chapter 12 religion romanticism and reform 1800 1860 slaves including her parents.
she never lost a passenger during her legendary acts of bravery.
elijah p lovejoy despite the growing efforts of a nti slavery organizations racism remained widespread in the north especially among the working poor.
abolitionist speakers confronted hostile white crowds who disliked blacks or found a nti slavery agitation bad for business.
in 1837 a mob in illinois killed elijah p lovejoy editor of an a nti slavery newspaper giving the movement a martyr to the causes of both abolition and freedom of the press.
lovejoy had begun his career as a presbyterian minister in new england.
after receiving a sign by god to focus his life on the destruction of slavery he moved to st louis in slaveholding missouri where his newspaper denounced alcohol catholicism and slavery.
when a pro slavery mob destroyed his printing office he moved across the mississippi river to a warehouse in alton illinois where he tried to start an anti slavery society.
there mobs twice more destroyed his printing press.
when a new press arrived lovejoy and several supporters armed themselves and took up defensive positions.
on november 7 1837 thugs began hurling stones and firing shots into the building.
one of lovejoys allies fired back killing a rioter.
the mob then set fire to the warehouse shouting kill every damned abolitionist as he leaves a shotgun blast killed lovejoy and his murder aroused a frenzy of indignation.
at one of the hundreds of memorial services across the north a grizzled john brown rose raised his right hand and declared here before god in the presence of these witnesses from this time i consecrate my life to the destruction of slavery brown and other militants decided that only violence would dislodge the sin of slavery.
abigail kelley the powerful appeal of abolitionism and the broader reform impulse is illustrated in the colorful life of abigail abbie kelley.
a teacher born in pelham massachusetts in 1811 she initially became a grahamite giving up coffee alcohol meat and tea in favor of vegetables and graham crackers.
soon thereafter she attended a lecture by william lloyd garrison and embraced abolitionism joining the female anti slavery society.
in 1837 she wrote her sister that she was supporting a variety of moral e nterprises grahamism abolition and peace kelley was a compelling speaker.
in 1840 she was the first woman to be elected an officer in the american anti slavery society.
many male abolitionists were furious.
one of them described kelley as being one of those women of masculine minds and aggressive tendencies.
who cannot be satisfied in domestic life the prejudice she experienced among male officers revealed to her that she and other women were manacled chained ourselves the a nti slavery movement 547 during the 1850s kelley while still a passionate abolitionist began to champion womens rights and temperance.
she spoke at the fourth national womans rights convention in cleveland.
lucy stone one of the womens rights leaders called kelley a heroine who stood in the thick of the fight for the slaves and at the same time she hewed out that path over which women are now walking toward their equal political rights the defense of slavery the growing strength and visibility of the abolitionist movement coupled with the profitability of cotton growing prompted southerners to launch an aggressive defense of slavery.
some of them even called for the reopening of the african slave trade.
during the 1830s and after pro slavery leaders worked out an elaborate rationale for what they considered the benefits of slavery.
the bible was frequently cited in support of slavery had not the patriarchs of the hebrew bible held people in bondage.
had not saint paul advised servants to obey their masters and told a runaway servant to return to his master.
and had not jesus remained silent on the subject.
soon even bolder arguments emerged.
in february 1837 south carolinas john c calhoun the most prominent southern political leader told the senate that slavery was good a great good rooted in the bible.
he asserted that the savage africans brought to america had never existed in so comfortable so respectable or so civilized a condition as that which is now enjoyed in the southern states if slavery were abolished calhoun warned the principle of white racial supremacy would be compromised.
calhoun and other defenders of slavery also claimed that blacks could not be expected to work under conditions of freedom.
they were too shiftless the argument went and if freed they would be a danger to themselves and to others.
white workers on the other hand feared the competition for jobs if slaves were freed.
calhouns strident defense of slavery led henry clay of kentucky himself a slaveholder to describe calhoun as a rigid fanatic ambitious selfishly partisan and sectional turncoat with too much genius and too little common sense who will either die a traitor or a madman the increasingly heated debate over slavery drove a deep wedge between north and south.
in 1831 william lloyd garrison predicted that an eventual separation between the free and slave states was unavoidable by midcentury a large number of americans had decided that southern slavery was an abomination that should not be allowed to expand into the western territories.
the militant reformers who were determined to prevent slavery from expanding outside the south came to be called free soilers their crusade would reach a fiery climax in the civil war.
chapter 1 the collision of cultures technology such as spear points basketry and pottery and developed their own nature centered religions.
by about 5000 b c e native americans had adapted to the warmer climate by transforming themselves into farming societies.
agriculture provided reliable nutritious food which accelerated population growth and enabled a once nomadic wandering people to settle down in villages.
indigenous peoples became expert at growing the plants that would become the primary food crops of the entire hemisphere chiefly maize corn beans and squash but also chili peppers avocados and pumpkins.
many of them also grew cotton.
the annual cultivation of such crops enabled indian societies to grow larger and more complex with their own distinctive social economic and political institutions.
the mayas incas and mexica around 1500 b c e farming towns first appeared in what is now mexico.
agriculture supported the development of sophisticated communities complete with gigantic t emple topped pyramids palaces and bridges in middle mayan society a fresco depicting the social divisions of mayan society.
a mayan lord at the center receives offerings.
early cultures in america 9 america mesoamerica what is now mexico and central america where north and south america meet.
the mayas who dominated central america for more than 600 years developed a rich written language and elaborate works of art.
they also used sophisticated mathematics and astronomy to create a yearly calendar more accurate than the one the europeans were using at the time of columbus.
the incas much farther south as many as 12 million people speaking at least twenty different languages made up the sprawling inca empire.
by the fifteenth century the incas vast realm stretched some 2 500 miles along the andes mountains in the western part of south america.
the mountainous inca empire featured irrigated farms enduring stone buildings and interconnected networks of roads made of stone.
the mexica aztecs during the twelfth century the mexica me shee ka whom europeans later called aztecs people from aztln the place they claimed as their original homeland began drifting southward aztec sacrifices to the gods renowned for their military prowess aztecs preferred to capture and then sacrifice their enemies.
10 chapter 13 western expansion 1830 1848 most of the pioneers who made their way west on the overland trails traveled in family groups.
by 1845 some 5 000 people were making the s ix month journey annually.
the discovery of gold in california in 1848 brought some 30 000 pioneers along the oregon trail in 1849 by 1850 the peak year of travel along the trail the annual count had risen to 55 000 plains indians more than 325 000 indians inhabited the southwest the great plains california and the pacific northwest in 1840 when the great migration of white settlers into the region began.
the native americans were divided into more than 200 nations each with its own language religion c ultural practices and system of governance.
plains indians included the arapaho blackfoot cheyenne kiowa and sioux.
some were primarily farmers others were nomadic following buffalo herds across the prairie grasslands.
in the arid southwest region that today includes arizona new mexico and southern utah the peaceful pueblo n ations acoma hopi laguna taos zia zuni were sophisticated farmers who lived in adobe villages along rivers that irrigated their crops of corn beans and squash.
their rivals were the apache and the navajo warlike hunters who roamed the countryside in small bands and preyed upon the pueblos.
they in turn were periodically harassed buffalo hunt chasing back 1860s this painting by george catlin shows a hunter outrunning a buffalo.
moving west 559 by their powerful enemies the comanche.
many indian nations were hostile to each other resulting in frequent wars and raids.
to the north in the great basin paiutes and gosiutes struggled to survive in the harsh arid region of what is today nevada utah and eastern california.
they traveled in family groups and subsisted on berries pine nuts insects and rodents.
along the california coast indians lived in small villages.
they gathered wild plants and acorns and were experts at fishing.
the native americans in the pacific n orthwest the nisqually spokane yakama chinook klamath and nez perce pierced nose enjoyed the most abundant natural resources and the most temperate climate.
the ocean and rivers provided whales seals salmon and crabs and lush inland forests harbored game berries and nuts.
majestic forests of fir redwood and cedar offered wood for cooking and shelter.
all these indian societies eventually felt the unrelenting pressure of white expansion and conquest and the influx of white settlers and hunters posed a direct threat to the indians cultural survival.
when federal officials could not coerce cajole or confuse indian leaders into selling the title to their tribal lands fighting ensued.
and after the discovery of gold in california in early 1848 the tidal wave of white expansion flowed all the way to the west coast violently engulfing native americans and mexicans in its wake.
mexico and the spanish west as american settlers trespassed across indian lands they also encountered spanish speaking peoples.
many whites were as prejudiced toward hispanics as they were toward indians.
senator lewis cass from michigan who would be the democratic candidate for president in 1848 expressed the common bias among white expansionists we do not want the people of mexico either as citizens or as subjects.
all we want is their.
territory the centuries old spanish efforts at colonization in the northernmost provinces of mexico had been less successful in arizona and texas than in new mexico and florida.
the yuma and apaches in arizona and the comanches and apaches in texas thwarted spanish efforts to establish catholic missions.
by 1790 the hispanic population in texas numbered only 2 510 while in new mexico it exceeded 20 000 in 1807 french forces led by napolon had occupied spain and imprisoned the king creating confusion throughout spains colonial possessions in the western hemisphere including mexico.
miguel hidalgo y costilla a creole priest born in mexico of european ancestry took advantage of the fluid situation to convince indians and hispanics to revolt against spanish rule in mexico.
but the poorly organized uprising failed miserably.
560 chapter 12 religion romanticism and reform 1800 1860 stressed that african americans were endowed with those intellectual and amiable qualities which adorn and dignify human nature frederick douglass frederick douglass was an even more effective spokesman for abolitionism.
having escaped from slavery in baltimore maryland douglass made his way to massachusetts where he began speaking at anti slavery meetings in black churches.
through his writings and dazzling presentations he became the best known black man in america.
i appear before the immense assembly this evening as a thief and a robber he told a massachusetts group in 1842.
i stole this head these limbs this body from my master and ran off with them fearful of capture after publishing his narrative of the life of frederick douglass an american slave written by himself 1845 he left for an extended lecture tour of the british isles returning two years later with enough money to purchase his official freedom.
he then started an abolitionist newspaper for blacks the north star in rochester new york.
he named the newspaper after the star that runaway slaves used to guide them at night toward freedom.
sojourner truth the female counterpart to frederick douglass was sojourner truth.
born to enslaved parents in upstate new york in 1797 she was given the name isabella bell hardenbergh but renamed herself in frederick douglass left and sojourner truth right both former slaves douglass and truth were leading african american abolitionists and captivating orators.
the a nti slavery movement 545 1843 after experiencing a conversation with god who told her to travel up and down the land preaching against slavery.
having been a slave until she was freed in 1827 sojourner truth was able to speak with conviction and knowledge about the evils of the peculiar institution as well as the inequality of women.
truth traveled and spoke throughout the north during the 1840s and 1850s.
as she told the ohio womens rights convention in 1851 i have plowed and planted and gathered into barns and no man could head m e and arnt i a woman.
i have borne thirteen children and seen em mos all sold off into slavery and when i cried out with a mothers grief none but jesus heard and arnt i a woman through such compelling testimony sojourner truth demonstrated the powerful intersection of abolitionism and feminism.
in the process she tapped the distinctive energies that women brought to reformist causes.
if the first woman god ever made was strong enough to turn the world upside down all alone she concluded in her address to the ohio gathering these women together ought to be able to turn it back and get it right side up again the underground railroad between 1810 and 1850 tens of thousands of southern slaves fled north.
runaway slaves would make their way usually at night from one station or safe house to the next.
the organizations and the systems of safe houses and shelters along the routes to freedom were referred to as the underground railroad.
the conductors helping the runaways included freeborn blacks white abolitionists former slaves and native americans.
many were motivated by religious concerns.
quakers presbyterians methodists and baptists participated.
in many northern cities blacks and whites organized vigilance committees to thwart the slave catchers.
in february 1851 shadrach minkins a stout c opper colored man who worked as a waiter at a boston coffee house was seized by u s marshals who claimed that he was a runaway slave from virginia.
during a court hearing black and white members of the anti slavery boston vigilance and safety committee active in the underground railroad rushed in overcame armed guards and snatched the trembling prey of the slave hunters an outraged president millard fillmore issued a proclamation demanding that citizens obey the law and that those responsible for kidnapping minkins be prosecuted.
none of the bostonians charged in the case were convicted.
a few courageous runaway slaves returned to the south to organize more escapes.
harriet tubman the most celebrated member of the underground railroad was born a slave in maryland in 1820 but escaped to philadelphia in 1849 she would return to the south nineteen times to help some 300 fugitive 546 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation was the first great domestic challenge to the federal government since the constitution was ratified and george washington responded decisively.
at the urging of alexander hamilton washington ordered the whiskey rebels to disperse by september 1 or he would send in the militia.
when the rebels failed to respond some 12 500 militiamen from several states began marching to western pennsylvania to suppress the rebellion.
president washington donned his military uniform and rode on horseback to greet the soldiers.
it was the first and last time that a sitting president would lead troops in the field.
pinckneys treaty 1795 virginia te nn es s iv e ri b e rland r ive ee r north carolina tennessee mi ss iss ip pi r um c r louisiana spanish ver kentucky south carolina t riv r e iver ar 31 31 florida spanish new orleans gulf of mexico area claimed by spain after 1793 line of pinckneys treaty 1795 what were the terms of pinckneys treaty.
why was the treaty popular.
wwn64 figure m6 5 first proof 23p0 x 24p0 charleston savannah fl in a la b am georgia 100 miles 100 kilometers st augustine western settlement 289 the huge army commanded by virginias governor henry lighthorse harry lee quickly panicked the whiskey rebels who vanished into the hills.
two dozen were charged with high treason two were sentenced to hang only to be pardoned by president washington.
the new federal government had made its point and showed its strength.
the show of force led the rebels and their sympathizers to change their tactics.
rather than openly defying federal laws they voted for republicans who won heavily in the next pennsylvania elections.
pinckneys treaty while the turbulent events were unfolding in pennsylvania the spanish began negotiations over control of the mississippi river as well as the disputed northern boundary of their florida colony which they had acquired from the british at the end of the revolutionary war.
u s negotiator thomas pinckney pulled off a diplomatic triumph in 1795 when he convinced the spanish to accept a southern american boundary at the 31st parallel in west florida along the northern coast of the gulf of mexico the current boundary between florida and georgia.
the spanish also agreed to allow americans to ship goods grains and livestock down the mississippi river to spanish controlled new orleans.
senate ratification of pinckneys treaty also called the treaty of san lorenzo came quickly for westerners were eager to transport their crops and livestock to new orleans.
western settlement the treaties signed by john jay and thomas pinckney spurred a new wave of settlers into the western territories.
their lust for land aroused a raging debate in congress over what the federal government should do with the vast areas it had acquired or taken from the british the spanish and from native americans.
land policy federalists and republicans differed sharply on federal land policy.
federalists wanted the government to charge high prices for western lands to keep the east from losing both political influence and a labor force important to the growth of manufactures.
they also preferred that government owned lands be sold in large parcels to speculators rather than in small plots to settlers.
thomas jefferson and james madison were reluctantly prepared to go along with such land policies for the sake of reducing the national debt but jefferson preferred that g overnment owned land be sold to farmers rather than speculators.
290 chapter 13 western expansion 1830 1848 fights.
bowie claimed he had never started a fight nor lost one.
and he was hard to bring down.
in his most famous brawl he was shot twice stabbed and impaled by a sword before he killed his opponent with his knife.
bowie wore out his welcome in louisiana and migrated to texas in 1828 settled near san antonio and came to own about a million acres of texas land.
he married a prominent mexican woman became a mexican citizen and learned spanish but a cholera epidemic killed his wife and two children as well as his in laws.
upon learning of the texas revolution bowie joined the volunteer army and fought in several battles before arriving in san antonio in january 1836 bowie often roaring drunk commanded the texas volunteers in the alamo while william travis a hot tempered twenty six year old lawyer and teacher led the texian regular army soldiers.
travis had come to texas by way of alabama where he had left behind a failed marriage a pregnant wife a t wo year old son considerable debts and rumors claimed a man he had killed.
travis pledged that he would redeem his life by doing something great and honorable in texas or die trying.
his determination to face an honorable death led him to refuse orders to retreat from the alamo.
the most famous american at the alamo was david crockett the tennessee frontiersman sharpshooter bear hunter and storyteller who had fought under andrew jackson and served in congress as an anti jackson whig.
in his last speech before congress after being defeated for reelection crockett who was not called davy until long after his death told his colleagues that he was done with politics for the present and that they might go to hell and i would go to texas he told his son and daughter that he planned to make a fortune for myself and family in texas.
soon after arriving in texas with his trusty rifle old betsy crockett the lion of the west was told he would receive 4 000 acres of land for his service as a fighter.
he then was assigned to join the garrison at the alamo.
full of bounce and brag the forty nine year old crockett was thoroughly expert at killing.
as he once told his men pierce the heart of the enemy as you would a feller that spit in your face knocked down your wife burnt up your houses and called your dog a skunk what crockett travis and bowie shared with the other defenders of the alamo was a commitment to liberty in the face of santa annas growing despotism.
in late february 1836 santa anna demanded that the alamos defenders surrender.
by then bowie had fallen seriously ill was bedridden and had turned over his command to travis who answered the mexican ultimatum with cannon fire.
he then sent urgent appeals to texian towns for supplies and more men while promising that i shall never surrender or retreat.
victory or death moving west 573 the alamo david crockett pictured fighting with his rifle over his head joined the legendary effort to defend the alamo against the mexican armys repeated assaults.
help did not come however and santa anna launched a series of assaults against the outnumbered defenders.
for twelve days the mexicans were thrown back and suffered heavy losses.
the ferocious fighting at the alamo turned the rebellion into a war for texan independence.
on march 2 1836 delegates from all fifty nine texas towns most of them american immigrants met at the tiny village of washington on the brazos some 150 miles northeast of san antonio.
there they signed a declaration of independence and drafted a constitution for the new republic of texas.
the delegates then named sam houston as the commander of their disorganized but growing army four days later the defenders of the alamo were awakened at four oclock in the morning by the sound of mexican bugles playing the dreaded degello no mercy to the defenders.
colonel travis shouted the mexicans are upon us give em hell the climactic battle of the alamo was fought in the predawn dark.
wave after wave of santa annas men attacked.
they were twice forced back but on the third try they broke through the battered north wall.
travis was killed by a bullet between the eyes.
some of the texans took the fight outside the alamo with tomahawks knives rifle butts and fists but in the end virtually all of them were killed or wounded.
574 chapter review summary the new south many southerners embraced the vision of the new south p romoted by henry grady and others who called for a more diverse economy with greater industrialization more vocational training and a widespread acceptance of white supremacy in social relations.
the cotton textile industry grew to surpass that of new england iron manufacturing increased and the american tobacco company became the worlds largest manufacturer of cigarettes.
but agriculture and especially the growing of cotton still dominated the southern e conomy much as it had before the civil war.
under the crop lien system large landowners rented land to cash poor tenant farmers or sharecroppers the latter usually african americans in return for a share of the cotton they grew each year.
the crop lien system kept millions in long term debt and limited where they could live and how they could make a living.
jim crow policies in the south during the 1890s southern states disfranchised the vast majority of african american voters and instituted a series of p olicies known as jim crow laws segregating blacks and whites in public facilities.
starting with the mississippi plan state governments passed a series of comprehensive measures that included poll taxes grandfather clauses literacy tests and residency requirements making voting nearly impossible for most african americans and some poor whites.
disfranchisement was followed by legalized segregation ruled constitutional by the supreme court in the 1896 plessy v ferguson decision.
african americans who resisted were often the target of violence at the hands of whites the worst form being organized lynching.
western migrants life in the west was often harsh and violent but the promise of cheap land or wealth from mining drew settlers from the east.
although most westerners were white protestant americans or immigrants from germany and scandinavia mexicans african americans the exodusters and chinese as well as many other nationalities contributed to the wests diversity.
about t hree fourths of those who moved to the west were men.
miners farmers ranchers and women many migrants to the west were attracted to opportunities to mine ranch farm or work on the railroads.
miners were drawn to the discovery of precious minerals such as silver at the comstock lode in nevada in 1861 but most miners and cattle ranchers did not become wealthy because mining and raising cattle particularly after the development of barbed wire and the end of the open range became large scale enterprises.
farmers on the great plains were able to produce wheat for export but declining grain prices and the need for expensive machinery and transportation meant that only large scale farms owned by a wealthy few could sustain real profits.
indian wars and policies by 1900 native americans were no longer free to roam the plains as the influx of miners ranchers farmers and soldiers had curtailed their traditional way of life.
instances of armed resistance such as the great sioux war were crushed.
beginning in 1887 with the dawes severalty act the american governments indian policy shifted.
it now forced indians to relinquish their traditional culture and adopt the american way of individual landownership.
the south and west in 1900 by 1900 the west resembled the south where agricultural resources were concentrated in the hands of a few.
in the 1890s poor farmers in the west joined with tenant farmers in the south to support the peoples party or the populist movement which sought to wrest control of the political and economic system from the powerful east and return it to the plain folk.
this contest would dominate the nations politics in the 1890s and set its course for the twentieth century.
chronology 1880s congress passes the homestead act sand creek massacre joseph glidden invents barbed wire battle of little bighorn henry grady spreads the new south idea surrender of geronimo marks the end of the indian wars congress passes the dawes severalty act battle of wounded knee james duke forms the american tobacco company frederick j turner outlines his frontier thesis plessy v ferguson mandates separate but equal racial facilities key terms textile industry p 801 exodusters p 820 american tobacco company p 801 boomtown p 822 redeemers p 802 comstock lode p 823 crop lien system p 804 open range p 826 sharecroppers p 804 indian wars p 831 share tenants p 804 sand creek massacre 1864 p 832 mississippi plan 1890 p 807 great sioux war p 836 separate but equal p 809 ghost dance movement p 839 atlanta compromise 1895 p 815 dawes severalty act 1887 p 841 ijk go to inquizitive to see what youve learned and learn what youve missed with personalized feedback along the way.
political stalemate and rural revolt 1865 1900 wet night on the bowery 1911 this scene of early t wentieth century life in new york city by john sloan captures people of all walks of life converging on a rainy night a smartly dressed society woman left a prostitute center and drunks stumbling about farther down the block.
running overhead is the elevated train while an electric trolley gleams from the wet street.
w ithin three decades after the civil war american life had experienced a stunning transformation.
an agricultural society long rooted in the soil and little involved in global issues had become an urban and industrialized nation deeply entwined in world markets and international politics.
the period from the end of the civil war to the beginning of the twentieth century was an era noted for the widening social economic and political gap between the powerful and the powerless the haves and h ave nots.
it was sardonically labeled the gilded age for its greed and vulgarity and was a time marked by conspicuous consumption by the newly rich as they flaunted their enormous personal wealth the same wealth that financed extensive political and corporate corruption.
while the gilded age brought dramatic changes across all socioeconomic classes the resulting transformations to social and cultural life could hardly be considered gilded to average americans or recent immigrants.
urban america during the late nineteenth century the united states became a nation dominated by rapidly growing cities.
between 1865 and 1900 the urban population skyrocketed from 8 million to 30 million.
in 1865 fewer than twenty cities had populations of more than 50 000 by 1900 there were four times that many.
focus questions 1 what were the effects of urban growth during the gilded age.
what problems did it create.
2 who were the new immigrants of the late nineteenth century.
how were they viewed by american society.
3 how did urban growth and the increasingly important role of science influence leisure activities cultural life and social policy in the gilded age.
4 how did the nature of politics during the gilded age contribute to political corruption and stalemate.
5 how effective were politicians in developing responses to the major economic and social problems of the gilded age.
6 why did the money supply become a major political issue especially for farmers during the gilded age.
how did it impact american politics.
848 chapter 25 the great depression 1929 1939 c reated the federal housing administration fha which offered americans much longer home mortgages twenty years in order to reduce their monthly payments.
up to that point most mortgages were for less than ten years duration and covered only a portion of the purchase price.
reviving the industrial sector the centerpiece of the new deals efforts to revive the industrial economy was the national industrial recovery act nira of 1933 one of its two major sections created massive public works construction projects funded by the federal government as a means of creating jobs.
the nira started the public works administration pwa granting 3 3 billion for the construction of government buildings highways bridges dams port facilities and sewage plants.
the second and more controversial part of the nira created the national recovery administration nra headed by hugh s johnson a hard drinking retired army general known for his administrative expertise a blustering dictatorial and appealing bureaucrat.
the nra represented a radical shift in the federal governments role in the economy.
never before in peacetime had washington bureaucrats taken charge of setting prices wages and standards for working conditions.
the primary purpose of the nra was to promote economic growth by ignoring a nti trust laws and allowing executives of competing businesses to negotiate among themselves and with labor unions to create codes of fair competition that would set prices production levels minimum wages and maximum hours within each industry no matter how small.
in new york city for example women who made their living as burlesque show strippers agreed to an nra code limiting the number of performers on stage and the number of performances they could provide each night.
in exchange for allowing companies to cooperate rather than compete the nra codes included fair labor policies long sought by unions and social progressives a national forty hour work week minimum weekly wages of 13 12 in the south where living costs were lower and a ban on the employment of children under the age of sixteen.
the nra also included a provision that guaranteed the right of workers to organize unions.
these were landmark changes and for a time the downward spiral of wages and prices subsided.
but as soon as economic recovery began small business owners complained that the larger corporations dominated the nra whose price fixing robbed small producers of the chance to compete.
and because the nra wage codes excluded agricultural and domestic workers at the insistence of southern democrats most african americans derived no direct benefit from the program.
when the supreme court declared the nra unconstitutional in may 1935 few regretted its demise.
roosevelts new deal 1121 the nra experiment did however have lasting effects.
it set new workplace standards such as the f orty hour work week created a national minimum wage and helped end the abuse of child labor.
its endorsement of collective bargaining between workers and owners spurred the growth of unions.
yet as 1934 ended industrial recovery was still nowhere in sight.
agricultural assistance in addition to rescuing the banks and providing jobs to the unemployed roosevelt created the farm credit administration to help farmers deal with their crushing debts and lower their mortgage payments to avoid bankruptcy.
the agricultural adjustment act of 1933 created a new federal agency the agricultural adjustment administration aaa which sought to raise prices for crops and herds by paying farmers to cut back production.
the money for such payments came from a tax levied on the processors of certain basic c ommodities cotton gins flour mills and slaughterhouses.
by the time the aaa was created however the spring growing season was already under way.
the prospect of another bumper cotton crop forced the aaa to organize a plow under program in which farmers were paid to kill the sprouting seeds in their fields.
to destroy a growing crop was a shocking commentary on our civilization agriculture secretary henry a wallace admitted.
i could tolerate it only as a cleaning up of the wreckage from the old days of unbalanced production moreover in an effort to raise pork prices some 6 million baby pigs were slaughtered and buried.
by the end of 1934 the aaa efforts had worked wheat cotton and corn production had declined and prices for those commodities had risen.
farm income increased by 58 percent between 1932 and 1935 at the end of the first hundred days of roosevelts presidency the principle of an activist federal government had been established.
while journalists characterized the aaa nra ccc cwa and other new programs as alphabet soup and conservative critics warned that roosevelt was leading america toward fascism or communism the president had become the most popular man in the nation.
dust bowl migrants at the same time that the agricultural economy was struggling a terrible drought created an ecological catastrophe known as the dust bowl.
colorado new mexico kansas nebraska texas arkansas and oklahoma were hardest hit.
crops withered and income plummeted.
strong winds swept across the treeless plains scooping up tons of parched topsoil into billowing dark clouds called black blizzards which engulfed farms and towns.
by 1938 topsoil had disappeared from more than 25 million acres of prairie land.
1122 chapter 13 western expansion 1830 1848 the election of 1844 nh 6 vt 6 oregon country unorganized territory iowa terr.
mo disputed area republic of texas ar la il ny mi in oh ky 12 tn 13 ms al pa va me ma 12 ri 4 ct 6 nj 7 de 3 md 8 nc sc ga florida territory electoral vote popular vote james knox polk democrat 1 337 000 henry clay whig 1 299 000 why was the annexation of texas such a divisive issue.
why was polks platform especially appealing to southerners and westerners.
wwn64 how did polk carry new york and why was winning that state so decisive.
figure m13 2 1st proof nomination.
the democrats platform called for the annexation of texas and declared that the united states had a clear and unquestionable claim to all of the oregon country.
the 1844 presidential election proved to be one of the most significant in history.
by promoting southern and western expansionism the democrats offered a winning strategy one so popular it forced clay the whig candidate to alter his position on texas at the last minute he now claimed that he had no personal objection to the annexation if it could be achieved without dishonor without war with the common consent of the union and upon just and fair terms clays waffling on texas shifted more a nti slavery votes to the new liberty party the anti slavery party formed in 1840 which increased its count in the presidential election from about 7 000 in 1840 to more than 62 000 in 1844 in moving west 583 the western counties of new york the liberty party drew enough votes away from clay and the whigs to give the crucial state to polk.
had clay carried new york he would have won the election by 7 electoral votes.
instead polk won a narrow national plurality of 38 000 popular votes the first president since john quincy adams to win without a majority but a clear majority of the electoral college 170 to 105 julia tyler the presidents wife was overjoyed with the outcome hurrah for polk.
what will become of henry clay and of the downfall of our whig friends a devastated clay had lost his third and last presidential election.
he could not understand how he lost to polk whom he considered a third rate politician lacking leadership abilities.
james k polk yet james k polk had been surprising people his whole career.
born near charlotte north carolina the oldest of ten children he graduated first in his class at the university of north carolina then moved to tennessee where he became a successful lawyer and planter entered politics and served fourteen years in congress four as speaker of the house and two years as governor.
at age forty nine polk was americas youngest president up to that time.
short thin and humorless he was called young hickory because of his admiration for andrew jackson.
and like jackson he believed that any efforts by the federal government to promote economic growth necessarily helped some people and regions and hurt others.
he was thus opposed to tariffs a national bank and federally funded roads.
polks greatest virtue was his relentless work ethic.
i am the hardest w orking man in this country he declared.
true to his word he often worked from dawn to midnight and rarely took a vacation.
such unrelenting intensity eventually wore him out however.
polk would die in 1849 at fifty three years old just three months after leaving office.
the state of texas texas the hottest political potato had been added as a new state just before polk was sworn in as president.
in his final months in office president john tyler had taken an unusual step by asking congress to annex texas by joint resolution which required only a simple majority in each house rather than the t wo thirds senate vote needed to ratify a treaty of annexation.
the resolution narrowly passed with most whigs opposed.
on march 1 1845 in his final presidential action tyler signed the resolution admitting texas to the union as the twenty eighth state and fifteenth slave state on december 29 1845 six weeks later on february 16 1846 the lone star flag of the republic of texas was lowered and the flag of the united states was raised over the largest state in the nation.
584 chapter 19 political s talemate and rural revolt 1865 1900 in 1907 congress appointed the bipartisan dillingham commission to examine the changes in immigration patterns.
in its f orty one volume report released in 1911 the commission concluded that the new immigrants were far less intelligent than the old approximately one third of all those over 14 years of age when admitted being illiterate.
racially they are for the most part essentially unlike the british german and other peoples who came during the prior period to 1880 and generally speaking they are actuated in coming by different ideals for the old immigration came to be a part of the country while the new in a large measure comes with the intention of profiting in a pecuniary way by the superior advantages of the new world and then returning to the old country.
immigrants were usually desperately poor and needed to find jobs quickly.
many were greeted at the docks by family and friends others were met by representatives of immigrant aid societies or by company agents offering low paying and often dangerous jobs in mines mills sweatshops and on railroads.
since most immigrants knew little if any english and nothing about american employment practices they were easy targets for exploitation.
many unwittingly lost a healthy percentage of their wages to unscrupulous hiring agents in exchange for a bit of whiskey and a job.
companies eager for workers gave immigrants train tickets to inland cities such as buffalo pittsburgh cleveland chicago milwaukee cincinnati and st louis.
as strangers in america most immigrants naturally wanted to live in neighborhoods populated by people from their homeland.
the largest cities had vibrant immigrant districts with names such as little italy little hungary and chinatown where immigrants practiced their native religions and customs and spoke and read newspapers in their native languages.
but they paid a price for such community solidarity.
when new immigrants moved into an area the previous residents often moved out taking with them whatever social prestige and political influence they had achieved.
living conditions often quickly deteriorated as housing and sanitation codes went unenforced.
the nativist response then as now many native born americans saw the newest immigrants as a threat to their jobs and way of life.
many nativists were racists who believed that anglo saxon americans people of british or germanic background were superior to the slavic italian greek and jewish newcomers.
a stanford university professor called immigrants from southern and eastern europe illiterate docile lacking in s elf reliance and initiative and not possessing the anglo teutonic conceptions of the new immigration 855 mulberry street 1900 this photograph captures the many italian immigrants who made mulberry street in downtown new york city their home at the turn of the century.
horse drawn carts weave through people shopping socializing and people gazing.
law order and government many were illiterate but others only appeared so because they could not speak or read english.
some resorted to crime to survive fueling suspicions that european nations were sending their criminals to america.
throughout american history congress has passed laws regulating immigration largely these statutes have been inconsistent in their goals and frequently motivated by racial and ethnic prejudice.
during the late nineteenth century such prejudice took an especially ugly turn against the chinese.
by 1880 some 75 000 chinese formed about a ninth of the population of california.
they were the first non european and non african group to migrate in large numbers to america.
chinese immigrants were easy targets for discrimination they were not white they were not christian and many could not read or write.
whites resented them for supposedly taking their jobs although in many instances the chinese were willing to do menial work that whites refused to do.
john jeong a young chinese immigrant arrived in san francisco and quickly encountered ethnic persecution.
as he and others made their way to the chinatown neighborhood in an open carriage some white boys came up and started throwing rocks at us another chinese newcomer experienced 856 chapter 13 western expansion 1830 1848 the oregon dispute 1818 1846 5440 200 miles 200 kilometers o r e british possessions g n v ou nc o va 49 continental divide er n la is buchana n pakenham treaty lin e 1846 d c disputed area m u r y ons line t snake river adams united states n columbia river 42 mexico ouri rive r iss o pacific ocean treaty line of 1818 great salt lake why were the americans and the british involved in a dispute over the wwn64 oregon country.
figure m13 3 what were the terms of the buchanan pakenham treaty.
1st proof why were both the americans and the british eager to settle the disagreement over the vast oregon territory.
so polk ordered several thousand u s troops under general zachary taylor to take up positions around corpus christi near the rio grande.
the u s troops were knowingly in disputed territory and mexico viewed the arrival of u s troops along the rio grande as an act of war.
on the evening of may 9 1845 polk learned that mexican troops had attacked u s soldiers north of the rio grande.
eleven americans were killed five wounded and the remainder taken prisoner.
hostilities may now be considered as commenced taylor reported.
the mexican a merican war 587 polks scheme to provoke an attack had worked.
to avoid the risk that congress would vote down a declaration of war polk simply declared that the mexicans had started a war that now needed to be funded.
mexico he reported has invaded our territory and shed american blood upon the american soil congress quickly authorized the recruitment of 50 000 soldiers.
some congressmen however were skeptical of polks explanation.
whig garret davis of kentucky asserted that the rio grande was a part of mexico not texas it is our own president who began this war even democrats were concerned about the presidents account of what had happened.
a new york senator john dix said he would not be surprised if the next accounts should show that there is no mexican invasion of our soil the war he later added was begun in fraud.
and i think will end in disgrace president polk steadfastly denied that the war against mexico had anything to do with the expansion of slavery.
he argued instead that his efforts to extend americas boundaries to the pacific were intended to replace sectional tensions with national unity.
for polk the notion of manifest destiny was a means of promoting national unity.
after all he stressed slavery could not flourish in places like new mexico and california because cotton could not be grown there because of the climate.
with the outbreak of fighting most americans accepted the presidents account of what happened along the mexico texas border and rushed to support the military.
let us go to war screamed a new york newspaper.
another headline blared mexico or death the new york j ournalist poet walt whitman got caught up in the war fever urging those enlisting in the army to show the world that america knows how to crush as well as how to expand the south was especially excited over the war because of the possibility of acquiring more territory.
so many southerners wild reckless young fellows rushed to volunteer that thousands had to be turned away.
eventually 112 000 whites served in the war blacks were banned.
in tennessee there were so many volunteers that it became difficult even to purchase a place in the ranks among the warriors were young army officers who would later distinguish themselves as opposing leaders in the civil war pierre beauregard braxton bragg ulysses s grant joseph hooker thomas jackson james longstreet robert e lee george mcclellan george meade william t sherman and george thomas.
opposition to the war in new england and among northern abolitionists there was much less enthusiasm for mr.
polks war congressman john quincy adams called it a most unrighteous war designed to extend slavery into new territories.
many other new englanders involved with the growing 588 chapter 25 the great depression 1929 1939 okies on the run a sharecropping family reaches its destination of bakersfield california in 1935 after we got blowed out in oklahoma parched farmers could not pay their debts and banks foreclosed on family farms.
suicides soared and millions of people abandoned their farms.
many uprooted farmers and their families from the south and the midwest headed toward california where jobs were said to be plentiful.
frequently lumped to gether as okies or arkies most of the dust bowl refugees were from cotton belt communities in arkansas texas missouri and oklahoma.
during the 1930s and 1940s some 800 000 people mostly whites headed to the far west.
without money to pay rent or a mortgage homeless migrants set up squatter camps often called little oklahomas alongside highways or close to towns where they could get food and supplies.
when one crop was harvested the migrants moved on to the next carrying their belongings with them.
most people uprooted by the dust bowl went to californias urban a reas los angeles san diego or san francisco.
others moved into the san joaquin valley the states agricultural heartland.
there they discovered that california was no paradise.
only a few could afford to buy land.
most had to work as farm laborers.
living in tents or crude cabins migrant workers suffered from exposure to the elements poor sanitation and social abuse.
as an okie reported when roosevelts new deal 1123 the big farmers need us they call us migrants and when weve picked their crop were bums and we got to get out the tennessee valley authority early in his pres idency franklin roosevelt declared that the south is the nations no.
1 economic problem indeed since the end of the civil war the economy and quality of life in the southern states had lagged far behind the rest of the nation.
that gap only widened during the depression.
to help the blighted south roosevelt created one of the most innovative programs of the first new deal the tennessee valley authority tva norris dam the massive dam in which would bring electrical power tennessee completed in 1936 was flood control efforts and jobs to appa essential in creating jobs and expanding lachia the desperately poor mountain electricity under the tva.
ous region that stretched from west virginia through western virginia and north carolina kentucky eastern tennessee and northern georgia and alabama.
by 1940 the tva a multipurpose public corporation had constructed twenty one hydroelectric dams which created the great lakes of the south and produced enough electricity to power the entire region at about half the average national rate.
the tva also dredged rivers to allow for boat and barge traffic promoted soil conservation and forestry management drew new industries to the region encouraged the formation of labor unions and improved schools and libraries.
it gave 1 5 million farms access to electricity and indoor plumbing for the first time.
progress is rarely without its burdens or inconsistencies.
many new deal programs helped some people and hurt others.
tough choices had to be made.
building all of those huge dams in appalachia and the resulting lakes meant displacing thousands of hardscrabble people from homes and villages that were destroyed to make way for progress.
i dont want to move said an elderly east tennessee woman.
i want to sit here and look out over these hills where i was born.
my folks are buried down the road a piece and our babies are over there on the hill under the cedars 1124 chapter 25 the great depression 1929 1939 african americans and the new deal however progressive franklin delano roosevelt was on social issues he showed little interest in the plight of african americans even as black voters were shifting from the republicans the party of lincoln to the democrats.
roosevelt like woodrow wilson before him failed to address long standing patterns of racism and segregation in the south for fear of angering conservative southern democrats in congress.
as a result many new deal programs discriminated against blacks.
as mary white ovington the treasurer of the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp stressed the racism in any agency varies according to the white people chosen to administer it but always there is discrimination for example the payments from the aaa to farm owners to take land out of production in an effort to raise the prices for farm products forced hundreds of thousands of tenant farmers and sharecroppers both blacks and whites off the land.
the fha refused to guarantee mortgages on houses purchased by blacks in white neighborhoods and both the ccc and the tva practiced racial segregation.
the naacp waged an energetic legal campaign against racial prejudice throughout the 1930s but a major setback occurred in the supreme court ruling on grovey v townsend 1935 which upheld the texas democrats w hites only election primary.
thanks to relentless pressure from eleanor roosevelt the president did appoint more african americans to government positions than ever before.
one of the most visible was mary mcleod bethune the child of former slaves from south carolina who had founded bethune cookman college in florida and served as head of the naacp in the 1920s.
in 1935 roosevelt approved her appointment as the director of the division of negro affairs within the national youth administration an agency that provided jobs to unemployed young americans.
bethune worked with other blacks in new deal agencies to form an informal black cabinet to ensure that african americans had equal access to federal programs.
court cases and civil liberties the continuing prejudice against blacks in the south was vividly revealed in a controversial case in alabama.
in 1931 an all white jury on flimsy conflicting testimony convicted nine black youths ranging in age from thirteen to twenty one of raping two young white women while riding a freight train.
eight of the scottsboro boys were sentenced to death before cheering whites who packed the courtroom while 10 000 spectators outside celebrated with a brass band.
in his award w inning novel native son 1940 african american writer richard wright the new deal under fire 1129 scottsboro case haywood patterson center one of the defendants in the case with his attorney samuel liebowitz left in decatur alabama in 1933 recalled the mob who surrounded the scottsboro jail with rope and kerosene after the initial conviction.
the injustice of the scottsboro case sparked protests throughout the nation and the world.
the two white girls it turned out had been selling sex to white and black boys on the train.
one of the girls eventually recanted the rape charges and began appearing at rallies on behalf of the defendants.
no case in legal history had produced as many trials appeals reversals and retrials as the scottsboro case.
further it prompted two important legal interpretations.
in powell v alabama 1932 the u s supreme court overturned the original convictions because the judge had not ensured that the accused were provided adequate defense attorneys.
the court ordered new trials.
in another case norris v alabama 1935 the court ruled that the systematic exclusion of african americans from alabama juries had denied the scottsboro defendants equal protection under the law a principle that had widespread impact on state courts by opening up juries to blacks.
although the state of alabama eventually dropped the charges against the four youngest of the scottsboro defendants and granted paroles to the others their lives were ruined.
the last defendant was released from prison in 1950 native americans and the depression the great depres sion also ravaged native americans.
they were initially encouraged by roosevelts appointment of john collier as commissioner of the bureau of indian affairs bia.
collier steadily increased the number of native americans 1130 chapter 25 the great depression 1929 1939 holston river k e n tu c k y powell river paducah er t ennessee riv ir ipp u c iver missouri r hio ive r o the tennessee valley authority m b erla nd r i v er nashville oak ridge knoxville iss ten n e ssee ss clinch river mi asheville north carolina corinth es se huntsville e ri ver memphis te tupelo nn muscle shoals french broad river chattanooga little tennessee river south carolina georgia alabama mi s s i s s i p p i atlanta birmingham 100 miles 100 kilometers principal tva dams area served by tva electric power area of map what was the tennessee valley authority.
wwn64 why did congress create it.
figure m25 2 how did it transform the tennessee valley.
first proof during roosevelts first year in office his programs and his personal charm generated widespread support.
the first new deal p rograms as well as roosevelts leadership had given americans a sense of renewed faith in the future.
in the congressional elections of 1934 the democrats increased their dominance in congress with an almost unprecedented midterm victory for a party in power.
eleanor roosevelt one of the reasons for franklin roosevelts popularity was his energetic wife eleanor roosevelt who would prove to be one of the most influential leaders of the time.
she ceaselessly prodded her husband about social justice issues and sometimes scolded him yet she always supported his ambitions and decisions.
roosevelts new deal 1125 born in 1884 in new york city eleanor married her distant cousin franklin in 1905 all too quickly she learned that franklins domineering mother sara delano roosevelt would always be the most important woman in his life.
he might have been happier with a wife who was completely uncritical like his mother eleanor wrote later.
that i was never able to be and he had to find it in other people during the 1920s eleanor shy and insecure revealed that at heart she was a creature of conscience.
she began a lifelong crusade on behalf of women blacks and youth giving voice to the voiceless.
her tireless compassion resulted in large part from the self doubt and loneliness she had experienced as the child of an alcoholic father and an aloof mother.
equally influential in shaping eleanors outlook was the sense of betrayal she felt upon discovering in 1918 that her husband had fallen recklessly in love with lucy mercer her friend and secretary.
the bottom dropped out of my own particular world she recalled.
eleanor and franklin decided to maintain their marriage but as their son james said it became an armed truce eleanor later observed that she could forgive but never forget but she never truly forgave or forgot.
t art tongued alice roosevelt longworth the daughter of theodore roosevelt and a cousin of eleanor s actually nurtured the affair hosting mercer and franklin for dinner several times.
she later explained that roosevelt deserved a good time.
he was married to eleanor franklin and eleanor were both s trong willed people who were concerned for each others happiness while acknowledging their inability to provide it.
in the white house they lived entirely apart rarely seeing each other except for formal occasions and public events.
eleanor roosevelt redefined the role of the first lady.
she was not content just to host social events in the white house.
instead she became an outspoken and relentless activist the first woman to address a national political eleanor roosevelt intelligent convention to write a nationally syndi principled and a political figure in cated newspaper column and to hold her own right she is pictured here addressing the red cross convention regular press conferences.
the tireless in 1934.
eleanor everywhere crisscrossed the 1126 chapter 7 the early republic 1800 1815 he surrendered his entire force of 2 500 troops without firing a shot.
his capitulation shocked the nation and opened the entire western frontier to raids by british troops and canadian militiamen and their indian allies.
president madison and the republicans felt humiliated.
in kentucky a republican said general hull must be a traitor or nearly an idiot or part of both hull was eventually put on trial and sentenced to death.
although pardoned by madison he was dismissed from the army for his cowardice.
the second prong of the american invasion plan the assault on montreal never got off the ground.
the third prong began at dawn on october 13 1812 when u s troops led by general stephen van rensselaer rowed across the niagara river from lewiston new york to the canadian village of queenston where they suffered a crushing defeat in the battle of queenston heights.
the shameful losses in canada led many americans to lose hope that they could win the war.
in early 1813 a kentuckian warned that any more military disasters would result in disunion and the cause of republicanism will be lost then there was a glimmer of good news.
in april 1813 an american force led by general zebulon pike attacked york later renamed toronto the provincial capital of upper canada.
the british and canadian militiamen surrendered and over the next several days in part because pike had been killed in the battle the u s soldiers rampaged out of control plundering the city and burning government buildings.
the destruction of york outraged the british and canadians and would lead them later to seek revenge on the american capital of washington d c after the burning of york the americans sought to gain naval control of the great lakes and other inland waterways along the canadian border.
if they could break the british naval supply line and secure lake erie they could divide the british from their indian allies.
in 1813 at presque isle pennsylvania near erie t wenty eight year old oliver hazard perry supervised the construction of warships from timber cut in nearby forests.
by the end of the summer commodore perrys new warships set out in search of the british and some warm fighting finally finding them at lake eries put in bay on september 10 two british warships used their superior weapons to pound the lawrence perrys flagship.
after four hours of intense shelling none of the lawrences guns was working and most of the crew were dead or wounded.
perry refused to quit however.
he switched to another vessel kept fighting and miraculously ended up accepting the surrender of the entire british squadron.
hatless and bloodied perry reported that we have met the enemy and they are ours the war of 1812 333 american naval control of lake erie forced the british to evacuate upper canada.
they gave up detroit and were defeated at the battle of the thames in southern canada on october 5 1813 during the battle the british fled leaving the great chief tecumseh and 500 warriors to face the wrath of the americans.
when tecumseh was killed the remaining indians retreated.
perrys victory and the defeat of tecumseh enabled the americans to recover control of most of michigan and seize the western district of upper canada.
thereafter the war in the north lapsed into a military stalemate along the canadian border with neither side able to dislodge the other.
the creek war in the south too the war flared up in 1813 the creek indians in western georgia and alabama had split into two factions the upper creeks called red sticks because of their bright red war clubs who opposed american expansion and sided with the british during the war and the lower creeks who wanted to remain on good terms with the americans.
on august 30 red sticks attacked fort mims on the alabama river thirty miles above the gulf coast town of mobile and massacred 553 men women and children butchering and scalping half of them.
americans were incensed.
thirsting for revenge andrew jackson commanding general of the army of west tennessee recruited about 2 500 volunteer militiamen and headed south.
with him were david crockett a famous sharpshooter and sam houston a nineteen year old virginia frontiersman who would later lead the texas war for independence against mexico.
jackson was a natural warrior and gifted commander who was both feared and respected.
his soldiers nicknamed him old hickory in recognition of his toughness.
from a young age he had embraced violence gloried in it and prospered by it.
he told all brave tennesseans that their frontier was threatened with invasion by the savage foe and that the indians were advancing with scalping knives unsheathed to butcher your wives your children and your helpless babes.
time is not to be lost jacksons expedition across alabama was not easy.
it was difficult to keep his men fed and supplied so far from tennessee and with no connecting roads.
some of the men went home once their enlistment period ended.
a few deserted or rebelled.
when a s eventeen year old soldier threatened an officer he was tried and sentenced to death.
jackson refused pleas for mercy and had the young man shot in front of the rest of the army to provide a harsh example of the generals steely determination.
jacksons grizzled volunteers crushed the red sticks in a series of lopsided bloodbaths in alabama.
the decisive battle occurred on march 27 1814 at 334 chapter 2 englands colonies calvert wanted maryland to be a refuge for english catholics a persecuted minority in anglican england.
yet he also wanted the colony to be profitable and to avoid antagonizing protestants so he instructed his brother leonard the colonys first proprietary governor to ensure that catholic colonists worship in private and remain silent upon all occasions of discourse concerning matters of religion in 1634 the calverts planted the first settlement in coastal maryland at st marys near the mouth of the potomac river about eighty miles up the chesapeake bay from jamestown.
they sought to learn from the mistakes made at jamestown.
first they recruited a more committed group of colonists families intending to stay in the colony rather than single men seeking quick profits.
second the calverts did not want maryland to be a colony of scattered farms and settlements like virginia or to become dependent solely on tobacco.
they wanted to create a more diversified agriculture and build fortified towns designed to promote social interaction.
third they wanted to avoid extremes of wealth and poverty by ensuring that the government would do justice to every man without partiality.
and fourth to avoid the chronic indian wars suffered in virginia the calverts resolved to purchase land from the native americans rather than take it by force.
the charter from the king gave the calverts power to make laws with the consent of the freemen that is all property holders.
yet they could not attract enough roman catholics to develop a s elf sustaining economy.
the majority of the servants who came to the colony were protestants both anglicans and puritans.
to recruit servants and settlers the calverts offered them small farms most of which grew tobacco.
unlike virginia which struggled for its first twenty years maryland succeeded more quickly because of its focus on growing tobacco from the start.
its long coastline along the chesapeake bay gave planters easy access to shipping.
despite the calverts caution concerning matters of religion sectarian squabbles impeded the maryland colonys early development.
when oliver cromwell and the puritans took control in england after the civil war cecilius calvert a catholic like his father feared he might lose the colony.
to avoid such a catastrophe he wrote the toleration act 1649 which welcomed all christians regardless of their denomination or beliefs.
it also promised to execute anyone who denied the divinity of jesus.
lord baltimore convinced the maryland legislature to pass the toleration act in the hope that it would protect the catholic minority in maryland.
but it did not work.
protestants in maryland seized control of the government deprived lord baltimore of his governing rights and rescinded the toleration american colonies 71 act in 1654 only to see it reinstituted three years later by oliver cromwell.
the act deservedly stands as a landmark to human liberty even though it was enacted more out of expediency than conviction.
the once persecuted puritans had become persecutors themselves at one point driving lord baltimore out of his own colony.
were it not for its success in growing tobacco maryland may well have disintegrated.
in 1692 following the glorious revolution in england catholicism was banned in maryland.
only after the american revolution would marylanders again be guaranteed religious freedom.
settling new england unlike maryland and virginia the new england colonies were initially intended to be s elf governing religious utopias based on the teachings of john calvin.
dedham massachusetts for example was founded in the 1630s by english puritans who signed a written agreement promising to live together in peace and harmony while giving complete obedience to god.
the new england settlers were not indentured servants as in the chesapeake but were mostly m iddle class families that could pay their own way across the atlantic.
most male settlers were small farmers merchants seamen or fishermen.
new england also attracted more women than did the southern colonies.
although its soil was not as fertile as that of the chesapeake region and its growing season was much shorter new england was a healthier place to live.
because of its colder climate settlers avoided the infectious diseases like malaria that ravaged the southern colonies.
during the seventeenth century only 21 000 colonists arrived in new england compared with the 120 000 who went to the chesapeake bay colonies.
but by 1700 new englands thriving white population exceeded that of maryland and virginia.
the pilgrims and puritans who arrived in massachusetts in the 1620s were on a divine mission to create a model christian society.
in the new land these s elf described saints intended to purify their churches of all catholic and anglican rituals and enact a code of laws and a government structure based upon biblical principles.
unlike the anglican church which allowed anyone including sinners to join the puritans would limit membership in their churches only to s aints those who had been chosen by god for salvation.
they also sought to stamp out gambling swearing and sabbath breaking.
such holy settlements they hoped would provide a beacon of righteousness for a wicked england to emulate.
72 chapter 31 conservative revival 1977 1990 pushing a f aith based political agenda formed the strongest grassroots movement of the late twentieth century.
by the eighties catholic conservatives and protestant evangelicals owned television and radio stations operated their own schools and universities and organized mega churches from which such televangelists as the reverend jerry falwell launched a cultural crusade against the demonic forces of liberalism at home and communism abroad.
in 1979 falwell formed a group he called the moral majority later renamed the liberty alliance to campaign for the major political and social goals of the religious right the economy should operate without interference by the government which should be reduced in size the supreme court decision in roe v wade 1973 legalizing abortion should be reversed darwinian evolution should be replaced in school textbooks by the biblical story of creation prayer should return to public schools women should submit to their husbands and communism should be opposed as a form of pagan totalitarianism.
that ronald reagan became the hero of the religious right was a tribute to his political skills for he rarely attended church and had no strong religious affiliations.
president carter though famous as a b orn again baptist sunday school teacher lost the support of religious conservatives because he was not look on the right side the rise of the religious right saw protests against supreme court rulings that reinforced the separation of church and state.
here in a 1984 rally organized by the moral majority students chant kids want to pray in support of an amendment to reinstate prayer in public schools.
the effort failed.
the rise of ronald reagan 1427 willing to ban abortions or restore prayers in public schools.
his push for state ratification of the e qual rights constitutional amendment era also cost him the support of anti feminist conservatives.
anti feminist backlash by the late seventies a well organized and w ell financed backlash against the feminist movement reinforced the rise of the new right activists like republican phyllis schlafly a conservative catholic attorney from illinois campaigned successfully to keep the era from being ratified by the required thirty eight states.
schlaflys stop stop taking our privileges era organization warned that the era would allow husbands to abandon their wives force women into military service and give gay perverts the right to marry.
she and others stressed that the gender equality promised by the proposed amendment violated biblical teachings about womens god given roles as nurturers and helpmates.
by the late seventies the effort to gain ratification of the era had failed largely because no states in the conservative south and west had ratified it.
many of schlaflys supporters also participated in the growing anti abortion or pro life movement.
the national right to life committee supported by the national conference of catholic bishops denounced abortion as murder and the emotional intensity of the issue made it a powerful political force.
reagan highlighted his support for traditional family values gender roles and the rights of the unborn which helped persuade many northern d emocrats mostly w orking class catholics to support him.
financing conservatism the business community as well had become a source of revitalized conservative activism.
in 1972 the leaders of the nations largest corporations formed the business roundtable to promote their interests in congress.
within a few years many of them had created political action committees pacs to distribute money to p ro business political candidates.
corporate donations also helped fund conservative think tanks such as the american enterprise institute the cato institute and the heritage foundation.
by 1980 the conservative insurgency had become a powerful political force with substantial financial resources carefully crafted ideas and grassroots energy.
the election of 1980 ronald reagans supporters during the 1980 campaign loved his simple solutions upbeat personality and folksy humor and they responded passionately to his recurring question are you better off than you were four years ago their answer was a resounding no on election day reagan swept to a lopsided victory with 489 electoral votes to 49 1428 chapter 19 political s talemate and rural revolt 1865 1900 the practices of racial segregation and violence against blacks in the solidly democratic south.
and he alienated many w orking class catholics in northern states by supporting prohibition of alcoholic beverages.
mckinley meanwhile stayed at home and kept his mouth shut letting other republicans speak for him.
he knew he could not compete with bryan as a speaker so he conducted a front porch campaign welcoming supporters at his home in canton ohio and giving only prepared statements to the press which warned m iddle class voters of the dangers of bryans ideas.
mckinleys brilliant campaign manager marcus mark hanna shrewdly portrayed bryan as a popocrat a radical whose communistic spirit would ruin the capitalist system and stir up a class war.
hanna convinced the republican party to declare that it was unreservedly for sound money meaning gold coins.
by appealing to such fears the republicans raised vast sums of money from corporations and wealthy donors to finance an army of 1 400 speakers who the election of 1896 wa or ca 1 dem.
mt id nv nd wy ut az terr.
co nm terr.
sd ne nh 4 vt 4 mn wi ia ks mo ok terr ind.
8 tx la il ny mi in oh pa wv va 8 12 nc tn 12 sc ga ms al ky 11 1 dem.
me ma ri 4 ct 6 nj 10 de 3 md 8 fl electoral vote popular vote william mckinley republican 7 100 000 william j bryan democrat populist 6 500 000 how did bryans cross of gold speech divide the democratic party.
wwn64 how did mckinleys campaign strategy differ from bryans.
figure m19 3 first proof why was bryan able to carry the west and the south but unable to win in cities and the northeast.
farmers and the money problem 891 traveled the country promoting mckinley.
it was the most sophisticated and expensive presidential campaign in history to that point.
in the end bryan won the most votes of any candidate in history 6 5 million but mckinley won even more 7 1 million.
the better organized and better financed republicans won the electoral college vote by 271 to 176 bryan carried most of the west and all of the south but found little support in the north and east.
in the critical midwest from minnesota and iowa eastward to ohio he did not win a state.
his evangelical protestantism repelled many roman catholic voters who were normally drawn to the democrats.
farmers in the northeast moreover were less attracted to radical reform than were farmers in the west and south.
workers in the cities found it easier to identify with mckinleys focus on reviving the industrial economy than with bryans farm based free silver evangelism.
of the nations twenty largest cities bryan carried only new orleans.
although bryan lost he launched the democratic partys shift from pro business conservatism to its eventual twentieth century role as a party of liberal reform.
the populist party however virtually disintegrated.
having won a million votes in 1896 it collected only 50 000 in 1900 conversely mckinleys victory climaxed a g eneration long struggle for political control of an industrialized urban america.
the republicans would be dominant for sixteen years.
by 1897 when mckinley was inaugurated economic prosperity was returning.
part of the reason was inflation of the currency which bore out the arguments of the greenbackers and silverites that the nations money supply had been inadequate during the gilded age.
but inflation came in one of historys many ironies not from more greenbacks or silver dollars but from a flood of gold discovered in south africa northwest canada and alaska.
in 1900 congress passed and mckinley signed a bill affirming that the nations money supply would be based only on gold.
even though the populist movement faded after william jennings bryans defeat most of the ideas promoted by bryan democrats and populists dismissed as too radical in 1896 would be implemented over the next two decades by a more diverse coalition of democrats and republicans who would call themselves progressives chapter 14 the gathering storm 1848 1860 and with the blood of millions in this slave country whose rights are disregarded by wicked cruel and unjust enactments for four weeks as brown waited to be hanged he met with newspaper reporters and wrote a host of letters many of which were printed in anti slavery newspapers.
henry wise governor of virginia visited brown in jail and reported that he was a man of courage fortitude and simple ingeniousness.
he is cool collected and indomitable on december 2 1859 some 1 500 virginia militiamen including a young actor named john wilkes booth who would later assassinate abraham lincoln assembled for browns execution.
just before being placed atop his coffin in a wagon to take him to the scaffold brown wrote a final message predicting that the crimes of this guilty land will never be purged away but with blood although john browns raid on harpers ferry failed to ignite a massive slave rebellion it achieved two things he became a martyr for the abolitionist cause and he set off a hysterical panic throughout the slaveholding south.
the pacifist abolitionist william lloyd garrison called brown the man with the burning eyes misguided wild and apparently insane others were not so sure.
john brown may be a lunatic said a boston newspaper but if so one fourth of the people of massachusetts are madmen the transcendentalist leader ralph waldo emerson called brown a saint who had made the gallows glorious like a cross frederick douglass proclaimed brown our noblest american hero whose commitment to ending slavery was far greater than mine caught up in a frenzy of fear southerners circulated wild rumors about slave rebellions.
they have declared war on us warned a mississippi legislator.
southern congressmen brought weapons to the capitol.
one of them reported that the only ones who do not have a revolver and a knife are those who have two revolvers john browns raid convinced southern states to strengthen their militia units and pass new restrictions on the movements of slaves.
we regard every man in our midst an enemy to the institutions of the south said the atlanta confederacy who does not boldly declare that he believes african slavery to be a social moral and political blessing other newspapers claimed that browns raid had dramatically increased support for secession in the south.
the richmond whig reported that thousands of virginians had decided that the unions days are numbered its glory perished as a result of john browns actions.
the democrats divide president buchanan had chosen not to seek a second term leaving stephen a douglas as the frontrunner for the nomination.
his northern supporters tried to straddle the slavery issue by the emergence of the republican party 629 promising to defend the institution in the south while assuring northerners that slavery would not spread to new states.
southern firebrands however demanded federal protection for slavery in the territories as well as the states.
when the p ro slavery advocates lost delegates from eight southern states walked out of the convention in charleston south carolina.
the delegates then decided to leave charleston.
douglass supporters reassembled in baltimore on june 18 and nominated him for president.
southern democrats met first in richmond and then in baltimore where they adopted the pro slavery platform defeated in charleston and named john c breckinridge vice president under buchanan as abraham lincoln a lanky and their candidate because he promised to rawboned small town lawyer lincoln ensure that congress would protect the won the presidential election in 1860 right of emigrants to take their slaves to the western territories.
thus another cord of union had snapped the last remaining national party had split into northern and southern factions.
the fracturing of the democratic party made a republican victory in 1860 almost certain.
lincolns election the republican convention was held in may in the fast growing city of chicago where everything came together for abraham lincoln.
the uncommon common man won the nomination over new york senator william h seward and the resulting cheer wrote one journalist was like the rush of a great wind the convention reaffirmed the partys opposition to the extension of slavery and to gain broader support endorsed a series of traditional whig policies promoting national economic expansion a higher protective tariff free farms on federal lands out west and federally financed internal improvements including a transcontinental railroad.
the presidential nominating conventions revealed that opinions tended to be more radical in the northeast and the lower south.
attitude followed latitude.
in the border states of maryland delaware kentucky and missouri a sense of moderation aroused former whigs to make one more try at reconciliation.
meeting in baltimore a week before the republicans met in 630 chapter 31 conservative revival 1977 1990 strategic defense initiative president reagan addresses the nation on march 23 1983 promoting the development of a space age shield to intercept soviet missiles.
make nuclear weapons impotent and obsolete he described a defensive shield provided by satellites equipped with laser weapons in outer space that would intercept and destroy all soviet missiles in flight before they could harm the united states.
the expensive program was controversial from the start because it relied upon untested technology and violated a 1972 u s soviet treaty banning such anti missile defensive systems.
despite skepticism among the media scientists and even government officials that such a defense system dubbed star wars by the media could be built congress approved the first stage of funding eventually allocating 30 billion to the fanciful program.
in the end sdi was never implemented but it did fulfil reagans pledge to change the course of history because it forced the soviets to launch an expensive research and development effort of their own which helped bankrupt their economy.
confronting the evil empire reagan also borrowed the rhetoric of harry s truman john foster dulles and john f kennedy to express resolve in the face of communist aggression anywhere in the world when the polish government declared martial law during the winter of 1981 reagan forcefully protested and imposed economic sanctions against polands communist government.
he also worked behind the scenes to support the polish protest movement solidarity which sought independence from soviet control.
an a nti soviet foreign policy 1437 the americas president reagans foremost international concern however was central america where he detected the most serious communist threat.
the tiny nation of el salvador caught up since 1980 in a brutal struggle between communist supported revolutionaries and right wing militants received u s economic and military assistance.
critics argued that u s involvement ensured that the revolutionary forces would gain favor by capitalizing on anti yankee sentiment.
reagans supporters countered that a victory by the revolutionaries would lead all of central america into the communist camp a new domino theory.
by 1984 the u s backed government of president jos napolen duarte had brought some stability to el salvador.
more troubling to reagan was the situation in nicaragua.
the state department claimed that the c uban sponsored sandinista socialist government which had seized power in 1979 was sending arms to leftist salvadoran rebels.
in response the reagan administration ordered the cia to train anti communist nicaraguans or contras short for contrarevolucionarios or counterrevolutionaries who staged attacks on sandinista bases from sanctuaries in honduras.
in supporting these freedom fighters reagan sought not only to impede the traffic in arms to salvadoran rebels but also to replace the sandinistas with a democratic government.
critics accused the contras of being mostly r ight wing fanatics who killed indiscriminately.
they also feared that the united states might eventually commit its own combat forces leading to a v ietnam like intervention.
reagan warned that if the communists prevailed in central america our credibility would collapse our alliances would crumble and the safety of our homeland would be jeopardized the middle east the middle east remained a tinderbox of conflict during the 1980s.
no peaceable end seemed possible in the prolonged bloody iran iraq war entangled as it was with the passions of islamic fundamentalism.
in 1984 both sides began to attack tankers in the persian gulf a major source of the worlds oil.
the main international response was the sale of arms to both sides.
nor was any settlement in sight in afghanistan where the soviet occupation forces had bogged down as badly as the americans had in vietnam.
american administrations continued to see israel as the strongest and most reliable ally in the volatile region all the while seeking to encourage moderate arab groups.
but the forces of moderation were dealt a blow during the mid 1970s when lebanon long an enclave of peace despite its ethnic complexity collapsed into an anarchy of warring groups.
the capital beirut became a battleground for sunni and shiite muslims the druze the palestine liberation 1438 chapter 8 the emergence of a market economy 1815 1850 romoting the risky engineering project which thomas jefferson dismissed as p little short of madness clinton however boasted that his state of new york had the opportunity to create a new era in history and to erect a work more stupendous more magnificent and more beneficial than has hitherto been achieved by the human race it was not an idle boast.
after the erie canal opened in 1825 having taken eight years to build it drew eastward much of the midwestern trade furs lumber textiles that earlier had been forced to go to canada or to make the long journey down the ohio and mississippi rivers to new orleans and the gulf of mexico.
thanks to the erie canal the backwoods village of chicago developed into a bustling city because of its commercial connection via the great lakes to new york city and eventually across the atlantic to europe.
the erie canal was a triumph of engineering audacity.
forty feet wide and four feet deep it was the longest canal in the world extending 363 miles across new york from albany in the east to buffalo and lake erie in the west and rising some 675 feet in elevation.
additional branches soon put most of the state within its reach.
the canal was built by tens of thousands of manual laborers mostly german and irish immigrants who were paid less than a dollar a day to drain the erie canal junction of the erie and northern canals 1830 32 by john hill.
the market revolution 359 swamps clear forests build stone bridges and aqueducts and blast through solid rock.
it brought a river of gold to new york city in the form of an unending stream of lumber grain flour and other goods from western new york and the midwest and it unlocked the floodgates of western settlement.
the canal also reduced the cost of moving a ton of freight from 100 to 5.
it was so profitable that it paid off its construction costs in just seven years.
the erie canal had enormous economic and political consequences as it tied together the regional economies of the midwest and the east while further isolating the deep south.
the genesee valley in western new york became one of the most productive g rain growing regions in the world and rochester became a boom town processing wheat and corn into flour and meal.
the writer nathaniel hawthorne said the town had sprung up like a mushroom syracuse albany and buffalo experienced similarly dramatic growth because of the erie canal.
the business of moving goods and people along the canal involved some 4 000 boats and over 25 000 workers.
canal boats slender and shallow usually eleven feet wide and seventy feet long were pulled by teams of horses or mules walking along a towpath.
the teams hauling the boats needed to be changed every ten to twelve miles.
painted in bright colors and given colorful names the packet boats carrying passengers traveled seven days a week at between two and four miles an hour.
much time was lost waiting at one of the e ighty eight locks where boats would enter one at a time to be raised or lowered to match the changing water level of the canal.
often the boat captains took their families with them.
most boatmen however were single and rough.
one traveler called them a coarse and untaught set of vagabonds whose chief delight is to carouse and fight the success of the erie and the entire new york canal system inspired other states to build some 3 000 miles of waterways by 1837 not all of which were successful.
by 1834 canals connected pittsburgh to philadelphia a distance of 395 miles.
canals boosted the economy by enabling speedier and less expensive transport of goods and people.
they also boosted real estate prices for the lands bordering the canals and transformed sleepy rural villages like rochester new york into booming cities.
railroads for a brief period canals were essential to the nations economic growth.
the canal era was short lived however.
during the second quarter of the nineteenth century a much less expensive but much more powerful efficient and versatile form of transportation emerged the railroad.
in 1825 the year the erie canal was completed the worlds first s team powered railway began operating in england.
soon thereafter a r ailroad building 360 chapter 14 the gathering storm 1848 1860 in mid february davis traveled from mississippi to montgomery alabama the confederate capital for his installation.
on february 18 william yancey an alabama fi re eater introduced davis to the crowd by announcing that the man and the hour have met in his remarks davis ominously claimed that the time for compromise is now passed final efforts at compromise members of congress however desperately sought a compromise to avoid a civil war.
on december 18 1860 john j crittenden of kentucky offered a series of resolutions that would allow the extension of slavery into the new western territories south of the missouri compromise line 3630 parallel and guaranteed the preservation of slavery where it already existed.
lincoln however opposed any plan that would expand slavery westward and the senate defeated the crittenden compromise 25 to 23 several weeks later in february 1861 t wenty one states sent delegates to a peace conference in washington d c former president john tyler presided but the peace conventions proposal substantially the same as the crittenden compromise had little support in either house of congress.
tyler himself voted against it and urged virginia to secede at once.
the only proposal that generated much interest was a constitutional amendment guaranteeing slavery where it existed.
many republicans including lincoln were prepared to go that far to save the union but no further.
as it happened after passing the house the slavery amendment passed the senate 24 to 12 on the morning of march 4 1861 lincolns inauguration day.
it would have become the thirteenth amendment and would have been the first time the word slavery had appeared in the constitution but the states never ratified it.
when a thirteenth amendment was eventually ratified in 1865 it did not protect slavery it ended it.
lincolns inauguration in mid february 1861 abraham lincoln boarded a train in springfield illinois headed to washington d c for his inauguration.
along the way he told the new jersey legislature that he was devoted to peace but warned that it may be necessary to put the foot down in his inaugural address on march 4 the fifty two year old lincoln repeated his pledge not to interfere with the institution of slavery in the states where it exists but the immediate question facing the nation had shifted from slavery to secession.
lincoln insisted that the union of these states is perpetual no state he stressed can lawfully get out of the union he pledged the response in the south 635 to defend federal forts in the south but beyond that there will be no invasion no using of force against or among the people anywhere in closing he appealed for the union we are not enemies but friends.
we must not be enemies.
though passion may have strained it must not break our bonds of affection.
the mystic chords of memory stretching from every battlefield and patriot grave to every living heart and hearthstone all over this broad land will yet swell the chorus of the union when again touched as surely they will be by the better angels of our nature.
southerners were not impressed.
a north carolina newspaper warned that lincolns speech made civil war inevitable on both sides however people assumed that any warfare would be over quickly and that their lives would then go on as usual.
the end of the waiting game on march 5 1861 his first day in office president lincoln found on his desk a letter from major anderson at fort sumter.
time was running out for the union soldiers.
anderson reported that his men had enough food for only a few weeks and that the confederates were encircling the fort with a ring of fire it would take thousands of federal soldiers to rescue them.
on april 4 1861 lincoln ordered that unarmed ships take food and supplies to the sixty nine soldiers at fort sumter.
jefferson davis was equally determined to stop any effort to supply the fort even if it meant using military force.
the secretary of state for the new confederacy richard lathers warned davis that if the south fired first it would unify northern opinion against the secessionists there will be no compromise with secession if war is forced upon the north davis ignored the warning.
on april 11 confederate general pierre g t beauregard who had studied under robert anderson at west point urged his former professor to surrender fort sumter and sent him cases of whiskey and boxes of cigars to help convince him.
anderson refused the gifts and the request.
at 4 30 a m on april 12 confederate cannons began firing on fort sumter.
the bright flashes and thundering boom of guns awakened the entire city thousands rushed to the battery to watch the incessant shelling.
finally the outgunned major anderson his ammunition and food gone lowered the stars and stripes a civil war of unimagined horrors had begun.
chapter 31 conservative revival 1977 1990 personal computer.
in 1975 an engineer named ed roberts developed the altair 8800 the prototype of the personal computer.
its potential excited a harvard university sophomore named bill gates who improved the software of the altair 8800 dropped out of college and formed a company called microsoft.
during the 1980s ibm international business machines using a microprocessor made by the intel corporation and an operating system provided by microsoft had helped transform the personal computer into a mass consumer product.
in 1963 a h alf million computer chips were sold worldwide by 1970 the number was 300 million.
computer chips transformed a variety of electronic products televisions calculators wristwatches clocks ovens and automobiles while also facilitating american efforts to land astronauts on the moon and launch satellites in space.
the development of the internet electronic mail e mail and cell phone technology during the eighties and nineties allowed for instantaneous communication thereby accelerating the globalization of the economy and dramatically increasing productivity in the workplace.
debt and the stock market plunge in the late seventies jimmy carter had urged americans to lead simpler lives cut back on conspicuous consumption reduce energy use and invest more time in faith and family.
during the eighties ronald reagan promoted very different behavior he reduced tax rates so people would have more money to spend.
americans preferred reagans emphasis on prosperity rather than carters focus on propriety for it endorsed entrepreneurship as well as an increasingly consumption oriented and hedonistic leisure culture.
but reagan succeeded too well in shifting the public mood back to the more is more bigger is better tradition of heedless consumerism.
during the age of reagan marketers and advertisers celebrated instant gratification at the expense of the future.
michelob beer commercials began assuring americans that you can have it all and many consumers went on a s elf indulgent spending spree.
the more they bought the more they wanted.
in 1984 hollywood producers launched a new tv show called lifestyles of the rich and famous that exemplified the decades runaway materialism.
as the stock market soared the number of multi millionaires working on wall street and in the financial industry nationwide mushroomed.
the money fever was contagious.
compulsive shoppers donned t shirts proclaiming born to shop by 1988 110 million americans had an average of seven credit cards each.
money lots of i t came to define the american dream.
in the hit movie wall street 1987 the h igh flying land developer and corporate raider g ordon gekko played by actor michael douglas announced that greed.
greed is right during the eighties many americans caught up in the materi the changing economic and social landscape 1445 alism of the times began spending more money than they earned.
all kinds of d ebt personal corporate and g overnment increased dramatically.
americans in the sixties had saved on average 10 percent of their income in 1987 the figure was less than 4 percent.
the federal debt more than tripled from 908 billion in 1980 to 2 9 trillion at the end of the 1989 fiscal year.
then on october 19 1987 the bill collector suddenly arrived at the nations doorstep.
on that black monday the stock market experienced a tidal wave of selling reminiscent of the 1929 crash as investors worried that the united states would never address the federal governments massive budget deficits.
the dow jones industrial average plummeted an astounding 22 6 percent.
the market plunge nearly doubled the record 12 8 percent fall on october 28 1929 wall streets selling frenzy reverberated throughout the capitalist world sending stock prices plummeting in tokyo london paris and toronto.
in the aftermath of the calamitous selling spree on black monday fears of an impending recession led business leaders and economists to attack president reagan for allowing such huge budget deficits.
reagan responded by agreeing to work with congress to develop a d eficit reduction package.
for the first time the president indicated a willingness to include increased taxes in such a package to reduce the deficit.
but the eventual compromise plan was so modest that it did little to restore investor confidence.
as one republican black monday a 508 point plunge devastated the stock market on october 19 1987 and sent traders on the floor of the new york stock exchange into a panic selling frenzy.
1446 chapter 15 the war of the union 1861 1865 much of the romance of war the colorful uniforms bright flags marching bands and rousing songs gave way to the agonizing realization that this would be a long costly grim struggle.
harpers weekly bluntly warned from the fearful day at bull run dates war.
not polite war not incredulous war but war that breaks hearts and blights homes the unions anaconda plan the battle of bull run demonstrated that the war would not be decided with one sudden stroke.
general winfield scott the seventy five year old commander of the union war effort devised a three pronged strategy that called first for the army of the potomac the main union army to defend washington d c and exert constant pressure on the confederate capital at richmond.
the first battle of bull run july 21 1861 10 miles m 10 kilometers l n d m union ar bull run y a centreville fed e r washington arlington bull run co n a y alexandria rat es manassas junction v i r g i oc coq n ua n i a cr ee po tom ac ri ve r k area of map confederate advance union advance union retreat battle site why did the confederate and union armies rush to battle before they were ready.
how did general beauregard win the first battle of bull run.
why did the confederates not pursue the retreating union army.
wwn64 figure m15 2 1st proof choosing sides 647 at the same time the federal navys blockade of southern ports would cut off the confederacys access to foreign goods and weapons.
the final component of the plan called for other union armies to divide the confederacy by pushing south along the crucial inland water routes the mississippi tennessee and cumberland rivers.
this so called anaconda plan was intended to slowly trap and crush the southern resistance like an anaconda snake strangling its prey.
confederate strategy confederate president jefferson davis was better prepared than lincoln at the start of the war to guide military strategy.
a graduate of the u s military academy at west point he had served with distinction both as an officer during the m exican american war and as u s secretary of war from 1853 to 1857 if the war could be prolonged davis and others hoped then the british or french desperate for southern cotton might be persuaded to join their cause.
or perhaps a long war would influence public sentiment in the north and force lincoln to seek a negotiated settlement.
so while armies were forming in the south confederate diplomats were seeking military and financial assistance in london and paris and confederate sympathizers in the north were urging an end to the unions war effort.
the confederate representatives in paris won a promise from france to recognize the confederacy as a new nation if great britain would do the same.
but the british refused partly in response to pressure from president lincoln and partly out of britains desire to maintain its trade with the united states.
confederate leaders had assumed that britain would support the south in order to get its cotton.
the cards are in our hands crowed the mercury a charleston newspaper.
and we intend to play them out to the bankruptcy of every cotton factory in great britain and france for the acknowledgement of our independence as it turned out however the british were able to import enough cotton from india to maintain production.
in the end confederate diplomacy in europe was more successful in getting military supplies than in gaining official recognition of the confederacy as an independent nation.
forming armies once fighting began president lincoln called for 500 000 more men a staggering number at the time and one that the confederacy struggled to match.
and volunteers are the only topics of conversation or thought wrote a student at ohios oberlin college.
i cannot study.
i cannot sleep and i dont know as i can write in illinois ulysses s grant a 648 chapter 15 the war of the union 1861 1865 mediocre graduate of the u s military academy at west point who had displayed courage and a knack for leadership in the mexican american war as well as a fondness for horses liquor and cigars rejoined the army in 1861 explaining that there are but two parties n ow traitors and patriots and i want hereafter to be ranked with the latter confederates were equally committed to their cause.
charleston wrote mary chesnut the literary wife of a prominent planter was crowded with soldiers who feared the war will be over before they get a sight of the fun tennessees twenty one year old sam watkins reported that everyone in his town was eager for the war the basic unit of the nineteenth century u s army was the regiment about 1 000 soldiers and during the civil war most regiments were made up of friends neighbors and relatives from the same local community.
ethnic groups also formed their own regiments.
a quarter of the union troops were foreign born.
the union army for example included a scandinavian regiment the 15th wisconsin infantry a french regiment the 55th new york infantry a polish legion the 58th new york infantry and a mixed regiment of poles hungarians germans spaniards and italians the 39th new york infantry.
many immigrant soldiers did not speak english.
immigrants were attracted to serve for many reasons a strong belief in the union cause cash bonuses regular pay or the need for a steady job.
whatever the reason the high proportion of immigrants in the union army gave it an ethnic diversity absent in the confederate ranks.
many of the first confederate army units chose flamboyant names the frontier guards rough and ready grays game cocks tigers cherokee lincoln killers tallapoosa thrashers and raccoon roughs.
because the confederacy had a smaller male population than the north jefferson davis was forced to enact a conscription law mandatory military draft.
on april 16 1862 all white males between eighteen and thirty five were required to serve in the army for three years.
from this time until the end of the war a tennessee soldier wrote a soldier was simply a machine a conscript.
all our pride and valor had gone and we were sick of war and cursed the southern confederacy the confederate conscription law included controversial loopholes.
a draftee might avoid service either by paying a substitute who was not of draft age or by paying 500 to the government.
elected officials and key civilian workers as well as planters with twenty or more slaves were exempted from military service.
many among the planter elite argued that if they left to fight their slaves would escape or riot.
equally galling to many confederate soldiers was the behavior of wealthy officers who brought their enslaved servants with them to army camps.
choosing sides 649 the u s army recruiting office in city hall park new york city the sign advertises the money offered to those willing to serve 677 to new recruits 777 to veteran soldiers and 15 to anyone who brought in a recruit.
the union waited nearly a year to force men into service.
in 1863 with the war going badly for the federal armies the government began to draft men.
as in the south northerners found ways to avoid military service.
exemptions were granted to selected federal and state officeholders and to others on medical or compassionate grounds or a draftee might pay 300 to avoid service.
such exemptions led to bitter complaints on both sides about the conflict being a rich mans war and a poor mans fight the civil war also divided families.
lincolns wife had four brothers who fought for the rebel side.
the son of lincolns attorney general edward bates fought for the confederacy.
in june 1862 two brothers alexander and james campbell fought against each other at the battle of secessionville on james island south carolina.
alexander joined union forces in assaulting a confederate fort one of whose defenders was his brother.
afterward james wrote his brother expressing astonishment that alexander had been among the union attackers.
doing my best to beat you but i hope that you and i will never again meet face to face but if they should he urged his brother to do your duty to your cause for i can assure you i will strive to discharge my duty to my country my cause the life of a soldier the average civil war soldier or sailor was twenty five years old stood five feet eight inches and weighed 143 pounds.
650 chapter 26 the second world war 1933 1945 codes enabling allied convoys to steer clear of u boats or to hunt them down with long range warplanes called subchasers and anti submarine weapons deployed on warships.
new technology also helped as sonar and radar allowed allied ships to track submarines.
yet the best tactic against u boats was to group cargo vessels into tightly bunched convoys so that warships could protect them more effectively.
in may 1943 the allies destroyed forty one u boats.
thereafter the u boats were on the defensive and allied shipping losses fell significantly.
sicily and italy on july 10 1943 following the allied victory in north africa about 250 000 british and american troops landed on the coast of sicily.
general eisenhower called it the first page of the liberation of the european continent the island was in allied hands by august 17 bringing to an end benito mussolinis twenty years of fascist rule in italy.
on july 25 1943 the italian king had dismissed mussolini as prime minister and had him arrested.
the new italian government startled the allies when it offered not only to surrender but also to switch sides.
to prevent them from doing so hitler sent german armies into italy.
the italian campaign thereafter became a series of stalemated battles that left people wondering if it had been worth the cost.
winter came early to southern italy making life even more miserable for the soldiers.
the germans positioned themselves behind formidable defenses and rugged terrain that enabled them to slow the allied advance to a crawl.
italy was one hill after another said a u s soldier and when it was wet you were either going up too slow or down too fast but always the mud.
and every hill had a german machine gun on it allied casualties soared as the stalemate continued.
by february 1944 the two sides were in the words of u s commander mark w clark like two boxers in the ring both about to collapse mussolini plucked from prison by a daring german airborne commando raid became head of a puppet fascist government in northern italy as allied forces finally took control of the rest of the country.
on june 4 1944 the u s fifth army entered rome just two days before d day on the coast of france.
we were woken by trucks moving through the street one overjoyed italian remembered.
at first i thought it was the germans but then i heard american accents.
by dawn people were lining the streets.
i cried the tehran conference late in the fall of 1943 in tehran iran churchill and roosevelt had their first joint meeting with josef stalin.
their discussions focused on the planned invasion of n azi controlled france and a simultaneous russian offensive westward across eastern europe.
the three the allied drive toward berlin 1187 leaders agreed to create an international organization the united n ations to maintain peace after the war.
upon arriving back in the united states roosevelt confided to churchill his distrust of stalin saying that it was a ticklish business keeping the russians cozy with us because of the tension between communism and capitalism.
as general eisenhower stressed however the fate of britain and the united states depended on the soviets survival as an ally.
the prize we seek he said in 1942 is to keep 8 million russians soldiers in the war the strategic bombing of europe months of preparation went into the long anticipated allied invasion of german occupied france.
while waiting for d day the day the invasion would begin the u s army air force tried to pound germany into submission with an air campaign that dropped thousands of bombs and killed some 350 000 civilians.
yet the air offensive failed to shatter either german morale or w ar related production.
many bombs missed their targets because of thick clouds high winds and inaccurate navigational systems and many allied planes were shot down.
the bombing campaign however did force the germans to commit precious resources to air raid defense and eventually wore down their air force.
with allied air supremacy assured by 1944 the m uch anticipated invasion of hitlers fortress europe could move forward.
planning an invasion in early 1944 dwight d eisenhower arrived in london with a new title supreme commander of the allied expeditionary force aef that would invade n azi controlled western europe.
eisenhower faced enormous challenges ranging from creating an effective command structure to handling disagreements between president roosevelt and prime minister churchill.
eisenhower also faced the daunting task of planning operation overlord the daring assault on hitlers atlantic wall a formidable array of fortifications mines machine guns barbed wire and jagged beach obstacles along the french coastline.
an attack by sea against heavily fortified defenders was the toughest of military operations.
the planned invasion gave churchill nightmares when i think of the beaches.
choked with the flower of american and british youth.
i see the tides running red with their blood.
i have my doubts.
i have my doubts for months eisenhower neither an experienced strategist nor a combat commander dedicated himself to planning the risky invasion and managing the complex political and military rivalries among the allied leaders.
well organized and efficient he was a high energy perfectionist impatient and 1188 chapter 20 seizing an american e mpire 1865 1913 the narrow nation of panama had first become a major concern of americans in the late 1840s when it became an important overland link in the sea route from the east coast to the california goldfields.
two treaties dating from that period loomed as obstacles to the construction of a canal however.
the bidlack treaty 1846 with colombia then called new granada guaranteed colombias control over panama.
in the clayton bulwer treaty 1850 the british had agreed to acquire no more central american territory and the united states joined them in agreeing to build or fortify a canal only by mutual consent.
secretary of state john hay asked the british ambassador for consent to digging the canal president theodore roosevelt operating a steam shovel build a canal and the outcome was during his 1906 visit to the panama the hay pauncefote treaty of 1901 canal.
other obstacles remained however.
from 1881 to 1887 a french company led by ferdinand de lesseps who had engineered the suez canal in egypt had already spent nearly 300 million and some 20 000 lives to dig a canal a third of the way across panama which was still under colombian control.
the company asked that the united states purchase the partially completed canal which it did.
meanwhile secretary hay had opened negotiations with ambassador toms herrn of colombia.
in return for acquiring a canal zone six miles wide the united states agreed to pay 10 million.
the u s senate ratified the h ay herrn treaty in 1903 but the colombian senate held out for 25 million.
as president roosevelt raged against the foolish and homicidal corruptionists in bogot the panamanians revolted against colombian rule.
philippe b unau varilla an employee of the french canal company assisted them and reported after visiting roosevelt and hay in washington d c that u s warships would arrive at coln panama on november 2 colombian troops who could not penetrate the overland jungle sepa rating them from the canal zone found the u s ships blocking the s ea lanes roosevelts big stick diplomacy 927 to the area.
on november 13 the roosevelt administration received its first ambassador from the newly independent panama bunau varilla who eagerly signed a treaty that extended the canal zone from six to ten miles wide.
for a 10 million down payment and 250 000 a year the united states received in perpetuity the use occupation and control of the fifty mile long canal zone.
not everyone applauded the presidents actions.
a chicago news paper attacked roosevelt for his rough riding assault upon another republic over the shattered wreckage of international law the u s attorney general asked to supply a legal opinion upholding roosevelts actions responded wryly no mr president if i were you i would not have any taint of legality about it he then added you were accused of seduction and you have conclusively proved that you were guilty of rape roosevelt later explained i took the canal zone and let congress debate and while the debate goes on the construction of the canal does also big stick diplomacy president theodore roosevelt wields the big stick symbolizing his aggressive diplomacy.
as he stomps through the caribbean he drags a string of american warships behind him.
928 chapter 3 colonial ways of life one of the most lucrative trades among colonial women was the oldest prostitution.
many servants took up prostitution after their indenture was fulfilled and the colonial port cities had thriving brothels.
they catered to sailors and soldiers but men from all walks of life married and unmarried frequented what were called bawdy houses or in puritan boston disorderly houses virginias william byrd perhaps the wealthiest man in the colony complained in his diary that he had walked the streets of williamsburg trying to pick up a whore but could not find one local authorities frowned on such activities.
in massachusetts convicted prostitutes were stripped to the waist tied to the back of a cart and whipped as it moved through the town.
in south carolina several elected public officials were dismissed because they were caught lying with wenches new york city officials ordered raids on brothels in 1753 some two dozen ladies of pleasure were arrested and five of them were subjected to a public whipping.
some enslaved women whose owners expected sexual favors turned the tables by demanding compensation.
on occasion circumstances forced women to exercise leadership outside the domestic sphere.
such was the case with south carolinian elizabeth lucas pinckney 1722 1793.
born in the west indies raised on the island of antigua and educated in england eliza moved with her family to charleston south carolina at age fifteen when her father george lucas inherited three plantations.
the following year however lucas a british army officer and colonial administrator was called back to antigua leaving eliza to care for her ailing mother and younger s ister and to manage three plantations worked by slaves.
she wrote a friend in england i have the business of three plantations to transact which requires much writing and more business and fatigue.
but by rising early i find i can go through much business eliza loved the vegetable world and experimented with several crops uch coveted before focusing on indigo a west indian plant that produced a m blue dye for coloring fabric especially military uniforms.
indigo made her family a fortune as it did for many other plantation owners on the carolina coast.
in 1744 she married charles pinckney a widower twice her age who was speaker of the south carolina assembly.
she made him promise that she could continue to manage the plantation.
as eliza began raising children she resolved to make a good wife to my dear husband.
a good mother to my children.
a good mistress to my servants making their lives as comfortable as i can she also pledged not to be luxurious or extravagant in the management of my table family budget and family on the one hand nor niggardly and covetous or too anxiously concerned about it on the other the shape of early america 115 in the towns women commonly served as tavern hostesses and shopkeepers and occasionally worked as doctors printers upholsterers painters and silversmiths.
often these women were widows carrying on their dead husbands trade or business and they became accustomed to some measure of social authority in a mans world women and religion during the colonial era no denomination allowed women to be ordained as ministers.
only the quakers let women hold church offices and preach exhort in public.
puritans cited biblical passages claiming that god required virtuous women to submit to male authority and remain silent in congregational matters.
governor john winthrop demanded that women not meddle in such things as are proper for men to manage.
women who challenged ministerial authority were usually prosecuted and punished.
yet by the eighteenth century as is true today women made up the overwhelming majority of church members.
their disproportionate attendance at church services and revivals worried many ministers since a feminized church was presumed to be a church in decline.
in 1692 the influential boston minister cotton mather observed that there are far more godly women in the world than there are godly men in explaining this phenomenon mather put a new twist on the old notion of women being the weaker sex.
he argued that the pain associated with childbirth which had long been interpreted as the penalty women paid for eves sinfulness was in part what drove women more frequently the more fervently to commit their lives to christ.
in colonial america the religious roles of black women were quite different from those of their white counterparts.
in most west african tribes women were not subordinate to men and frequently served as priests and cult leaders.
although some enslaved africans had been exposed to christianity or islam in africa most of them tried to sustain their traditional african religion once they arrived in the colonies.
in america black women and men were often excluded from church membership for fear that christianized slaves might seek to gain their freedom.
to clarify the situation virginia in 1667 passed a law specifying that children of slaves would be slaves even if they had been baptized as christians.
over time the colonial environment did generate slight improvements in the status of women.
the acute shortage of women in the early years made them more highly valued than they were in europe and the puritan emphasis on a w ell ordered family life led to laws protecting wives from physical abuse and allowing for divorce.
in addition colonial laws gave wives greater control 116 chapter 15 the war of the union 1861 1865 the battle of antietam had several important results.
it revived sagging northern morale dashed the confederacys hopes of forging alliances with great britain and france and convinced lincoln to transform the war from an effort to restore the union to a crusade to end slavery.
emancipation proclamation on september 22 1862 five days after the battle he issued the preliminary emancipation proclamation which warned the confederacy that if it did not stop fighting all slaves still under rebel control were to be made forever free in exactly 100 days on january 1 1863 the emancipation proclamation was not based on ideas of racial equality or on abstract ideals of human dignity.
it was according to lincoln a military necessity the proclamation freed only those slaves in areas still controlled by the confederacy it had no bearing on slaves in the four border states because they remained in the union.
lincoln believed that the constitution allowed each state to decide the fate of slavery so his only legal avenue was to act as commander in chief of the armed forces rather than as president.
he would declare the end of slavery as a fit and necessary war measure to save the union.
union view of the emancipation proclamation a thoughtful lincoln composes the proclamation with the constitution and the bible in his lap.
the scales of justice hangs on the wall behind him.
emancipation 663 when lincoln officially signed the emancipation proclamation in january however he amended his original message adding that the proclamation was an act of justice as well as a military necessity.
lincolns constitutional concerns about abolishing slavery would lead him to promote the thirteenth amendment ending slavery across the nation.
as lincoln signed the emancipation proclamation he said i never in my life felt more certain that i was doing the right thing than i do in signing this paper simply restoring the union was no longer the purpose of the war the transformation of the south and the slave system was now the goal.
reactions to emancipation lincolns threat to free slaves under confederate control triggered emotional reactions.
the illinois state register savaged the president for violating the constitution and causing the permanent disruption of the republic democrats exploded with rage calling the presidents decision dictatorial unconstitutional and catastrophic.
we wont fight to free the nigger proclaimed one popular banner.
many voters felt likewise.
lincoln forcefully responded to his critics.
you say you will not fight to free negroes he wrote.
some of them seem willing to fight for you but no confederate view of the emancipation proclamation surrounded by demonic faces hidden in his furnishings lincoln pens the proclamation with a foot trampling the constitution.
the devil holds the inkwell before him.
664 chapter 26 the second world war 1933 1945 soviet union.
i can deal with stalin he wrote.
he is h onest but smart as hell truman would soon change his mind about stalins honesty.
the deadline calling for japans surrender passed and on august 6 1945 a b 29 bomber named enola gay after the pilots mother took off at 2 00 a m from the island of tinian and headed for hiroshima.
at 8 15 a m flying at 31 600 feet the enola gay released the fi ve ton ten foot long uranium bomb nicknamed little boy forty three seconds later the bomb exploded at an altitude of 1 900 feet creating a blinding flash of light followed by a fireball towering to 40 000 feet.
the tail gunner on the enola gay described the scene its like bubbling molasses down there.
the mushroom is spreading out.
fires are springing up bombing of nagasaki a 20 000 foot everywhere.
its like a peep into hell tall mushroom cloud enveloped the city the bombs incredible shock wave of nagasaki after the atomic bombing and firestorm killed some 78 000 peoon august 9 1945 ple including thousands of japanese soldiers and 23 american prisoners of war housed in the city.
by the end of the year the death toll would reach 140 000 as people died of injuries or radiation poisoning.
in addition of the citys 76 000 buildings only 6 000 were left standing and four square miles of the city were turned to rubble.
president truman was aboard the battleship augusta returning from the potsdam conference when news arrived that the atomic bomb had been dropped.
this is the greatest thing in history he exclaimed.
in the united states americans greeted the news with similar joy.
to them the atomic bomb promised a quick end to the long nightmare of war.
no tears of sympathy will be shed in america for the japanese people the omaha world herald predicted.
had they possessed a comparable weapon at pearl harbor would they have hesitated to use it others reacted more soberly when they considered the implications of atomic warfare.
yesterday journalist hanson baldwin wrote in the new york times we clinched victory in the pacific but we sowed the whirlwind a new age is born 1205 two days after the hiroshima bombing an opportunistic soviet union hoping to share in the spoils of victory hastened to enter the war in the pacific by sending hundreds of thousands of troops into j apanese occupied manchuria along the border between china and the soviet union.
truman and his aides frustrated by the stubborn refusal of japanese leaders to surrender and fearful that the soviet unions entry would complicate negotiations ordered a second atomic bomb fat man to be dropped on japan.
on august 9 the city of nagasaki a shipbuilding center experienced the same nuclear devastation that had destroyed hiroshima.
five days later on august 14 1945 the japanese emperor accepted the terms of surrender.
the formal surrender ceremony occurred on an american warship in tokyo bay on september 2 1945 upon learning of the unexpected japanese decision to surrender paul fussell one of the american soldiers preparing for the dreaded invasion of japan said he went into his tent and pulled the zipper closed.
and i sat there in silence for at least a full day before i could compose myself because my joy was such that i knew i couldnt survive it in public then he came out and cheered and danced with everyone else.
a new age is born thus ended the costliest war in history.
it was a total war in its scope intensity and numbers.
including deaths from war related disease and famine some 50 million civilians and 22 million combatants died.
the second world war was more costly for the united states than any other foreign war 292 000 combat deaths and 114 000 noncombat deaths among soldiers sailors airmen and marines.
a million more were wounded with half of them seriously disabled.
in proportion to its population however the united states suffered far fewer losses than did the other major allies or their enemies and american territory escaped the devastation suffered in so many parts of the world.
for every american killed in the second world war for example some fifty nine soviets died.
the war was the pivotal event of the turbulent twentieth century.
it engulfed five continents leveled cities reshaped societies and transformed international relations.
german and italian fascism as well as japanese militarism were destroyed.
the war set in motion the fall of china to communism in 1949 and the outbreak of the korean war a year later.
colonial empires in africa and asia rapidly crumbled as the conflict unleashed independence movements.
the soviet union emerged from the war as a new global superpower while the united states as winston churchill told the house of commons stood at the summit of the world 1206 chapter 21 the progressive era 1890 1920 reform society both to help those in need and to keep them from becoming revolutionaries.
populism populism with its roots in the rural south and west was another thread in the fabric of progressivism.
the populist party platforms of 1892 and 1896 included reforms intended to give more power to the people such as the direct election of u s senators by voters rather than by state legislatures.
although william jennings bryans loss in the 1896 presidential campaign ended the populist party as a serious political force many reforms pushed by the populists were implemented by progressives.
honest government the mugwumps gentlemen reformers who had fought the patronage system and insisted that government jobs be awarded on the basis of merit supplied progressivism with another key goal the honest government ideal.
over the years the good government movement expanded beyond ending political corruption to addressing persistent urban issues such as crime access to electricity clean water and municipal sewers mass transit and garbage collection.
socialism another significant progressive force was the growing influence of socialist ideas.
the socialist party of america supported mostly by militant farmers and immigrant germans and jews served as the radical wing of progressivism.
unlike european socialists most american socialists did not call for the government to take ownership of large corporations.
they focused instead on improving working conditions and closing the widening income gap between rich and poor through progressive taxation.
most progressives were capitalist reformers not socialist radicals.
they rejected the extremes of both socialism and laissez faire individualism preferring a new regulated capitalism softened by humanitarianism.
muckraking journalism progressivism depended upon newspapers and magazines to inform the public about political corruption and social problems.
the so called muckrakers were americas first investigative journalists.
their aggressive reporting played a crucial role in educating the upper and middle classes about political and corporate wrongdoing and revealing how the other half lives the title of danish immigrant jacob riiss pioneering 1890 work of photojournalism about life in the sordid slums of new york city where some 1 2 million people mostly immigrants lived in poverty amid killing diseases.
the varied sources of progressivism 941 the muckrakers got their nickname from theodore roosevelt who said that crusading journalists were often indispensable to.
society but only if they know when to stop raking the muck by uncovering political corruption and writing about social ills in newspapers and popular monthly magazines such as mcclures munseys and cosmopolitan the muckrakers changed the face of journalism and gave it a new political role.
roosevelt both as governor of new york and as president frequently used muckrakers to drum up support for his policies he corresponded with them invited them to the white house and used their popularity to help shape public opinion.
the golden age of muckraking is sometimes dated from 1902 when samuel s mcclure the owner of mcclures recruited idealistic journalists to root out the corruption in politics and corporations.
mcclure was determined to make his magazine a power for good the vitality of democracy he insisted depended upon educating the public about complex questions mcclures and other muckraking magazines investigated corporate monopolies and crooked political machines while revealing the miserable conditions in which poor americans lived and worked.
ida tarbell one of the most dedicated muckrakers spent years doggedly investigating the illegal means by which john d rockefeller had built his gigantic standard oil trust.
at the end of her series of nineteen mcclures articles on the topic she asked readers and what are we going to do about it she stressed that it was the people of the united states and nobody else who must cure whatever is wrong in the industrial situation without the muckrakers progressivism would never have achieved widespread popular support.
during the early twentieth century investigative journalism became such a power cover of mcclures magazine 1902 this issue features ida tarbells ful force for change that one editor said muckraking series investigating the that americans now had government standard oil company.
by magazine 942 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present supreme courts decision he asked voters to rally around president elect bush and move forward.
partisan rancor he urged must be put aside the ferocious sparring between the two national parties was not put aside however in part because bush chose as key advisers men known for their brusqueness and strong ideological convictions.
one of them r ichard dick cheney a former wyoming congressman and influential m ember of the nixon ford and bush administrations quickly became the most p owerful vice president in history.
cheney so secretive that he often appeared sinister used his long experience with the government bureaucracy to fill the administration with like minded associates who helped him control the flow of information to the president.
he became a domineering influence on the inexperienced bush.
a change of direction george w bush had promised to cut taxes for the wealthy increase military spending oppose strict environmental regulations and privatize social security by investing workers retirement pension funds in the stock market.
first however he had to deal with a sputtering economy.
by march 2001 the economy was in recession for the first time in more than a decade.
bush decided that cutting taxes was the best way to boost economic growth.
on june 7 2001 he signed the economic growth and tax relief act which cut 1 35 trillion in taxes.
instead of paying for themselves in renewed economic growth however the bush tax cuts led to a sharp drop in federal revenue producing in turn a fast growing budget deficit as the clinton surpluses were quickly used up.
huge increases in the costs of medicare and medicaid resulting from the aging of the baby boom generation contributed to the soaring deficits as did m ilitary expenditures caused by an unexpected war.
bush was also distracted by global crises.
islamic militants around the world bitterly resented what they viewed as the imperial globalization of u s culture and power.
with increasing frequency they used terrorism including suicide bombings to gain notoriety exact vengeance and generate fear and insecurity.
throughout the nineties the united states had fought a losing struggle against global terrorist groups in part because terrorism thrives in nations with weak governments overwhelmed by rapid population growth scarce resources widespread poverty and huge numbers of unemployed young men symptoms many nations were suffering.
the ineffectiveness of u s intelligence agencies in tracking the movements and intentions of militant extremists became tragically evident in the late summer of 2001 a chaotic start to a new century 1477 9 11 a new day of infamy at 8 45 a m on september 11 2001 the continental united states was attacked for the first time since 1814 when a passenger airliner that had been hijacked by islamist terrorists slammed into the north tower of the world trade center in new york city.
eighteen minutes later a second hijacked jumbo jet crashed into the south tower.
the twin towers 110 stories tall and filled with 50 000 workers burned fiercely the infernos forcing hundreds of desperate people to jump to their deaths as t housands more on the floors below the points of impact struggled to evacuate.
the steel structures quickly collapsed from the intense heat destroying surrounding buildings and killing nearly 3 000 people including more than 400 firefighters police officers and emergency responders.
the southern end of manhattan ground zero became a hellish scene of twisted steel suffocating smoke wailing sirens and panicked people.
while the catastrophic drama in new york city was unfolding a third hijacked plane crashed into the pentagon in washington d c a fourth airliner september 11th smoke pours out of the north tower of the world trade center as the south tower bursts into flames after being struck by a second hijacked airplane.
both iconic buildings would collapse within an hour.
1478 chapter 9 nationalism and sectionalism 1815 1828 and unemployment spiked.
the collapse of cotton prices was especially devastating for southern planters but it also reduced the world demand for other american goods.
owners of new factories and mills most of them in new england new york and pennsylvania struggled to find markets for their goods and to fend off more experienced foreign competitors.
the financial panic and the ensuing depression deepened tensions between northern and southern economic interests.
it also spawned a widespread distrust of banks and bankers.
tennessee congressman david crockett dismissed the whole banking system as nothing more than swindling on a large scale thomas jefferson felt the same way.
he wrote to john adams that the paper money bubble is then burst.
this is what you and i and every reasoning man.
have long foreseen other factors caused the financial panic to become a depression.
business owners farmers and land speculators had recklessly borrowed money to expand their business ventures or to purchase more land.
with the collapse of crop prices and the decline of land values during and after 1819 both land speculators and settlers saw their income plummet.
the equally reckless lending practices of the numerous new state banks compounded the economic confusion.
to generate more loans the banks issued more paper money.
even the second bank of the united states which was supposed to provide financial stability was caught up in the easy credit mania.
in 1819 newspapers revealed a case of extensive fraud and embezzlement in the baltimore branch of the bank of the united states.
the scandal prompted the appointment of langdon cheves a former south carolina congressman as the new president of the b u s.
cheves restored confidence in the national bank by forcing state banks to keep more gold coins in their vaults to back up the loans they were making.
state banks in turn put pressure on their debtors who found it harder to renew old loans or to get new ones.
the economic depression lasted about three years and many people blamed the b u s.
after the panic subsided many americans especially in the south and the west remained critical of the national bank.
the missouri compromise as the financial panic deepened another dark cloud appeared on the horizon the onset of a fierce sectional controversy over expanding slavery into the western territories.
the possibility of western territories becoming slave states created the greatest political debate of the nineteenth century.
thomas jefferson admitted that the issue scared him like a firebell in the night jefferson realized that the united states was increasingly at risk of disintegrating over the future of slavery.
by 1819 the country had an equal number an era of good feelings 403 of slave and free states eleven of each.
the northwest ordinance 1787 had banned slavery north of the ohio river and the southwest ordinance 1790 had authorized slavery south of the ohio.
in the region west of the mississippi river however slavery had existed since france and spain first colonized the area.
st louis became the crossroads through which southerners brought slaves into the missouri territory.
in 1819 residents in the missouri territory asked the house of representatives to let them draft a constitution and apply for statehood its population having passed the minimum of 60 000 white settlers there were also some 10 000 slaves.
it would be the first state west of the mississippi river.
at that point representative james tallmadge jr an obscure new york republican stunned congress by proposing a resolution to ban the transport of any more slaves into missouri.
tallmadges resolution enraged southern slave owners many of whom had developed a profitable business selling slaves the missouri compromise 1820 british possessions oregon country joint occupation by britain and u s maine vt 1820 ip p ss m iss i unorganized michigan territory nh ma ny i oh in o river hi il spanish possessions o missouri va sc ms ga al atlantic ocean florida territory free states md nc tn la slave states states and territories covered by the compromise ri ky arkansas territory pacific ocean ct nj de pa river territory gulf of mexico british 500 miles 500 kilometers sp a ni sh what caused the sectional controversy over slavery in 1819.
what were the terms of the missouri compromise.
wwn64 figure m9 2 was henry clays solution to the missouri constitutions ban on free blacks in what first proof that state.
31p0 x 20p6 404 chapter 27 the cold war and the fair deal 1945 1952 its neighbors enforcing ideological conformity and prohibiting religious practices.
insecurity as much as communist ideology drove much of soviet behavior after the second world war.
russia after all had been invaded by germany twice in the first half of the twentieth century and some 23 million people died as a result.
soviet leaders were determined to create loyal nations on their borders for protection.
the people of eastern europe were caught in the middle.
conflicts with the soviets the wartime military alliance against nazism disintegrated after 1945 as the soviet union violated the promises it had made at the yalta conference and imposed military control and the communist political system on the nations of eastern europe it had liberated.
on may 12 1945 four days after victory in europe winston churchill asked truman what is to happen about europe.
an iron curtain is drawn down upon the russian front.
we do not know what is going on behind it churchill and truman wanted to lift the iron curtain and help those nations develop democratic governments.
but events during the second half of 1945 dashed those expectations.
as early as the spring of 1945 and continuing for the next two years the soviet union systematically imprisoned half of the european continent.
the red army ran amok raping and killing the liberated citizens of eastern europe.
thereafter the soviets systematically installed puppet governments across central and eastern europe albania bulgaria czechoslovakia east germany hungary poland romania and yugoslavia.
totalitarian regimes essentially turned once proud nations into soviet colonies.
in their ruthless pursuit of total control the soviets eliminated all political parties except the communists created secret police forces took control of intellectual and cultural life including the mass media undermined the roman catholic church and organized a process of ethnic cleansing whereby whole populations 12 million germans as well as poles and h ungarians were relocated from their homes in eastern europe usually to west germany or to prisons.
more than 500 000 of the refugees died in the process.
anyone who opposed the s oviet installed regimes was exiled silenced executed or imprisoned.
stalins promises at the yalta conference to allow open elections in the nations of eastern europe controlled by soviet armies had turned out to be lies.
in a fit of candor he admitted that a freely elected government in any of these countries would be anti soviet and that we cannot allow u s secretary of state james f byrnes tried to use americas monopoly on atomic bombs to pressure the soviets to abide by the yalta accords.
in april 1945 he suggested to president truman that nuclear weapons might well put us in position to dictate our own terms with the soviets at the end of the containment policy 1219 the war the soviets however paid little attention in part because their spies had kept them informed of what american scientists had been doing and in part because they were developing their own atomic bombs.
throughout the spring of 1945 the soviets created friendly governments in eastern europe arguing that the united states had done the same in italy and japan after those nations had surrendered.
the difference was that the soviets prevented non communists from participating in the political process.
a few days before the opening of the conference to organize the united nations in april truman met with soviet foreign minister vyacheslav molotov.
the soviets had just put in place a p ro communist government in poland in violation of stalins pledge at yalta to allow free elections.
truman directed molotov to tell stalin that the united states expected the soviet leader to live up to his agreements.
i have never been talked to like that in my life molotov angrily replied.
carry out your agreements truman snapped and you wont get talked to like that later in july 1945 when truman met stalin at the potsdam conference he wrote his mother that he had never seen such pig headed people as are the russians he later acknowledged that the soviets broke their promises as soon as the unconscionable russian dictator stalin returned to moscow truman added with a note of embarrassment and i liked the little son of a bitch the containment policy by the beginning of 1947 relations with the soviet union had grown ice cold.
a year before in february 1946 stalin had proclaimed the superiority of the soviet communist system of government and declared that peace was impossible under the present capitalist development of the world economy his provocative statement suggesting an inevitable war between communism and capitalism led the state department to ask for an analysis of soviet communism from forty two year old george frost kennan the best informed expert on the soviet union then working in the u s embassy in moscow.
kennan responded on february 22 1946 with a famous 5 000 word long telegram the longest in the history of the state department.
he included considerable detail about russian history the pillars of soviet policy stalins neurotic view of world affairs and russias historic determination to protect its western border with europe.
kennan explained that the soviet union was founded on a rigid ideology marxism leninism which saw a fundamental global conflict between communist and capitalist nations and helped soviet rulers justify their amoral 1220 chapter 21 the progressive era 1890 1920 c enters called settlement houses.
at the hull house settlement on halsted street in a working class chicago neighborhood two women from privileged backgrounds jane addams and ellen gates starr addressed the everyday needs of the working poor especially newly arrived european immigrants.
addams and starr were driven by an impulse to share the lives of the poor and to make social service express the spirit of christ their staff of two dozen women served thousands of people each week.
besides a nursery for the infant children of working mothers hull house also sponsored health clinics lectures music lesjane addams by the end of the century sons and art studios mens clubs an thanks to the efforts of jane addams employment bureau job training and others religious groups were a gymnasium a coffeehouse and a joining the settlement house movement.
savings bank.
by the early twentieth century there were hundreds of settlement houses in cities across the united states most of them in the northeast and midwest.
to addams the social gospel driving progressive reformers reflected their yearning sense of justice and compassion she and other settlement house leaders soon realized however that their work in the rapidly spreading immigrant slums was like bailing out the ocean with a teaspoon.
they thus added political reform to their already lengthy agenda and began lobbying for new laws and regulations to improve the living conditions in poor neighborhoods.
as her influence in chicago grew addams was appointed to prominent governmental and community boards where she focused on improving public health and food safety.
she pushed for better street lighting and police protection in poor neighborhoods and sought to reduce the misuse of narcotics.
an ardent pacifist and outspoken advocate for suffrage voting rights for women addams would become the first american woman to win the nobel peace prize.
the varied sources of progressivism 945 the woman suffrage movement from 1880 to 1910 the number of employed women tripled from 2 6 million to 7 8 million.
as women especially college educated women became more involved in the public world of work and wages the womens rights movement grew.
immediately after the civil war women in the movement had hoped that the fifteenth amendment which guaranteed voting rights for african american men would aid their own efforts to gain the vote.
the majority of men however still insisted that women stay out of politics because it would corrupt their moral purity.
in 1869 the wyoming territory became the first place in the united states to extend equal voting rights to women.
in that year the womens rights movement split over the issue of whether to c oncentrate solely on gaining the vote or to adopt a broader agenda.
susan b anthony and elizabeth cady east meets west san francisco suffragists marched across the country in 1915 to deliver a petition calling for a constitutional amendment with more than 500 000 signatures to congress in washington d c along the way they were warmly received by other suffragists like those of new jersey pictured here.
946 chapter 15 the war of the union 1861 1865 the confederates moved quickly.
as a rebel soldier said he had enjoyed breakfast in virginia whiskey in maryland and supper in pennsylvania a maryland woman reported that the confederate soldiers were the dirtiest i ever saw a most ragged lean and hungry set of wolves one reason lee moved into the north was the need for food.
his soldiers and slaves gathered thousands of horses cattle and hogs as well as tons of wheat and corn.
they also captured free blacks in maryland and pennsylvania and sent them back to slavery in virginia.
once the union commander general george meade realized the confederates were again moving north he gave chase knowing that the next battle would decide the fate of our country and our cause as he moved into pennsylvania lee lost track of the federals because of the unexplained absence of general j e b stuarts 5 000 horse soldiers who were lees eyes and ears stuart it turned out had decided to create a panic in the union capital by threatening an attack on washington d c on june 28 lee uttered in exasperation i cannot think what has become of stuart.
i ought to have heard from him long before now neither side expected gettysburg a hilly crossroads farming town of 2 400 people in southeastern pennsylvania to be the site of the largest battle ever fought in north america.
both armies were caught by surprise when confederate troops entered the town at dawn on june 30 and collided with union cavalry units that had been tracking their movements.
the main forces of both sides 65 000 confederates and 85 000 federals then raced to the scene and on july 1 the armies clashed in what came to be called the battle of gettysburg the most dramatic contest of the war.
while preparing to fight a union cavalryman who sensed the importance of the coming battle yelled at the soldiers from new york and pennsylvania you stand alone between the rebel army and your homes.
fight like hell initially the confederates forced the federals to retreat but the union troops regrouped to stronger positions on high ridges overlooking the town.
meade rushed reinforcements to his new lines along the heights.
that night he wrote his wife that both sides had been shattered by the first days combat.
on july 2 wave after wave of screaming confederates assaulted meades army pushing the federal lines back across blood soaked wheat fields and through peach orchards but never breaking through.
a wounded confederate officer scrawled a note before he died tell my father i died with my face to the enemy some 16 000 were killed or wounded on both sides during the inconclusive second day of fighting.
worse was to come.
the next day july 3 against the advice of his senior general georgian james longstreet robert e lee risked all on a climactic assault against the well defended union lines along cemetery ridge.
for two hours both sides the faltering confederacy 679 a harvest of death timothy h osullivans grim photograph of the dead at gettysburg.
bombarded the other leading a union soldier to write that it felt as if the heavens and earth were crashing together deafening sounds more terrible never greeted human ears then the cannons stopped firing.
at about two oclock on the broiling summer afternoon three confederate infantry divisions about 12 500 men in all emerged from the woods and prepared to attack in the 90 degree heat.
general george pickett commander of the lead division told them to charge the enemy and remember old virginia with drums pounding and bugles blaring a gray wave of sweating rebels began a desperate mile long dash up a grassy slope of newly mown hay crisscrossed with fences.
awaiting them behind a low stone wall at the top of the ridge were 120 union cannons and thousands of rifles.
it was as hopeless a situation as the union charge at fredericksburg.
a union soldier remembered that the attacking confederates displayed a desperate courage they came on in magnificent order with the step of men who believed themselves invincible when the federals opened fire the confederates were enveloped in a dense cloud of dust.
arms heads blankets guns and knapsacks were tossed into the clear air only a few rebels made it to the top of the ridge where they fought bravely in h and to hand combat.
a general leading the assault climbed atop the stone wall and shouted come on boys.
give them the cold steel.
680 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present rio vista california with an 816 000 deficit this northern california city filed for bankruptcy and pulled the plug on its massive 750 home housing development in november 2008 here model homes stand eerily in a blank landscape of sidewalks and cul de sacs.
had weakened the republican party strained the nations military eroded american prestige and created the largest budget deficits in history by cutting taxes while increasing spending.
i inherited a recession and im ending on a recession bush admitted at one of his last press conferences.
a historic new presidency george bushs unpopularity excited democrats about regaining the white house in 2008 the early f ront runner for the nomination was new york senator hillary rodham clinton the spouse of ex president bill clinton.
like her husband she displayed an impressive command of policy issues and mobilized a well funded campaign team.
and as the first woman with a serious chance of gaining the presidency she had widespread support among voters eager for female leadership.
in the end however an overconfident clinton was upset in the d emocratic primaries and caucuses by barack obama of illinois a l ittle known first term senator.
young handsome and intelligent a vibrant mixture of i dealism and a historic new presidency 1489 pragmatism coolness and passion obama was an inspiring speaker who attracted huge crowds by promising a politics of hope he mounted an innovative internet based campaign directed at grassroots voters donors and volunteers.
in early june 2008 he gained enough delegates to secure the nomination with senator joseph biden of delaware as his running mate.
obama was the first african amer the clinton campaign democratic ican presidential nominee of either presidential candidate senator hillary rodham clinton speaks at a rally in fort party the gifted biracial son of a white worth texas.
mother from kansas and a black father from kenya who left the household and returned to africa when barack was a toddler.
obama eventually graduated from columbia university before earning a law degree from harvard.
the forty seven year old senator presented himself as a deal maker who could inspire unite and forge bipartisan collaborations.
candidate obama radiated poise confidence and energy.
he told an aide that he didnt need to be president.
it turns out that being barack obama is a pretty good gig in and of itself he and his strategists were able to turn his vitality and political inexperience into strengths at a time when voter disgust with politics was widespread.
by contrast his republican opponent s eventy two year old arizona senator john mccain was the oldest presidential candidate in history.
as a twenty five year veteran of congress and a leading senator mccain had developed a reputation as a bipartisan maverick willing to work with democrats to achieve key legislative goals.
on november 4 2008 barack obama made history by becoming the first person of color to be elected presi barack obama the president elect and his family wave to supporters in dent.
he won the popular vote by 53 per chicagos grant park.
cent to 46 percent and the e lectoral 1490 chapter 3 colonial ways of life the puritan ideal of religious uniformity was shattered.
the crusty connecticut old light minister isaac stiles denounced the intrusion of choice into spiritual matters and charged that the multitudes were seriously soberly and solemnly out of their wits in their embrace of ultra emotional religion.
john henry goetschius a dutch reformed evangelist shot back that stiles and other old lights were simply determined to impose on many people against their will their old rotten and stinking routine religion in anglican virginia some fifty baptist evangelists were jailed for disturbing the peace during the great awakening.
new england subsequently attracted more and more baptists presbyterians anglicans and other denominations while the revival frenzy scored its most lasting victories along the western frontier of the middle and southern colonies.
in the more sedate churches of boston the principle of rational or enlightened religion gained the upper hand in a reaction against the excesses of revivalistic emotion.
boston ministers such as charles chauncey and jonathan mayhew found puritan theology too cold and forbidding.
to them the calvinist concept that people could be forever damned by predestination was irrational.
they embraced many insights drawn from enlightenment rationalism arguing that god created laws of nature which people could discover and exploit.
religious colleges in reaction to taunts that born again revivalist ministers lacked learning the awakening gave rise to denominational colleges that became the distinctive characteristic of american higher education.
the three colleges already in existence had religious origins harvard college founded in 1636 because the puritans dreaded to leave an illiterate ministry to the church when our present ministers shall lie in the dust the college of william and mary created in 1693 to strengthen the anglican ministry and yale college set up in 1701 to educate the puritans of connecticut who believed that harvard was drifting from the strictest orthodoxy.
the college of new jersey later princeton university was founded by presbyterians in 1746 in close succession came kings college 1754 in new york later renamed columbia university an anglican institution the college of rhode island 1764 later called brown university which was baptist queens college 1766 later known as rutgers which was dutch reformed and dartmouth college 1769 which was congregationalist and the outgrowth of a school for indians.
the heart versus the head like a ferocious fire that burned intensely before dying out the great awakening subsided by 1750 the emotional the great awakening 143 awakening like its counterpart the rational enlightenment influenced the forces leading to the revolution against great britain and set in motion powerful currents that still flow in american life.
ministers could no longer control the direction of religious life as more and more people took charge of their own spirituality and new denominations sprouted like mushrooms.
the awakening implanted in american culture the evangelical impulse and the emotional appeal of revivalism weakened the status of the old fashioned clergy and state supported churches and encouraged believers to exercise their own individual judgment.
by encouraging the proliferation of denominations it heightened the need for toleration of dissent.
in some respects however the warring awakening and the enlightenment one stressing the urgings of the spirit and the other celebrating the cold logic of reason led by different roads to similar ends.
both movements spread across the mainland colonies and thereby helped bind them together.
both emphasized the power and right of individual d ecision making and both aroused hopes that america would become the promised land in which people might attain the perfection of piety or reason if not both.
by urging believers to exercise their own spiritual judgment revivals weakened the authority of the established churches and their ministers just as colonial resentment of british economic regulations would later weaken the colonists loyalty to the king.
as such the great awakening and the enlightenment helped nurture a growing commitment to individual freedom and resistance to authority that would play a key role in the rebellion against british tyranny in 1776 chapter 21 the progressive era 1890 1920 powerful blow against these abuses was struck by upton sinclairs novel the jungle 1906 which told the story of a lithuanian immigrant working in a filthy chicago meatpacking plant it was too dark in these storage places to see well but a man could run his hand over these piles of meat and sweep off handfuls of the dried dung of rats.
these rats were nuisances and the packers would put poisoned bread out for them they would die and then rats bread and meat would go into the hoppers to be ground up together.
after reading the jungle roosevelt urged congress to pass the meat inspection act of 1906 it required the department of agriculture to inspect every hog and steer whose carcass crossed state lines both before and after slaughter.
the pure food and drug act 1906 enacted the same day required the makers of prepared food and medicines to host government inspectors too.
environmental conservation theodore roosevelt was the first president passionately committed to environmental conservation.
an avid outdoorsman and naturalist he feared that unregulated logging and mining companies were destroying the nations landscape by their reckless extermination of all useful and beautiful wild things roosevelt c hampioned efforts to p rotect wilderness areas and manage and preserve the nations natural resources for the benefit of future generations.
he created fifty federal wildlife refuges approved five new national parks and fifty one federal bird sanctuaries and designated eighteen national monuments including the grand canyon.
in 1898 roosevelt had endorsed the appointment of his friend gifford pinchot the nations first professionyosemite valley a couple playfully ally trained forest manager as head of poses atop glacier point rock in yosemite national park in 1902 the u s department of agricultures adventurous tourists flocked to national division of forestry.
pinchot like rooparks and monuments in the early sevelt believed in economic growth as twentieth century and still do today.
well as environmental preservation.
progressivism under roosevelt and taft 963 pinchot said that the conservation movement promoted the greatest good for the greatest number for the longest time roosevelt and pinchot used the forest reserve act 1891 to protect 172 million acres of federally owned forests from being logged.
lumber companies were furious but the president held firm declaring i hate a man who skins the land overall roosevelt set aside more than 234 million acres of federal land for conservation purposes and created f orty five national forests in eleven western states.
as pinchot recalled launching the conservation movement was the most significant achievement of the t r.
administration as he himself believed roosevelt and race roosevelts most significant failure as a progressive as it was for so many of his successors was his refusal to confront the movements major blind spot racism.
like populists progressives worked to empower the people for many of them however the people did not include african americans native americans or some immigrant groups.
most white progressives shared the prevailing racist attitudes of the time.
they ignored or even endorsed the passage of jim crow laws in the south that prevented blacks from voting and subjected them to rigid racial separation.
by 1901 nearly every southern state had prevented almost all african americans from voting or holding political office by disqualifying or terrorizing them.
hundreds of african americans were being lynched each year across the south where virtually no blacks were allowed to serve on juries or work as sheriffs or policemen.
a white candidate for governor in mississippi in 1903 announced that he believed in the divine right of the white man to rule to do all the voting and to hold all the offices both state and federal the south wrote w e b du bois then a young black sociologist at atlanta university is simply an armed camp for intimidating black folk at the same time few progressives raised objections to the many informal and private patterns of segregation and prejudice in the north and west.
the plain fact is muckraking journalist ray stannard baker admitted in 1909 most of us in the north do not believe in any real democracy between white and colored men roosevelt confided to a friend in 1906 his belief that as a race and in the mass african americans are altogether inferior to whites yet the president made a few exceptions.
on october 16 1901 roosevelt invited booker t washington the nations most prominent black leader to the white house to discuss presidential appointments in the south.
upon learning of the meeting white southerners exploded with fury.
the memphis scimitar screamed that inviting a nigger to dine in the white house was 964 chapter 4 from colonies to states king charles ii tried to teach the rebellious colonists a lesson by revoking the royal charter for massachusetts.
the following year king charles ii died and was succeeded by his brother king james ii the first catholic monarch in more than 100 years.
to demonstrate his power over americans the new king reorganized the new england colonies into a single royal supercolony called the dominion of new england.
in 1686 the newly appointed royal governor the authoritarian sir edmund andros arrived in boston to take control of the dominion.
andros stripped new englanders of their civil rights imposed new taxes as well as the anglican religion ignored town governments strictly enforced the navigation acts and punished smugglers who tried to avoid regulation altogether.
the glorious revolution in 1688 the dominion of new england added the former dutch provinces of new york east jersey and west jersey to its control just a few months before the glorious revolution erupted in england in december.
the revolution was called glorious because it took place with little bloodshed.
james ii was forced to flee to france and was replaced by the kings protestant daughter mary and her protestant husband william iii the ruling dutch prince.
william iii and mary ii would rule as constitutional monarchs their powers limited by the parliament.
the new king and queen soon issued a religious toleration act and a bill of rights to ensure that there never again would be an absolute monarchy in england.
in 1689 americans in boston staged their own revolution upon learning of the transfer of power in london.
a group of merchants ministers and militiamen citizen soldiers arrested governor andros and his aides and removed massachusetts bay colony from the new dominion of new england.
within a few weeks the other colonies that had been absorbed into the dominion also restored their independence.
william and mary allowed all the colonies to regain their former status except massachusetts bay and plymouth which after some delay were united under a new charter in 1691 as the royal colony of massachusetts bay.
william and mary however were determined to crack down on american smuggling and rebelliousness.
they appointed new royal governors in massachusetts new york and maryland.
in massachusetts the governor was given authority to veto acts of the colonial assembly and he removed the requirement that only church members could vote in elections.
john locke on revolution the glorious revolution in england had significant long term effects on american history in that the an emerging colonial system 155 removal of king james ii revealed that a hated monarch could be deposed according to constitutional principles.
the long standing geographical designation great britain for the united kingdoms of england scotland and wales would soon be revived as the nations official name.
a powerful justification for revolution appeared in 1690 when the english philosopher john locke published his two treatises on government which had an enormous impact on political thought in the colonies.
locke rejected the divine right of monarchs to govern with absolute power.
he also insisted that people are endowed with natural rights to life liberty and property.
locke noted that it was the need to protect those natural rights that led people to establish governments in the first place.
when rulers failed to protect the property and lives of their subjects locke argued the people had the r ight in extreme cases to overthrow the monarch and change the government.
an emerging colonial system in early 1689 new yorkers sent a message to king william thanking him for delivering england from tyranny popery and slavery many colonists were disappointed however when the king cracked down on american smugglers.
the act to prevent frauds and abuses of 1696 required colonial royal governors to enforce the navigation acts allowed customs officials in america to use writs of assistance general search warrants that did not have to specify the place to be searched and ordered that accused smugglers be tried in royal admiralty courts because juries in colonial courts rarely convicted their peers.
admiralty cases were decided by judges appointed by the royal governors.
soon however british efforts to enforce the navigation acts waned.
king george i r 1714 1727 and george ii r 1727 1760 german princes who were descendants of james i showed much less interest in enforcing colonial trade laws.
robert walpole the l ong serving prime minister 1721 1742 and lord of the treasury decided that the american colonies should be left alone to export needed raw materials timber tobacco rice indigo and to buy various manufactured goods from the mother country.
under walpoles leadership britain followed a policy of a wise and salutary neglect of the navigation acts and gave the colonies greater freedom to pursue their economic interests.
what walpole did not realize was that such salutary neglect would create among many colonists an independent attitude that would eventually blossom into revolution.
156 chapter 27 the cold war and the fair deal 1945 1952 trumans assumption that stalin and the soviets were behind the invasion of south korea led him to deepen the american commitment to stop communism.
the interests of the united states are global in character he explained.
a threat to the peace of the world anywhere is a threat to our security fearful that the soviets would use the korean conflict as a diversion to invade western europe he ordered a major expansion of u s military forces in europe and around the world.
truman also increased assistance to french troops fighting a communist independence movement in the french colony of indochina which included vietnam starting americas deepening military involvement in southeast asia.
another red scare the korean war excited another red scare at home as people grew fearful that communists were infiltrating american society.
since 1938 the house committee on un american activities huac had kept up a drumbeat of accusations about supposed communist agents in the federal government.
on march 21 1947 president truman signed an executive order also known as the loyalty order requiring federal government workers to undergo a background investigation to ensure they were not communists or even associated with communists or other subversive groups.
truman knew that the loyalty program violated civil liberties but he felt he had no choice.
he was responding to pressure from fbi director j edgar hoover and attorney general tom clark both of whom were convinced that there were numerous spies working inside the federal government.
truman was also eager to blunt criticism that he was not doing enough to ensure that soviet sympathizers were not working in government.
truman thought that the fear about communist subversives was misplaced.
people are very much wrought up about the communist bugaboo he wrote to pennsylvania governor george earle but i am of the opinion that the country is perfectly safe so far as communism is concerned by early 1951 the federal civil service commission had cleared more than 3 million people while only 378 had been dismissed for doubtful loyalty.
others however had resigned for fear they would be dismissed.
in 1953 president dwight d eisenhower revoked the loyalty order.
the hollywood ten charges that hollywood was a hotbed of communism led the house committee on un american activities to launch a full blown investigation of the motion picture industry.
the huac subpoenaed dozens of actors producers and directors to testify at its hearings held in los angeles in october 1947 ten witnesses refused to testify arguing that another red scare 1251 the red scare and hollywood several courageous movie stars attended the huac hearings to support their friends and colleagues who were accused of being communists.
left to right danny kaye june havoc humphrey bogart and lauren bacall seated.
the questioning violated their first amendment rights.
when asked if he were a member of the communist party screenwriter ring lardner jr replied i could answer but i would hate myself in the morning another member of the so called hollywood ten screenwriter dalton trumbo shouted as he left the hearings this is the beginning of an american concentration camp all ten were cited for contempt given prison terms and blacklisted banned from the film industry.
the witch hunt launched by the huac inspired playwright arthur miller who himself was blacklisted to write the crucible an award winning play produced in 1953 it is a dramatic account of the notorious witch trials in salem massachusetts at the end of the seventeenth century intended to alert audiences about the dangers of the anti communist hysteria.
alger hiss the spy case most damaging to the truman administration involved alger hiss president of the carnegie endowment for international peace who had served in several government agencies.
whittaker chambers a former soviet spy and later an editor of time magazine who reversed himself and became an informer testifying against supposed communists in the 1252 chapter 4 from colonies to states unexpl ore d north america 1713 hudson bay h u d s o n s b ay c o m pa n y i s w fr co lo an ni c es ne ia newfoundland nova scotia new england n eng lish u ocean sippi sis r ive m is r lo pa c i f i c e virginia na atlantic carolinas ocean e florida w s england france spain gulf of mexico p cuba a 1000 miles i n hispaniola caribbean sea new granada 1000 kilometers what events led to the first clashes between the french and the british in the late seventeenth century.
10e wwn64 why didamerica new england suffer more than other regions of north america 26593 04map 03 during the wars of the eighteenth century.
first proof what were the long term financial military and political consequences of the wars between france and britain.
pontiacs rebellion after the war colonists began squabbling over indian owned land west of the appalachian mountains that the french had ceded to the british in the treaty of paris.
native american leaders none of whom attended the meetings leading to the treaty were shocked to learn that the french had given their ancestral lands to the british.
ohio indians warfare in the colonies 165 north america 1763 unexplored russians hudson bay h u d s o n s b ay c o m pa n y the th irte q en ue co lo be ni c newfoundland nova scotia es m is r i ia na n e w s 1000 miles 1000 kilometers england spain proclamation line of 1763 india n re ser ve u s new england sippi sis r ive lo oregon p a c i f i c disputed by o c e a n russia and spain west florida gulf of mexico p a st pierre et miquelon france i n virginia carolinas east florida atlantic ocean guadeloupe haiti france france cuba hispaniola martinique france british caribbean sea honduras mosquito coast new granada how did the map of north america change between 1713 and 1763.
how did spain win the louisiana territory.
wwn64 america 10e what were the consequences of the british gaining all the land east of the 26593 04map 04 mississippi first proof river.
complained to british army officers that as soon as you conquered the french you did not care how you treated us one chieftain claimed that the british had treated them like slaves the indians fought back in the spring of 1763 capturing most of the british forts around the great lakes and in the ohio valley.
never was panic more general reported the pennsylvania gazette than that of the back woods inhabitants whose terrors at this time exceed that followed on the defeat of general braddock 166 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction and killed him at sunrise in a burning barn.
three of his collaborators were convicted by a military court and hanged as was mary surratt who owned the washington boardinghouse where the assassinations had been planned.
some people celebrated lincolns death.
theyve shot abe lincoln a massachusetts democrat shouted.
hes dead and im glad hes dead a republican congressman from indiana reported that the presidents death is a god send to the radicals.
most felt otherwise however.
the outpouring of grief after lincolns death was overwhelming.
planned events celebrating victory were canceled.
even a richmond virginia newspaper called the assassination the heaviest blow which has fallen on the people of the south confederate president jefferson davis fleeing federal troops learned about lincolns murder in charlotte north carolina.
he too worried that the assassination would be disastrous for our people general ulysses s grant observed that the fallen president was incontestably the greatest man i ever knew lincolns body lay in state for several days in washington d c before being transported 1 600 miles by train on april 21 for burial in springfield illinois.
in philadelphia 300 000 mourners paid their last respects in new york city 500 000 people viewed lincolns body.
on may 4 lincoln was laid to rest for eternity.
johnsons paying respect the only photograph of lincoln in his coffin displayed here in new yorks city hall rotunda.
plan lincolns shocking death propelled into the white house andrew johnson of tennessee a pro union democrat who was the only senator from a seceding state to remain in washington.
he had been added to lincolns national union ticket in 1864 solely to help the president win reelection.
humorless and insecure combative and obstinate johnson nursed fierce prejudices he hated both the white southern elite and the idea of racial equality.
he also had a weakness for liquor.
at the inaugural ceremonies in early 1865 he had delivered his v ice presidential address in a state of slurring drunkenness.
like lincoln and his hero andrew jackson johnson was a self made man.
debates over political r econstruction 711 born in poverty in raleigh north carolina he never attended school.
at age thirteen he relocated to greeneville in the mountains of east tennessee where he was apprenticed to a tailor who helped him learn to read.
eventually as the self proclaimed friend of the common man he served as the mayor a state legislator governor congressional representative and u s senator.
johnsons supporters were primarily small farmers and the working poor.
he called himself a jacksonian democrat in the strictest meaning of the term.
i am for putting down the confederate rebellion because it is a war of wealthy plantation owners against democracy he had long disliked the planter elite whom he damned as a pampered bloated corrupted aristocracy johnson however hated african americans too.
he shared the racist attitudes of most southern whites rich and poor.
damn the negroes he exclaimed to a friend during the war.
i am fighting those traitorous aristocrats their masters johnson maintained that white men alone must manage the south as a states rights democrat he also strongly opposed republican economic policies designed to spur industrial development.
and he also insisted that the federal government should be as small and inactive as possible.
with congress in recess johnson was temporarily in control of what he called the restoration of the union.
he needed to put his plan in place over the next seven months before the new congress convened and the radical republicans would take charge.
in may 1865 johnson issued a new proclamation of amnesty that excluded not only those e x confederates whom lincoln had barred from a presidential pardon but also anyone with property worth more than 20 000.
johnson also wanted to prosecute robert e lee and other high ranking confederate officers for treason.
he finally backed down when ulysses s grant threatened to resign if the president persisted in his efforts to put lee and others on trial.
johnson was determined to keep the wealthiest southerners from regain ing political power.
surprisingly however he eventually pardoned most andrew johnson a pro union of the white aristocrats he claimed democrat from tennessee.
to despise.
what brought about this 712 chapter 10 the jacksonian era 1828 1840 the verdict of the people george caleb binghams painting depicts a socially diverse electorate suggesting the increasingly democratic politics of the jacksonian era.
with a national base of support it was the first political party to hold a national convention to nominate a presidential candidate and the first to announce a formal platform of specific policy goals.
the 1832 election in preparing for the 1832 election the democrats and the national republicans followed the example of the a nti masonic party by holding presidential nominating conventions of their own for the first time.
in december 1831 the national republicans gathered to nominate henry clay.
jackson endorsed the idea of a nominating convention for the democratic party as well because it gave the people a greater role in choosing nominees.
the democratic convention first adopted the two thirds rule for nomination which prevailed until 1936 when the requirement became a simple majority and then named new yorker martin van buren as jacksons vice presidential running mate.
the democrats unlike the other two parties adopted no formal platform and relied to a substantial degree upon the popularity of the president to carry their cause.
nicholas biddle invested the vast resources of the b u s.
into the campaign against jackson and paid for thousands of pamphlets promoting clay.
by the summer of 1832 clay declared that the campaign is over and i think we have 213003 10 422 463 r4 th indd 444 24 10 15 1 52 pm nullification 445 won the victory he spoke too soon.
his blinding ego prevented him from seeing the sources of jacksons popularity.
where he dismissed jackson as a power hungry military chief most americans saw the president as someone fighting for their own causes.
clay also failed to understand jacksons effectiveness as a new type of engaged political candidate.
the national intelligencer a newspaper that supported clay acknowledged that jacksons eager participation in campaign events was certainly a new mode of electioneering.
we do not recollect before to have heard of a president of the united states descending in person into the political arena jackson gave stump speeches dived into crowds to shake hands and walked in parades or ate barbecue with loving supporters who cheered and mobbed him.
in the end jackson earned 219 electoral votes to clays 49 and enjoyed a solid victory in the popular vote 688 000 to 530 000 william wirt the anti masonic candidate carried only vermont winning 7 electoral votes.
dazzled by the presidents strong showing wirt observed that jackson could be president for life if he chooses the nullification crisis in the fall of 1831 jackson tried to defuse the confrontation with south carolina by calling on congress to reduce tariff rates.
congress responded with the tariff of 1832 which lowered rates on some products but kept them high on british cotton fabric and clothing.
the new tariff disappointed calhoun and others in his home state eager for the british to buy more southern cotton.
south carolinians seethed with resentment toward the federal government.
living in the only state where enslaved africans were a majority of the population they feared that if the northern representatives in congress were powerful enough to create such high tariffs that proved so harmful to the south they might eventually vote to end slavery itself.
calhoun declared that the peculiar domestic institutions of the southern states by which he meant slavery were at stake.
south carolina nullifiers in november 1832 just weeks after jackson was reelected a special convention in south carolina passed an ordinance of nullification that disavowed the unconstitutional federal tariffs of 1828 and 1832 declaring them null void and no law.
if federal authorities tried to use force to collect the tariffs on foreign goods unloaded in charleston harbor south carolina would secede from the union they vowed.
the state legislature then selected senator robert hayne as governor and named calhoun to replace him as u s senator.
at the end of december 213003 10 422 463 r4 th indd 445 24 10 15 1 52 pm 446 chapter review summary the progressive impulse progressives were mostly middle class idealists in both political parties who promoted reform and government regulation to ensure social justice.
many progressives wished to restrict the powers of local political machines and establish honest and efficient government.
they also called for legislation to end child labor promote workplace safety ban the sale of alcoholic beverages regulate or eliminate trusts and other monopolies and grant woman suffrage.
the varied sources of progressivism many religious reformers such as those involved in the social gospel movement urged their fellow protestants to reject social darwinism and do more to promote a better life for the urban poor.
the settlement house movement sprang from this idea and spread through urban america as educated middle class women formed community centers in p overty stricken neighborhoods.
progressives drew inspiration from the womens suffrage movement as more women became involved in social reform efforts and in the workplace.
many progressive ideas arose from the ongoing efforts of reformers to end political corruption.
progressives while not radicals also responded to the growing socialist movement and its calls for economic justice for the working class.
muckrakers investigative journalists who exposed political and corporate corruption further fueled the desire of progressive reformers to address abuses of power in american society.
progressives aims and achievements progressives focused on stopping corruption in politics.
they advanced political reforms such as the direct primary the initiative referendum and recall at the state level and the direct election of u s senators through the passage of the seventeenth amendment.
other progressives focused on incorporating new modes of efficiency and scientific management in business known as taylorism into government.
their efforts inspired many cities and counties to adopt the commission system and the city manager plan.
still other progressives who saw regulation of big business as the overriding issue facing the nation focused on legislation and bureaucratic oversight to control or eliminate trusts and other forms of monopolies.
progressivism under roosevelt and taft the administrations of theodore roosevelt and william h taft increased the power of the presidency and the federal government to regulate corporate power and improve the lives of many americans.
roosevelt promoted his progressive square deal program which included regulating trusts through the creation of the bureau of corporations arbitrating the 1902 coal strike persuading congress to regulate the railroads through the elkins and hepburn acts and to clean up the meat and drug industries with the meat inspection and pure food and drug acts.
roosevelt also initiated an environmental conservation campaign to manage and preserve the nations natural resources.
woodrow wilsons progressivism wilsons new freedom program included a low tariff and anti trust regulation.
he also established a central banking system with the federal reserve act and launched a rigorous anti trust program with the passage of the clayton anti trust act and the creation of the federal trade commission.
but he opposed a constitutional amendment guaranteeing womens suffrage.
a southerner he believed blacks were inferior and he supported increased segregation in the federal workforce.
chronology william mckinley is assassinated theodore roosevelt becomes president galveston texas adopts the commission system of city government justice department breaks up northern securities company congress passes the elkins act and creates the bureau of corporations upton sinclairs the jungle is published congress passes the meat inspection act and the pure food and drug act william howard taft inaugurated triangle shirtwaist fire frederick taylors the principles of scientific management is published woodrow wilson wins f our way presidential election alice paul and 5 000 suffragists protest wilsons inauguration sixteenth and seventeenth amendments ratified underwood simmons tariff and federal reserve act passed congress passes the clayton anti trust act key terms muckrakers p 940 square deal p 957 social gospel p 942 progressive party p 969 woman suffrage p 946 new freedom p 973 seventeenth amendment 1913 p 948 federal reserve act 1913 p 976 taylorism p 949 federal trade commission ftc 1914 p 977 sixteenth amendment 1913 p 955 clayton anti trust act 1914 p 977 ijk go to inquizitive to see what youve learned and learn what youve missed with personalized feedback along the way.
america and the great war 1914 1920 make american history in this u s navy recruiting poster in new york city a sailor encourages a young man to play an active role in the great war.
t hroughout the nineteenth century the atlantic ocean had protected america from the major land wars on the continent of europe.
during the early twentieth century however the nations century long isolation from european conflicts ended.
ever expanding world trade meant that u s interests were becoming deeply entwined with the global economy.
in addition the development of s team powered ships and submarines meant that foreign navies could directly threaten american security.
at the same time the election of woodrow wilson in 1912 brought to the white house a self righteous moralist determined to impose his standards on what he saw as renegade nations.
this combination of circumstances made the outbreak of the great war in europe in 1914 a profound crisis for the united states.
the war would become the defining event of the early twentieth century.
for almost three years president wilson maintained americas stance of neutrality in the war while providing increasing amounts of food and supplies to great britain and france.
in 1917 however german submarine attacks on u s ships forced congress into declaring war.
the decision would turn the tide in the fighting and reshape americas international role as a d ominant world power.
focus questions 1 what caused the outbreak of the great war and why was the united states drawn into it.
what was distinctive about the fighting on the western front.
2 how did the wilson administration mobilize the home front.
how did these mobilization efforts affect american society.
3 what were the major events of the war after the united states entered the conflict.
how did the american war effort contribute to the defeat of the central powers.
4 how did wilson promote his plans for a peaceful world order as outlined in his fourteen points.
5 what were the consequences of the war at home and abroad.
988 chapter 28 cold war america 1950 1959 the election of 1952 wa or ca mt id nv nd wy ut az co sd ks ok nm wi mi me ma 16 ny ri 4 ct 8 nj 16 de 3 md 9 ia ne tx mn nh 4 vt 3 pa oh il in 25 wv va 27 13 mo 8 12 ky 10 nc tn 11 ar sc ms al ga 8 11 la fl electoral vote popular vote dwight d eisenhower republican 33 900 000 adlai e stevenson democrat 27 300 000 why was the contest between adlai stevenson and dwight d eisenhower so lopsided.
wwn64 why was eisenhowers victory in several southern states remarkable.
figure m28 1 first proof that had resulted from twenty years of democratic control of the white house.
he pledged to shrink the federal bureaucracy and make it more efficient while restoring the balance between the executive and legislative branches.
eisenhower also promised to reduce the national debt cut military expenses balance the federal budget and trim taxes.
at the same time however he insisted that workers had a right to form unions and bargain with management.
he added that employees needed to be paid enough to afford the comforts of a good life.
we a ll workers and farmers foremen and financiers technicians and b uilders all must produce produce more and produce yet more he said to make the american dream a reality and to ensure global stability.
peace would be maintained not by weapons of war but by wheat and cotton moderate republicanism 1263 by milk and wool by meat and by timber and by rice he hated the growing arms race because every gun that is made every warship launched every rocket fired signifies in the final sense a theft from those who hunger and are not fed those who are cold and are not clothed eisenhowers cautious personality and genial public face fit the prevailing mood of most voters.
he was a unifier not a divider he inspired trust sought consensus and avoided confrontation.
he also championed the nineteenth century view that congress should make policy and the president should carry it out.
dynamic conservatism at home eisenhower labeled his domestic program dynamic conservatism by which he meant being conservative when it comes to money and liberal when it comes to human beings he kept intact the basic structure of the new deal even convincing congress to establish a new federal department of health education and welfare and working with democrats in congress to extend social security benefits to millions of workers formerly excluded w hite collar professionals maids and sales clerks farmworkers and members of the armed forces.
eisenhower also approved increases in the minimum wage and additional public housing projects for low income occupants.
conservative republicans charged that he was being too liberal.
he told his brother edgar in 1954 that if the stupid right wing of the republican party tried to abolish social security and eliminate labor laws and farm programs you would not hear of that party again in our political history transportation improvements under eisenhower the federal government launched two huge construction projects the st lawrence seaway and the interstate highway system both of which resembled the huge public works projects constructed under the new deal during the 1930s.
the st lawrence seaway project in partnership with canada opened the great lakes to oceangoing ships.
the federal aid highway act 1956 created a national network of interstate highways to serve the needs of commerce and defense as well as the public.
the interstate highway system funded largely by federal gasoline taxes took twenty five years to construct and was the largest federal project in history.
it stretched for 47 000 miles and required 55 512 bridges.
highway construction generated what economists call multiplier effects it created jobs stimulated economic growth and spurred the tourism motor hotel motel billboard fast food and long haul trucking industries.
interstates transformed the way people traveled and where they lived and it 1264 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction enrolled african americans and loyal whites initiated them into the secrets and rituals of the order and instructed them in their rights and duties the union league was so successful in its recruiting efforts among african americans that in 1867 it had e ighty eight chapter 10 the jacksonian era 1828 1840 defeated the entire whig field winning 170 electoral votes while the others combined to collect only 113 the eighth president martin van buren was a skillful politician whose ability to organize and manipulate legislators had earned him the nickname little magician elected governor of new york in 1828 he had resigned to join andrew jacksons cabinet first as secretary of state and then as vice president in 1833 now he martin van buren van buren earned was the first new yorker to be elected the nickname the little magician not president.
only for his short stature but also his van buren had been jacksons clos magical ability to exploit his political est political adviser and most trusted and social connections.
ally but many people considered him too self centered to do the work of the people.
john quincy adams wrote in his diary that van buren was by far the ablest of the jacksonians but that he had wasted most of his ability upon mere personal intrigues.
his principles are all subordinate to his ambition van burens rival john c calhoun was even more cutting.
he is not of the rder the fox race of the lion or the tiger rather he belongs to a lower o at his inauguration van buren promised to follow in the footsteps of the enormously popular president jackson.
before he could do so however the nations financial sector began collapsing.
on may 10 1837 several large state banks in new york running out of gold and silver suddenly refused to convert customers paper money into coins.
other banks across the nation quickly did the same creating a panic among depositors across the nation.
more than a third of the banks went under.
this financial crisis the worst yet faced by the young nation would become known as the panic of 1837 it would soon mushroom into the countrys worst depression lasting some seven years.
the panic of 1837 the causes of the financial crisis went back to the jackson administration but van buren got the blame.
the problem actually started in europe.
during the mid 1830s great britain americas largest trading partner experienced an acute financial crisis when the bank of england worried about a run on the gold and silver in its vaults curtailed its loans.
this 213003 10 422 463 r4 th indd 454 24 10 15 1 52 pm war over the b u s.
455 forced most british companies to reduce their trade with america.
as british demand for american cotton plummeted so did the price paid for cotton.
on top of everything else in 1836 there had been a disastrous wheat crop.
in the spring of 1836 niles weekly register the nations leading business journal reported that the economy was approaching a momentous crisis as creditors hastened to foreclose on businesses and farms unable to make their debt payments government spending plunged.
many canals under construction were shut down.
in many cases state governments could not repay their debts.
in the crunch 40 percent of the hundreds of recently created state banks failed.
in april 1837 some 250 businesses failed in new york city alone.
by early fall 90 percent of the nations factories had closed down.
not surprisingly the economic crisis frightened people.
as a newspaper editorial complained in december 1836 the economy has been put into confusion and dismay by a well meant but extremely mistaken pair of decisions by congress and president jackson the specie circular and the elimination of the b u s.
a well managed national bank could have served as a stabilizing force amid the financial panic.
instead weak state banks around the country flooded the economy with worthless paper money printed without adequate backing in gold or silver.
jacksonian treasury note a parody of the often worthless paper money banknotes issued by local banks and businesses in lieu of coins.
these notes proliferated during the panic of 1837 with the emergency suspension of gold and silver payments.
in the main scene martin van buren a monster on a wagon driven by john c calhoun is about to pass through an arch labeled wall street and safety fund banks 213003 10 422 463 r4 th indd 455 24 10 15 1 52 pm 456 chapter 28 cold war america 1950 1959 expertise to use in the suburbs.
between 1947 and 1951 on 6 000 acres of long island farmland forty miles east of new york city he built 17 447 small 750 square feet sturdy two bedroom homes to house more than 82 000 mostly lower middle class people.
levitt believed he was enabling the american dream.
no man who owns his own lot and his own house can be a communist he said.
the planned community called levittown included schools swimming pools shopping centers and playing fields.
levitt encouraged and even enforced uniformity and conformity.
the lookalike houses came in different colors but only three s tyles the cape cod the rancher and the colonial.
all sold for the same low price 6 990 with no down payments for veterans and featured the same floor plan and accessories.
each had a living room with a picture window and a television set a bathroom two bedrooms and a kitchen equipped with an electric refrigerator oven and washing machine.
trees were planted every t wenty eight feet in the former potato fields homeowners were required to cut their grass once a week and prohibited from hanging laundry on outside clothes lines during weekends.
when the first houses in levittown went on sale people stood in long lines to buy one.
in seven days levitt sold 707 houses.
he soon built three more levittowns in pennsylvania new jersey and puerto rico.
they and other planned suburban communities benefited greatly from government assistance.
federal and state tax codes favored homeowners over renters and local governments paid for the infrastructure the subdivisions required roads water and sewer lines fire and police protection.
by insuring loans for up to 95 percent of the value of a house the federal housing administration fha made it easy for builders to construct low cost homes and for people to purchase them.
levitt and other suburban developers created lily white communities outside mostly black populated cities.
initially the contracts for houses in levittown specifically excluded members of other than the caucasian race as levitt explained we can solve a housing problem or we can try to solve a racial problem.
but we cant combine the two it wasnt long however before the u s supreme court ruled in shelley v kraemer 1948 that such racial restrictions were illegal.
the court ruling however did not end segregated housing practices it simply made them more discreet.
in 1953 when levittowns population reached 70 000 it was the largest community in the nation without a single african american resident.
although jewish himself levitt also discouraged jews from living in his communities.
as a jew he explained i have no room in my heart for racial prejudice.
but the plain fact is that most whites prefer not to live in mixed communities.
this attitude may be wrong morally and someday it may change.
i hope it will other developers across the country soon mimicked levitts efforts building suburban communities with rustic names such as lakewood streamwood a people of plenty 1271 the second great migration african american families such as the new jersey bound family pictured here moved to northern urban centers in droves following the end of world war ii.
elmwood cedar hill park forest and deer park.
in 1955 house and garden magazine could declare that suburbia had become the national way of life by 1960 however only 5 percent of african americans lived in suburbs.
minorities on the move the mass migration of rural southern blacks to the urban north midwest and west after the second world war was much larger than the migration that occurred after the first world war and its social consequences were even more dramatic.
after 1945 more than 5 million blacks left the south in search of better jobs higher wages decent housing and greater civil rights.
by 1960 for the first time in history more african americans were living in urban areas than in rural areas.
as blacks moved into northern cities many white residents moved to the suburbs leaving behind racial ghettos.
between 1950 and 1960 some 3 6 million whites left the nations largest cities for suburban neighborhoods while 4 5 million blacks moved into the cities.
deeply entrenched racial attitudes outside the south forced blacks to work to counter the hostility they confronted.
through organizations such as the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp the congress of racial equality core and the national urban league they sought to change 1272 chapter 11 the south slavery and king cotton 1800 1860 across the mississippi river.
a group of slaves in virginia recognized the essential role they played in the surging national economy when they asked didnt we clear the land and raise the crops of corn of tobacco rice of sugar of everything.
and then didnt the large cities in the north grow up on the cotton and the sugars and the rice that we made the distinctiveness of the old south people have long debated what set the old south apart from the rest of the nation.
most arguments focus on the regions climate and geography in shaping its culture and economy.
the souths warm humid climate was ideal for cultivating profitable crops such as tobacco cotton rice indigo and sugarcane which led to the plantation system of large commercial agriculture and its dependence upon enslaved labor.
unlike the north the south had few large cities few banks few railroads few factories and few schools.
most southern commerce was related to the storage distribution and sale of agricultural products especially cotton.
with the cotton economy booming investors focused on buying land and slaves there was little reason to create a robust industrial sector.
we want no manufactures we desire no trading no mechanical or manufacturing classes an alabama politician told an english visitor.
profitable farming thus remained the souths ideal pursuit of happiness.
education was valued by the planter elite for their own sons but there was little interest in public schooling for the masses.
the illiteracy rate in the south was three times higher than in the north.
a biracial culture what made the old south most distinctive was not its climate or soil but its expanding system of r ace based slavery.
the majority of southern whites did not own slaves but they supported what john c calhoun called the souths peculiar institution because slavery was so central to their societys way of life.
calhouns carefully crafted phrase allowed southerners to avoid using the charged word slavery while the adjective peculiar implied that slavery was unique to the south as it essentially was.
the profitability and convenience of owning slaves created a sense of social unity among whites that bridged class differences.
poor whites who owned no slaves and resented the planters cotton snobs could still claim racial superiority over enslaved blacks niggers.
because of r ace based slavery explained georgia attorney thomas reade cobb every white feels that he belongs to an elevated class.
it matters not that he is no slaveholder he is not of the inferior race he is a free born citizen the distinctiveness of the old south 467 the old south also differed from other sections of the country in its high proportion of native born americans.
the region attracted few european immigrants after the revolution in part because of geography.
the main shipping routes from britain and europe took immigrants to northern port cities.
because most immigrants were penniless they could not afford to travel to the south.
moreover european immigrants most of whom were manual laborers could not compete with slave labor.
conflicting myths southerners a north carolina editor wrote are a mythological people created half out of dream and half out of slander who live in a still legendary land myths are beliefs made up partly of truths and partly of lies formed with accurate generalizations and willful distortions.
during the nineteenth century a powerful myth emerged among white southerners that the south was both different from and better than the north.
this blended notion of distinctiveness and superiority became central to the self image of many southerners.
even today many southerners tenaciously cultivate a defiant pride and separate identity from the rest of the nation.
in defending the south and slavery from northern critics southerners claimed that their region was morally superior.
kind planters according to the prevailing myth provided happy slaves with food clothing shelter and security in contrast to a north populated with greedy bankers and heartless factory owners who treated their wage laborers worse than slaves.
john c calhoun insisted that in the northern states the quality of life for free people of color had become worse since slavery there had been banned whereas in the south the standard of living among enslaved african americans had improved greatly in every respect in this mythic version of the old south slavery was defended as being beneficial to both slaves and owners.
in aunt philliss cabin or southern life as it is 1852 novelist mary henderson eastman stressed the necessity of the existence of slavery at present in our southern states and claimed that as a general thing the slaves are comfortable and contented and their owners humane and kind the agrarian ideal and the southern passion for guns horsemanship hunting and the military filled in the self gratifying image of the old south as a region of honest small farmers and aristocratic gentlemen young belles and beautiful ladies who led leisurely lives of well mannered graciousness honor and courage all the while sipping mint juleps in a carefree romantic world of w hite columned mansions.
the contrasting myth of the old south was much darker.
northern abolitionists those who wanted an immediate end to slavery pictured the region 468 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction unpunished any southern citizen may kill or abuse a negro or union man republican with as much safety as one of our frontiersmen may kill an indian at the urging of president grant republicans in congress responded with three enforcement acts 1870 1871.
the first of these measures imposed penalties on anyone who interfered with any citizens right to vote.
the second dispatched federal supervisors and marshals to monitor elections in southern districts where political terrorism flourished.
the third called the ku klux klan act outlawed the main activities of the k kk forming conspiracies wearing disguises resisting officers and intimidating officials.
in general however the enforcement acts were not consistently enforced.
as a result the efforts of southern whites to use violence to thwart reconstruction escalated.
on easter sunday in 1873 in colfax louisiana a mob of white vigilantes most of them ex confederate soldiers disappointed by local election results used a cannon rifles and pistols to attack a group of black republicans in the courthouse slaughtering e ighty one and burning down the building.
it was the bloodiest racial incident during the reconstruction period.
a visit from the ku klux klan african americans in the south lived in constant fear of racial violence as this 1872 engraving from harpers weekly published to elicit northern sympathy illustrates.
the grant administration 737 southern redeemers the ku klux klans impact on southern politics varied from state to state.
in the upper south it played only a modest role in helping democrats win local elections.
in the lower south however klan violence and intimidation had more serious effects.
in overwhelmingly black yazoo county mississippi vengeful whites used terrorism to reverse the political balance of power.
in the 1873 elections for example the republicans cast 2 449 votes and the democrats 638 two years later the democrats polled 4 049 votes the republicans 7 throughout the south the activities of white supremacists disheartened black and white republicans alike.
we are helpless and unable to organize wrote a mississippi scalawag.
we dare not attempt to canvass campaign for candidates or make public speeches at the same time northerners displayed a growing weariness with using federal troops to reconstruct the south.
the plain truth is noted the new york herald the north has got tired of the negro president grant however desperately wanted to use more federal force to preserve peace and asked congress to pass new legislation that would leave my duties perfectly clear congress responded with the civil rights act of 1875 the most comprehensive guarantee of civil rights to that point.
it said that people of all races must be granted equal access to hotels and restaurants railroads and stagecoaches theaters and other places of public entertainment.
unfortunately for grant however the new law provided little authority to enforce its provisions.
those who felt their rights were being violated had to file suit in court and the penalties for violators were modest.
public interest in protecting civil rights in the south continued to wane as other issues emerged to distract northerners.
western expansion indian wars and economic issues surged to the forefront of voter concerns.
republican political control in the south gradually loosened as all white conservative parties mobilized the a nti reconstruction vote.
white d emocrats the so called redeemers who supposedly saved the south from republican control and black rule used the race issue to excite the white electorate and intimidate black voters.
where persuasion failed to work democrats used trickery.
as one enthusiastic democrat boasted the white and black republicans may outvote us but we can outcount them republican political control ended in virginia and tennessee as early as 1869 in georgia and north carolina it collapsed in 1870 although north carolina had a republican governor until 1876 reconstruction lasted longest in the lower south where whites abandoned klan robes for barefaced intimidation in paramilitary groups such as the mississippi rifle club and the south 738 chapter 28 cold war america 1950 1959 charging that he was violating states rights.
eisenhower had lit the fires of hate claimed senator james eastland.
a south carolina moderate took a different tack those who believed that integration could be accomplished gradually and peacefully are now convinced that eisenhower will have to use force all the way eisenhower was quick to stress that his use of federal troops had little to do with the integration or segregation question and everything to do with maintaining law and order.
in his view the gleaming bayonets in little rock showed that the united states was a government of law that the constitution remained the supreme law of the land and that the u s supreme court was the final interpreter of the constitution.
martin luther king jr who had earlier criticized eisenhowers tepid support of civil rights told the president that the overwhelming majority of southerners negro and white stand behind your resolute action to restore law and order in little rock many southern politicians called for the presidents impeachment and removal.
in the summer of 1958 governor faubus supported by the state legislature closed the little rock high schools rather than allow racial integration.
the governor of virginia did the same in his state.
their actions led jonathan daniels editor of the raleigh north carolina news observer to write that closing public schools is something beyond secession from the union it is secession from civilization court proceedings in arkansas dragged into 1959 before the schools re opened.
resistance to integration in virginia collapsed when state and federal courts struck down state laws that had cut off funds to integrated public schools.
thereafter massive resistance to racial integration was confined mostly to the lower south where five states from south carolina westward through louisiana still opposed even token integration.
faubus went on to serve six terms as governor of arkansas.
southern christian leadership conference after little rock progress toward greater civil rights seemed agonizingly slow.
frustrated african americans began blaming the naacp for relying too much on the courts.
the negro masses are angry and restless tired of prolonged legal battles that end in paper decrees reported black journalist louis lomax.
the widespread sense of disappointment gave martin luther kings nonviolent civil rights movement even greater visibility.
as king explained we were confronted with blasted hopes and the dark shadow of a deep disappointment settled upon us.
so we had no alternative except that of preparing for direct action whereby we would present our very bodies as a means of laying our case before the conscience of the local and national community foreign policy in the fifties 1291 on january 10 1957 dr king invited about sixty black ministers and leaders to ebenezer church in atlanta.
their goal was to form an organization to coordinate and support nonviolent direct action as a method of desegregating bus systems across the south.
after a f ollow up meeting in new orleans on february 15 a new organization emerged the southern christian leadership conference sclc with dr king as its president.
unlike the naacp which recruited individual members sclc coordinated activities on behalf of a cluster of organizations mostly individual churches or community groups.
because dr king pushed for direct action against the segregated south only a few african american ministers were initially willing to affiliate with sclc for fear of a white backlash.
king persisted however and over time sclc grew into a powerful organization.
the activists knew that violence awaited them.
roy wilkins head of the naacp noted that the negro citizen has come to the point where he is not afraid of violence.
he no longer shrinks back.
he will assert himself and if violence comes so be it thus began the second phase of the civil rights movement a phase that would come to fruition in the 1960s as king and other african american activists showed the nation the courage to resist injustice the power to love everyone and the strength to endure discouragement and opposition.
foreign policy in the fifties the truman administrations commitment to contain communism focused on the soviet threat to western europe.
during the 1950s the eisenhower administration especially secretary of state john foster dulles expanded americas objective in the cold war.
containment was no longer enough the united states must develop a dynamic foreign policy that would roll back communism around the world.
dulless goal was to liberate those people under communist rule rather than merely contain communist expansion.
as a cold warrior dulles expected every nation to choose sides.
for us he said there are two kinds of people in the world.
there are those who are christians and support free enterprise and there are the others he soon discovered however that the complexities of world affairs and the realities of soviet and communist chinese power made his moral commitment to manage the destiny of the world unrealistic and costly.
concluding an armistice in korea eisenhower who had a unique understanding of the relationship between diplomacy and military force faced three choices increase the war effort continue the military 1292 chapter 28 cold war america 1950 1959 stalemate or pursue a negotiated settlement.
eisenhower chose the third option but he first had to convince dulles that negotiations were warranted.
dulles did not want peace until the chinese had suffered one hell of a licking and the two koreas had been reunited.
in april 1953 eisenhower told dulles that he was not willing to prolong the military effort but he was comfortable using the threat of nuclear weapons and other actions to break the impasse in the stalled negotiations.
in may 1953 eisenhower took the bold step of intensifying the aerial bombardment of north korea.
the president let it be known that he would dont be a fraid i can always pull use nuclear weapons if a truce were you back secretary of state john not forthcoming.
thereafter negotifoster dulles pushes a reluctant america to the brink of war.
ations moved quickly toward a c ease fire agreement called an armistice on july 26 1953 it ended all acts of armed force and reaffirmed the historical border between the two koreas just above the 38th parallel until both sides could arrive at a final peaceful settlement other factors in bringing about the armistice were chinas rising military losses in the conflict and the spirit of uncertainty and caution felt by the soviet communists after the death of josef stalin on march 5 1953 six weeks after eisenhowers inauguration.
the korean war had effects far beyond the divided nations borders.
it was the first war in which helicopters were used in combat and it ushered in the era of jet fighters.
the conflict transformed the united states into the worlds policeman by convincing american political and military leaders that communism was indeed a global threat.
within a few years the united states would create scores of permanent military bases around the world and organize a permanent national security apparatus in washington to manage its new responsibilities not the least of which was a growing stockpile of nuclear weaponry.
dulles and massive re taliation like woodrow wilson secretary of state dulles was a presbyterian ministers son whose favorite hymn was onward christian soldiers s elf righteous and humorless he believed foreign policy in the fifties 1293 that the united states was born with a sense of destiny and mission to defeat communism.
his british counterparts however were not im pressed with his sermonizing monologues calling them dull duller dulles dulles insisted that the democratic policy of containing communism was immoral because it did nothing to free people from oppression.
america he argued should work toward the liberation of the captive peoples of eastern europe and china.
when state department analyst george f kennan architect of the containment doctrine dismissed dulless rhetoric as lunacy dulles fired him.
eisenhower however understood kennans objections.
he was quick to explain that the liberation doctrine would not involve military force.
instead he would promote the removal of communist control by every peaceful means but only by peaceful means yet he did nothing to temper dulless rhetoric and praised his secretary of states moral fervor.
dulles and eisenhower knew that the united states could not win a ground war against the soviet union or communist china whose armies had millions more soldiers than did the united states.
nor could the administration afford politically or financially to sustain military expenditures at the levels required during the korean war.
so dulles and eisenhower crafted a strategy that came to be called massive retaliation which meant using the threat of nuclear warfare massive retaliatory power to prevent communist aggression.
the strategy they argued would provide a maximum deterrent at bearable cost massive retaliation had major weaknesses however.
by the mid 1950s both the united states and the soviet union had developed hydrogen bombs which were 750 times as powerful as the atomic bombs dropped on japan in 1945 a single hydrogen bomb would have a devastating global impact yet war planners envisioned using hundreds of them.
the necessary art dulles explained was in the brinkmanship the ability to get to the verge without getting into war.
if you are scared to go to the brink you are lost the milwaukee journal found dulless brinkmanship strategy terrifying it is like saying that the closer you get to war the better you serve peace.
it is like saying that the destiny of the human race is something to gamble with the cias foreign interventions while eisenhower and dulles were publicly promoting the liberation of communist nations and massive retaliation as a strategy against the soviets they were secretly using the new central intelligence agency cia to manipulate world politics in covert ways that produced unintended consequences all of them bad.
the a nti colonial independence movements unleashed by the second world war placed the united states in the awkward position of watching 1294 chapter 28 cold war america 1950 1959 nationalist groups around the globe revolt against british and french rule.
in iran in may 1951 the parliament seized control of the nations b ritish run oil industry.
the following year a newly elected prime minister mohammed mossadegh cut all diplomatic ties with great britain and insisted that iran not britain should own sell and profit from iranian oil.
dulles predicted that iran was on the verge of falling under communist control.
the cia and the british intelligence service mi6 then launched operation ajax designed in the words of the agencys head allen dulles the secretary of states brother to bring about the fall of mossadegh in 1954 the cia bribed iranian army officers and hired iranian agents to arrest mossadegh who was convicted of high treason.
he was imprisoned for three years then put under house arrest until his death in 1967 in return for access to iranian oil the u s government thereafter provided massive support for the anti communist and increasingly authoritarian regime of the shah king of iran mohammad reza pahlavi who consolidated power after the removal of mossadegh.
in the end operation ajax proved to be a disaster by reinstating the incompetent and indecisive shah.
the success of the cia engineered coup in iran emboldened eisenhower to authorize other secret operations to undermine unfriendly government re gimes even if it meant aligning with corrupt dictatorships.
in 1954 the target was guatemala a desperately poor c entral american country led by colonel jacobo arbenz guzman.
arbenzs decision to take over u s owned property and industries convinced dulles that guatemala was falling victim to international communism dulles per suaded eisenhower to approve a cia operation to organize a secret guatemalan army in honduras.
on june 18 1954 aided by cia piloted warplanes 150 paid liberators crossed the border and forced arbenz guzman into exile in mexico.
the united states then installed a new ruler in guatemala who eliminated all political opposition.
by secretly overthrowing elected governments to ensure that they did not join the soviet bloc however the cia operations destabilized iran and guatemala and created problems in the middle east and central america that would eventually come back to haunt the united states.
indochina during the 1950s the united states also became embroiled in southeast asia.
indochina created by french imperialists in the nineteenth century out of the old kingdoms of cambodia laos and vietnam offered a distinctive case of a nti colonial nationalism.
during the second world war after japanese troops occupied the region the viet minh league for the independence of vietnam waged a guerrilla resistance movement led by ho chi minh a seasoned revolutionary and passionate nationalist.
foreign policy in the fifties 1295 uncle ho a wispy man weighing barely 100 pounds worked sixteen hours each day toward a single goal independence for his country.
at the end of the war against japan the viet minh controlled part of northern vietnam.
on september 2 1945 ho chi minh proclaimed the creation of a democratic republic of vietnam with its capital in hanoi.
the french like the americans would later underestimated the determination of ho and the vietnamese nationalists to maintain their independence.
in 1946 the first indochina war began when hos fighters resisted french efforts to restore the colonial regime.
french forces quickly regained control of the cities while the viet minh controlled the countryside.
ho predicted that his forces would absorb more losses but the french would give ho chi minh though a ruthless leader he cultivated a public image of himself in first.
when the korean war ended as the humble gentle uncle ho a man the united states continued its efforts of the people.
to strengthen french control of vietnam.
by the end of 1953 the eisenhower administration was paying nearly 80 percent of the cost of the french military effort.
in december 1953 some 12 000 french soldiers parachuted into dien bien phu a cluster of villages in a valley ringed by mountains in northwestern vietnam.
their plan was to build a w ell fortified base to lure viet minh guerrillas into the open and then overwhelm them with superior firepower.
the french assumed that the surrounding forested hills were impassable.
but slowly more than 55 000 viet minh fighters equipped with chinese communist weapons took up positions atop the ridges overlooking the french military base.
they laboriously dismantled cannons and carried them in pieces up the hills then dug trenches and tunnels down into the valley.
by march 1954 the french paratroopers found themselves surrounded.
as the weeks passed the french government pleaded with the united states to relieve the pressure on dien bien phu.
the national security council dulles vice president nixon and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff urged eisenhower to use atomic bombs to aid the trapped french force.
1296 chapter 11 the south slavery and king cotton 1800 1860 free blacks this badge issued in charleston south carolina was worn by a free black so that he would not be mistaken for someones property the trade in slaves like other wealthy mulattoes came to view himself as a brown aristocrat he yearned to be accepted as an equal in white society during the civil war he supported the confederacy.
in louisiana a mulatto cyprien ricard paid 250 000 for an estate that had ninety one slaves.
in natchez mississippi william johnson son of a white father and a mulatto mother operated three barbershops owned 1 500 acres of land and held several slaves.
black or mulatto slaveholders were few in number however.
the 1830 census reported that 3 775 free blacks about 2 percent of the total free black population owned 12 760 slaves.
many of the african american slaveholders were men who bought or inherited their own family members.
the rapid rise in the slave population during the early nineteenth century mainly occurred naturally through slave births especially after congress and president thomas jefferson outlawed the african slave trade in 1808 by 1820 over 80 percent of slaves were american born.
once the african slave trade was outlawed the s lave trading network within the united states became much more important and profitable.
between 1800 and 1860 the average price of slaves quadrupled in large part because of the dramatic expansion of the cotton culture in the old southwest.
breeding and selling slaves became a big business.
over a twenty year period a virginia plantation owned by john tayloe iii recorded 252 slave births and 142 slave deaths thus providing tayloe with 110 extra slaves to be deployed on the plantation given to his sons or sold to traders.
to manage the growing slave trade markets and auction houses sprang up in every southern city.
new orleans alone had twenty slave trading businesses.
each year thousands of slaves circulated through the citys slave pens there they were converted from people into products with prices.
they were bathed black society in the south 485 and groomed fattened up with bacon milk and butter like cattle assigned categories such as prime no.
2 and second rate and packaged for sale by being dressed in identical blue suits or dresses.
on auction day they were paraded into the sale room.
the tallest strongest and blackest young men brought the highest prices.
as a slaver stressed i must have if possible the jet black negroes for they stand the the business of slavery this advertisement for the blount dawson trading company climate best buyers physically inspected each guarantees its clients secure and good accommodations for all negroes left with us for slave on the auction block as if they sale or s afe keeping in its newly acquired jail were horses or cattle.
they squeezed opposite the state bank.
their muscles felt their joints worked their fingers back and forth pried open their mouths to examine their teeth and gums.
they then forced the slaves to strip and carefully inspected their naked bodies looking for signs of disease or deformities.
they particularly focused on any scars from whipping.
as solomon northup noted scars on a slaves back were considered evidence of a rebellious or unruly spirit and hurt his chances for sale during the 1830s slave traders began advertising fancy girls among the slaves to be auctioned.
the term referred to young african american women distinctive for their beauty who would fetch higher prices because of their sexual attractiveness.
as a historian of the slave trade noted slaverys frontier was a white mans sexual playground once the crude inspections ended buyers bid on the slaves purchased them and then transported them to their new homes.
almost a million captive african americans many of them children were sold south or downriver and taken to the old southwest during the first half of the nineteenth century.
planters purchasing slaves knew what they wanted.
it is better to buy none in families said a mississippi buyer but to select only choice first rate young hands from 16 to 25 years of age buying no children or aged negroes the worst aspect of the domestic slave trade was the separation of children from parents and husbands from wives.
children were often taken from their parents and sold to new masters.
in missouri one enslaved woman saw six of her seven children ages one to eleven sold to six different owners.
only 486 chapter 11 the south slavery and king cotton 1800 1860 ouisiana and alabama from 1852 prohibited separating a child younger l than ten from his or her mother and no state prevented the separation of a slave husband from his wife.
slavery as a way of life the lives of slaves differed greatly from place to place depending in part on the personality of their owner in part on whether the enslaved were focused on growing rice sugar tobacco or cotton and in part on whether they were on farms or in cities.
although many slaves were artisans or craftsmen carpenters blacksmiths furniture makers butchers boatmen house servants cooks nurses maids weavers basket makers etc.
the vast majority were field hands who were often organized into work gangs supervised by a black driver or white overseer.
some slaves were hired out to other planters or to merchants churches or businesses.
others worked on sundays or holidays to earn cash of their own.
plantation slaves were usually housed in one or two room wooden shacks with dirt floors.
the wealthiest planters built slave cabins out of brick.
beds were a luxury even though they were little more than boards covered with straw.
most slaves were expected to sleep on the cold damp floor with only a cheap blanket for warmth.
a set of inexpensive linen or cotton clothes was distributed twice a year but shoes were generally provided only in winter.
about half of all slave babies died in their first year a rate more than twice that of whites.
the weekly or monthly food allotment was cheap and monotonous corn meal and pork often served in bowls placed on the ground as if the slaves were livestock.
planters were quite varied in their personalities and practices.
philip jones a louisiana slave observed that many planters were humane and kind others were not.
massa was purty good one e x slave recalled.
he treated us jus bout like you would a good mule another said his master fed us reglar on good stantial food jus like youd tend to your hoss horse if you had a real good one a slave born in 1850 had a life expectancy of thirty six years the life expectancy of whites was forty years.
solomon northup a freeborn african american from new york with a wife and three children was kidnapped in 1845 by slave traders taken first to washington d c and then to new orleans and eventually sold to a repulsive and coarse louisiana cotton planter.
more than a decade later northup was able to regain his freedom.
in twelve years a slave 1853 northup described his living and working conditions.
his bed was a plank twelve inches wide and ten feet long.
my pillow was a stick of wood.
the bedding was a coarse blanket the log cabin where he and others slept had a dirt floor and no windows.
each day an black society in the south 489 hour before daylight the horn is blown.
then the slaves arouse prepare their breakfast.
and hurry to the field if found in their quarters after daybreak slaves were flogged.
it was rarely that a day passed by without one or more whippings.
the crack of the lash and the shrieking of the slaves can be heard from dark till bed time field hands worked from sunrise to sunset six days a week.
at times they were worked at night as well ginning cotton milling sugarcane grinding corn or doing other indoor tasks.
women remembered a slave had to work all day in de fields an den come home an do the housework at night sundays were precious days off.
slaves used the sabbath to hunt fish dance to banjo and fiddle music tell stories or tend their own small gardens.
beginning in august and lasting several months the focus was on picking cotton.
the productivity per slave increased dramatically during the first half of the nineteenth century in large part because of the implementation of the pushing system during harvest season each slave was assigned a daily quota of cotton to be picked an amount that increased over the years.
gangs of slaves men and women would sweep across a field pull the bolls from the thorny pods and stuff them in large sacks or baskets which they dragged behind them.
all the while they were watched and prodded by an overseer bullwhip in hand forcing them to keep up the pace.
solomon northup remembered picking cotton until it was too dark to see and when the moon is full they oftentimes labor till the middle of the night each evening the baskets would be weighed and the number of pounds recorded on a slate board by each pickers name.
those who fell short of their quota were scolded and whipped.
the violence of slavery although some owners and slaves developed close and even affectionate relationships slavery on the whole was a system rooted in brutal force.
the difference between a good owner and a bad one according to one slave was the difference between one who did not whip you too much and one who whipped you till hed bloodied you and blistered you one overseer in south carolina whipped eight women simply for hoeing bad corn others were whipped for not picking cotton for not picking as well as he can or for picking very trashy cotton bennett barrow a louisiana planter on average had a slave whipped every four days as a means of symbolizing his absolute control.
allen sidney a slave recalled an incident on a mississippi plantation that illustrated the ruthlessness of cotton production.
a slave who fell behind while picking cotton resisted when a black driver started to whip him up upon seeing the fracas the white overseer mounted on horseback galloped over 490 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 under the treaty of amity and commerce france officially recognized the new united states and offered important trading privileges to american ships.
under the treaty of alliance both parties agreed first that if france entered the war both countries would fight until american independence was won second that neither would conclude a truce or peace without the formal consent of the other and third that each would guarantee the others possessions in america from the present time and forever against all other powers france further agreed not to seek canada or other british possessions on the mainland of north america.
in the end the intervention of the french army and navy determined the outcome of the war.
the americans would also form important alliances with the spanish 1779 and the dutch 1781 but neither provided as much support as the french.
after the british defeat at saratoga and the news of the french alliance with the united states parliament tried to end the war by granting all the demands that the americans had made before they declared independence.
but the continental congress would not negotiate until britain officially recognized american independence and withdrew its military forces.
king george refused.
1778 both sides regroup valley forge and stalemate for george washingtons army at valley forge near philadelphia the winter of 1777 1778 was a time of intense suffering and unrelenting cold hunger and disease.
some soldiers lacked shoes and blankets and their makeshift l og and mud huts offered little protection from the chilling winds.
by february 7 000 troops were too ill for duty.
more than 2 500 soldiers died at valley forge another 1 000 deserted.
fifty officers resigned on one december day and several hundred more left before winters end.
desperate for relief washington sent troops across new jersey delaware and the eastern shore of maryland to confiscate horses cattle and hogs in exchange for receipts promising future payment.
by march 1778 the troops at valley forge saw their strength restored.
their improved health enabled washington to begin a rigorous training program.
because few of the american officers had any formal military training their troops lacked leadership discipline and skills.
to remedy this defect washington turned to an energetic prussian soldier of fortune friedrich wilhelm baron von steuben who used an interpreter and frequent profanity to instruct the troops in the fundamentals of close order drill.
1778 both sides regroup 217 valley forge during the harsh winter of 1777 1778 washingtons army battled starvation disease and freezing temperatures.
steuben was one of several foreign volunteers who joined the american army at valley forge.
another was a n ineteen year old red haired french orphan named gilbert du motier marquis de lafayette.
a wealthy idealist excited by the american cause i was crazy with desire to wear a uniform he said lafayette offered to serve in the continental army for no pay in exchange for being named a general.
washington was initially skeptical of the young french aristocrat but lafayette soon became the commander in chief s most trusted aide.
washington noted that lafayette possessed a large share of bravery and military ardor the young french general also proved to be an able diplomat in helping to forge the military alliance with france there are forty cities seven counties and a private college named for lafayette across the united states.
the continental armys morale rose when the continental congress promised extra pay and bonuses after the war and it rose again with the news of the military alliance with france.
in the spring of 1778 british forces withdrew from pennsylvania to new york city with the american army in hot pursuit.
once the british were back in manhattan washingtons army encamped at 218 chapter 28 cold war america 1950 1959 unable to retaliate directly against the united states nasser seized control of the f rench based suez canal company and denied i srael bound ships access through the canal.
the british and french were furious but they needed a pretext for military action.
israel soon provided one.
on september 30 1956 israeli british and french officials secretly hatched a plan israel would invade egypt and race west to the suez canal.
the french and british would then send troops to the canal zone posing as peacekeepers to keep egypt and israel separated.
on october 29 1956 israeli paratroopers dropped into egypt.
the british and french governments then issued an ultimatum demanding that the fighting cease.
when egypt rejected the ultimatum british warplanes began bombing egyptian airfields.
on november 5 british and french soldiers invaded the canal zone.
nasser responded by sinking all forty of the international ships then in the suez canal.
a few days later anglo french commandos and paratroopers took control of the canal.
eisenhower was furious that the three nations had hatched their scheme and attacked egypt without informing the american government.
he bluntly told anthony eden the british prime minister that he flatly reject ed the thought of using force in egypt.
and he resolved to put a stop to the invasion.
how could we possibly support britain and france he asked if in doing so we lose the whole arab world eisenhower demanded that the british and french withdraw and that the israelis evacuate the sinai peninsula or face severe economic sanctions.
that the three aggressor nations grudgingly complied on november 7 testified to eisenhowers strength influence and savvy.
the suez debacle caused the downfall of the british government and hastened the process of independence among its remaining colonies.
but perhaps its major result was that the british government realized that never again would it be able to act independently of the united states.
egypt reopened the suez canal and as eisenhower had predicted operated it in a professional nonpolitical manner.
the suez crisis and the hungarian revolt led democrat adlai stevenson to declare the administrations foreign policy bankrupt eleanor roosevelt complained that eisenhowers opposition to our oldest and strongest allies.
is an ironic strange and horrible situation most americans however reasoned that the crises actually affirmed the nations status as the global superpower.
voters handed eisenhower an even more lopsided victory than the one in 1952 in carrying louisiana eisenhower became the first republican to win a lower south state since reconstruction nationally he carried all but seven states and won the electoral vote 457 to 73 eisenhowers decisive victory however failed to swing a congressional majority for his party in either house.
foreign policy in the fifties 1301 postwar alliances europe north africa the middle east finland norway sweden se neth.
poland cze communist bloc warsaw pact ch.
romania france albania iraq rs kuwait an bahrain gu lf qatar i u a r.
egypt d saudi arabia a se mali niger chad 1 000 miles 1 000 kilometers iran jordan pe libya syria re m aur itania cyprus lebanon israel suez canal se a ta n me dite rran ean algeria turkey greece tunisia sea spain morocco black sea bulgaria italy ian sp ca yugoslavia portugal members of meto arab league u s s r a nis atlantic ocean w ger.
ti c gh bel.
l ba af ireland denmark great britain members of nato a north sea sudan west pakistan trucial states muscat and oman yemen hadhramaut french terr.
of afars and issas ethiopia arabian sea somalia how did general abdel nasser play the united states and the soviet union against each other in pursuing egypts goals.
why did the israelis french and british attack egypt.
how was the suez war resolved.
wwn64 figure m28 3 first proof sputnik on october 4 1957 the soviets shocked the united states by launching the first communications satellite called sputnik a polished aluminum sphere the size of a beach ball.
americans panicked at the news believing that if the soviets could put a satellite in orbit they could also fire a rocket with a nuclear warhead across the pacific ocean and detonate it on the west coast.
it was a frightful blow said a radio commentator.
america had grown soft and complacent assuming that it was number one in everything yet now the united states had been bested in space by its soviet rival.
senator lyndon b johnson warned that the russians would soon be dropping bombs on us from space like kids dropping rocks on cars from freeway overpasses 1302 chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 the new frontier in his 1960 speech accepting the democratic presidential nomination john f kennedy showcased the muscular language that would characterize his rontier campaign and his presidency we stand today on the edge of a new f the frontier of unknown opportunities and perils a frontier of unfulfilled hopes and threats kennedy and his staff fastened upon the frontier metaphor as the label for their proposed domestic program because they believed that americans had always been adventurers eager to conquer and exploit new frontiers.
kennedy promised that if elected he would get the country moving again and be a more aggressive cold warrior than dwight eisenhower.
kennedy versus nixon in 1960 the presidential election featured two c andidates vice president richard m nixon and massachusetts senator john f kennedy jfk of similar ages but contrasting personalities and backgrounds.
as eisenhowers partner over successive terms nixon was assured the republican nomination in 1960 although president eisenhower himself had grave misgivings.
when asked by reporters to name a single major accomplishment of his vice president ike replied if you give me a week i might think of one the presidents snide comment undercut nixons claim of significant executive experience as vice president.
the two republicans had long had a testy relationship.
nixon once called his presidential boss a goddamned old fool while eisenhower dismissed his fiercely ambitious vice president as a man who couldnt think of anything but politics on more than one occasion eisenhower clumsily sought to dump his vice president in favor of other republicans whom he respected.
a native of california the forty seven year old nixon had come to washington after the second world war eager to reverse the tide of new deal liberalism.
his visibility among republicans benefited from his leadership of the anti communist hearings in congress during the mccarthy hysteria.
all his life nixon had clawed and struggled to reach the top.
now he had the presidency within his grasp.
but nixon graceless awkward and stiff proved to be one of the most complicated and most interesting political figures in american history.
kennedy told an aide that nixon doesnt know who he is.
so every time he makes a speech he has to decide which nixon he is and that will be very exhausting forty three year old john kennedy had not distinguished himself in the house or the senate.
more pragmatic than principled he was handsome articulate and blessed with energy and wit.
friends said his charisma was magical.
the new frontier 1311 the kennedy nixon debates nixons decision to debate his less prominent opponent on television backfired.
one of lifes great pleasures his b rother in law said was spending time with that man kennedy lit up a room with his inviting smile athletic presence and infectious zest for life.
coolly analytical and dangerously s elf absorbed he was a contradictory and elusive personality.
even his wife jacqueline was unsure about him.
he may be a fine politician she told a dinner guest but do we know if hes a fine person this much is certain kennedy had a bright agile mind a quick wit a harvard education a record of heroism in the second world war a rich and powerful roman catholic family and a beautiful and accomplished young wife.
in the words of a southern senator kennedy combined the best qualities of elvis presley and franklin d roosevelt a combination that played well in the first ever televised presidential debate as he began the process of seducing a nation.
some 70 million people tuned in to the debate and saw an obviously uncomfortable nixon perspiring heavily and looking pale.
by contrast kennedy looked 1312 chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 it would happen in 1969.
what spurred the start of the program was the news that the soviets had launched the first manned space flight in 1961 former president eisenhower said that kennedys race to the moon for national prestige is nuts but vice president lyndon johnson assured the president that dramatic accomplishments in space are being increasingly identified as a major indicator of world leadership kennedy explained that he had decided to shoot for the moon not because it is easy but because it is hard because that goal will serve to organize and measure the best of our energies and skills civil rights the most important developments in domestic life during the sixties occurred in civil rights.
throughout the south racial segregation remained firmly in place.
signs outside public restrooms distinguished between whites and colored restaurants declared colored not allowed or colored served only in rear stores prohibited african americans from trying on clothes before buying them.
despite the brown v board of education ruling in 1954 many public schools across the south remained segregated and unequal in quality.
like franklin d roosevelt president kennedy celebrated racial equality but did little to promote it until forced to do so.
his caution reflected his narrow election margin in 1960 he was reluctant to challenge conservative southern democrats on the explosive issue of segregation.
both he and his brother robert bobby the attorney general and his closest adviser had to be dragged into actively supporting the civil rights movement.
after appointing harris wofford a white law professor and experienced campaigner for racial equality as the special presidential assistant for civil rights president kennedy told him to make substantial headway against.
the nonsense of racial discrimination but to do so with minimum civil rights legislation and maximum executive action such actions led martin luther king jr to comment that kennedy had great political skill but no moral passion about the need to end racial injustice.
catastrophe in cuba kennedys performance in foreign relations was spectacularly mixed.
although he had told a reporter that he wanted to break out of the confines of the cold war he quickly found himself reinforcing its confining assumptions.
while still a senator kennedy had blasted president eisenhower for not being tough enough with the soviets and for allowing fidel castro and his communist followers to take over cuba just ninety miles from the southern tip of florida.
soon after his inauguration kennedy learned that a secret cia operation which had been approved by eisenhower was training 1 500 a nti castro cubans in guatemala texas and florida to invade their homeland in hopes the new frontier 1317 walk of shame captured anti castro cubans after the failed invasion at the bay of pigs.
of triggering a mass uprising against castro.
u s military leaders assured kennedy that the invasion plan operation trinidad was feasible cia analysts predicted that news of the invasion would inspire anti castro cubans to rebel against their communist dictator.
in reality the covert operation had little chance of succeeding.
its assumptions were flawed its strategy faulty its tactics bungled and the forces and weapons used inadequate.
kennedy seemed to realize it might fail when he callously said if we have to get rid of those 800 men actually 1 400 it is much better to dump them in cuba than in the united states when the ragtag force of right wing cubans transported on american ships landed before dawn at the bay of pigs on cubas south shore on april 17 1961 castros forces were waiting for them.
kennedy panicked when he realized the operation was failing and refused desperate pleas from the rebels for promised support from u s warplanes.
general lyman lemnitzer chair of the joint chiefs of staff said that kennedys pulling out the rug on the cuban invaders was.
absolutely reprehensible almost criminal some 1 200 rebels were captured the rest were killed.
kennedy later paid 53 million to ransom the captured rebels.
1318 chapter 17 business and labor in the industrial era 1860 1900 the molly maguires during the early 1870s violence erupted in the eastern pennsylvania coalfields when a secret irish american group called the molly maguires took economic justice into their own hands.
the mollies took their name from an irish patriot who had led the resistance against the british.
outraged by dangerous working conditions in the mines and the owners brutal efforts to suppress union activity the mollies used intimidation beatings and killings to avenge the wrongs done to irish workers.
their terrorism reached its peak in 1874 1875 prompting mine owners to hire men from the pinkerton detective agency commonly referred to as pinkertons to stop the movement.
one of the agents who infiltrated the mollies uncovered enough evidence to have the leaders indicted for the coalfield murders.
in 1876 twenty four molly maguires were convicted by a non irish jury ten were hanged.
the great railroad strike 1877 after the financial panic of 1873 the major rail lines fearful of a recession had slashed workers wages.
in 1877 the companies announced another 10 percent wage cut which led most of the railroad workers at martinsburg west virginia to walk off the job and block the tracks to shut down all rail traffic.
the strike spread to hundreds of other cities and towns.
tens of thousands of workers walked off the job and the resulting violence left more than 100 people dead and millions of dollars in damaged property.
in pittsburgh thousands of striking workers burned t hirty nine buildings and destroyed more than 1 000 railcars and locomotives.
the violence was not directed solely at employers either.
workers who refused to join the strike or participate in the riots were harassed and beaten.
the great railroad strike became one of the most spectacular incidents of widespread violence in american history and revealed how polarized the working poor and business elites had become.
local and state officials interpreted the growing insurgency as evidence of communist ideology born in europe.
governors mobilized state militia units to suppress the rioters.
in philadelphia the militia dispersed a crowd at the cost of twenty six lives but looting and burning continued until president rutherford b hayes dispatched federal troops finally to end it.
a reporter described the scene as the most horrible ever witnessed except in the carnage of war.
there were fifty miles of hot rails ten tracks side by side with as many miles of ties turned into glowing coals and tons on tons of iron car skeletons and wheels almost at white heat eventually the disgruntled workers lacking organized bargaining power had little choice but to return to work.
the strike had failed.
for many americans the railroad strike raised the possibility of what a pittsburgh newspaper saw as a great civil war in this country between labor the dreadful chill of change 783 and capital many workers felt that violence was their only option.
the working people everywhere are with us a unionist told a reporter.
they know what it is to bring up a family on ninety cents a day to live on beans and corn meal week in and week out to run in debt at the company stores until you cannot get trusted any longer to see the wife breaking down.
and the children growing sharp and fierce like wolves day after day because they dont get enough to eat equally disturbing to those in positions of corporate and political power was the presence of many women among the protesters.
a baltimore journalist noted that the singular part of the disturbances is the very active part taken by the women who are the wives and mothers of the railroad firemen president hayes knew that the army had suppressed the strikers but had not solved the underlying problems.
the strikes have been put down by force he wrote in his diary.
but now for the real remedy.
cant something be done by education of the strikers by judicious control of the capitalists by wise general policy to end or diminish the evil it was a fair question that largely went unanswered.
the sand lot incident in california the national railroad strike indirectly gave rise to a w orking class political movement.
in 1877 a the chinese must go in this advertisement for the missouri steam washer the american made washing machine drives a chinese laundryman back to china playing on the growing anti chinese sentiments in the 1880s.
784 chapter 12 religion romanticism and reform 1800 1860 they renamed the town nauvoo a crude translation of a hebrew word meaning beautiful land.
within five years nauvoo had become the second largest city in the state and joseph smith the prophet became nauvoos religious dictator.
he owned the hotel and general store published the newspaper served as mayor chief justice and commander of the citys 2 000 strong army and was the trustee of the church.
smiths lust for power and for women grew as well.
he began excommunicating dissidents and in 1844 he announced his intention to become president of the united states.
smiths remarkable sexual energy led him to practice plural marriage polygamy he accumulated more than two dozen wives many of them already married to other men and he encouraged other mormon leaders to do the same.
in 1844 a crisis arose when mormon dissenters including smiths first wife emma denounced his polygamy.
the result was not only a split in the church but also an attack on nauvoo by non mormons.
when smith ordered mormons to destroy an opposition newspaper he and his brother hyrum were arrested and charged with treason.
on june 27 1844 a mob stormed the jail and killed the smith brothers.
the new york herald predicted that his death would kill mormonism.
brigham young brigham young young headed the mormons from 1847 to 1877 in brigham young however the mormons found a new and in many ways better leader.
elected in 1844 to succeed smith young would not only preserve the mormon church but create a new theocratic empire.
strong minded intelligent authoritarian and charismatic young was an early convert to mormonism.
smith he remembered took heaven.
and brought it down to earth because nauvoo continued to arouse the suspicions of non mormons young began to look for another home for his flock.
their new destination turned out to be 1 300 miles away near the great salt lake in utah a vast sparsely populated area that was part of mexico.
the first to arrive at the great salt lake in july 1847 found a broad and barren a more democratic religion 517 plain hemmed in by the mountains.
the paradise of the lizard the cricket and the rattlesnake but young declared that this is the place to settle.
by the end of 1848 the mormons had developed an efficient irrigation system for their farms and over the next decade they brought about a spectacular greening of the desert.
at first they organized their own state named deseret meaning land of the honeybee and elected young governor.
but their independence was short lived.
in 1848 mexico signed the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo transferring to the united states what is now california nevada utah texas and parts of arizona new mexico colorado and wyoming.
two years later congress incorporated the utah territory into the united states.
nevertheless when young was named the territorial governor the new arrangement gave the mormons virtual independence.
mormon trek 1830 1851 canada oregon m i s sissip ts.
kirtland 1831 1837 r ve ri ky nc la pa a ms al sc ga la mexico fl md va c o hio p ar oh pi y texas mormon settlements the mormon trail 1830 1851 proposed state of deseret pa tn r iv t r er n or mi il mo u mexico territory independence 1831 1839 o san bernardino color a d new c r s mt salt lake city ive palmyra m er utah territory ny wi winter quarters 1846 1847 ia nauvoo in r pl a tt e rive 1839 1845 great salt lake california minnesota territory an riv a n d i i n ri hi m i s s ou ky roc territory 300 miles 150 300 kilometers where were mormon settlements established between 1830 and 1851.
wwn64 why did joseph smith initially lead his congregation west.
figure m12 1 proof why was the utah territory an ideal place for the mormons to settle at least first 29p6 initially.
x 23p0 nj 518 chapter 12 religion romanticism and reform 1800 1860 for more than twenty years young ruled with an iron hand allowing no dissent and defying federal authority.
not until 1896 after the mormons disavowed the practice of polygamy was utah admitted as a state.
out of its eerily secret beginnings and early struggles mormonism today is the fourth largest religious denomination in the world.
romanticism in america the revival of religious life during the early 1800s was one of many efforts throughout the united states and europe to unleash the stirrings of the spirit.
another great cultural shift was the romantic movement in thought literature and the arts.
the movement began in europe as young people rebelled against the w ell ordered rational world promoted by the enlightenment.
were there not after all more things in the world than reason science and logic could explain spontaneous moods impressions and feelings mysterious unknown and h alf seen things.
in areas in which science could neither prove nor disprove concepts the romantics believed that people were justified in having faith.
they preferred the stirrings of the heart over the calculations of the head nonconformity over traditional behavior and the mystical over the rational.
americans embraced the romantics emphasis on individualism and the virtues of common people.
transcendentalism the most intense american advocates of romantic ideals were the transcendentalists of new england the first group of rebellious intellectuals committed to reshaping the nations cultural life.
the word transcendentalism came from an emphasis on thoughts and behaviors that transcend or rise above the limits of reason and logic.
to transcendentalists the inner life of the spirit took priority over science.
transcendentalism said one of its champions meant an interest in areas a little beyond the scope of reason.
transcendentalism at times seemed irrational rejecting both religious orthodoxy and the corpse cold rationalism of unitarianism.
transcendentalists believed that reality was not simply what you can touch and see it included the innate promptings of the mind and the spiritual world.
above all they believed in self reliance and embraced a pure form of personal spirituality intuitions of the soul uncorrupted by theological dogma.
the miracles described in the bible were much less important to transcendentalists than the evidence of an individuals own intuitive spirituality.
transcendentalists wanted individuals to look within themselves for spiritual insights.
ralph waldo emerson the movements leader stressed that romanticism in america 519 its aim was to purify ones own soul and live with full integrity becoming a model rather than a nagging goad to others transcendentalists also wanted to nurture a romantic spirituality in harmony with nature.
natural beauty they believed had the transcendent power to startle people into self awareness.
as henry david thoreau described his own n ature inspired spirituality i believe in the forest and in the meadow and in the night in which the corn grows all people transcendentalists believed had the capacity for s elf realization enabling them to tap the divine spark present in all of gods creations.
in short transcendentalists wanted everyone to summon the courage to think their own thoughts and develop their own beliefs.
s elf discovery was the essential step in fulfilling potential.
by the 1830s new england transcendentalism had become the most influential force in american culture.
ralph waldo emerson more than anyone else ralph waldo emerson embodied the transcendentalist gospel which rejected conventional religion in favor of individual spiritual growth and self culture to emerson s elf knowledge opened the doors to self improvement and self realization.
the indians vespers 1847 asher b durands painting of a native american saluting the sun captures the romantic ideals of personal spirituality and the uncorrupted natural world that swept america during the early nineteenth century.
520 chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 i have a dream august 28 1963 protesters in the massive march on washington make their way to the lincoln memorial where martin luther king jr delivered his n ow f amous speech.
he started awkwardly.
noticing his nervousness someone urged him to tell em about the dream martin as if suddenly inspired king set aside his prepared remarks and delivered an extraordinary improvised speech that resonated around the world.
he started slowly and picked up speed as if he were speaking at a revival giving poetic voice to the hopes of millions as he stressed the fierce urgency of now and the unstoppable power of meeting physical force with soul force king then shared his dream for america in spite of the difficulties and frustrations of the moment i still have a dream.
it is a dream deeply rooted in the american dream.
i have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal i have a dream that one day.
the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slaveowners will be able to sit together at the table of brotherhood.
as if at a massive church service many in the crowd began shouting amen as king summoned a flawed nation to justice so let freedom ring he shouted for when we allow freedom to ring from every town and every ham civil rights 1333 let from every state and every city we will be able to speed up the day when all gods children black men and white men jews and gentiles protestants and catholics will be able to join hands and sing in the words of the old negro spiritual free at last free at last thank god almighty we are free at last as king finished there was a startling hush then a deafening ovation.
the crowd spontaneously joined hands and began singing we shall overcome i have never been so proud to be a negro said baseball superstar jackie robinson.
i have never been so proud to be an american president kennedy who had tried to convince organizers to call off the march was watching on tv at the white house just a mile away.
as king spoke the president told an aide that hes damn good but kings dream remained just that a dream.
eighteen days later four klansmen in birmingham detonated a bomb in a black church killing four young girls.
the murders sparked a new wave of indignation across the country and the world.
the editors of the milwaukee sentinel stressed that the bombing should serve to goad the conscience.
the deaths.
in a sense are on the hands of each of us the warren court the civil rights movement depended as much on the courts as it did on the leadership of dr king and others and federal judges kept forcing states and localities to integrate schools and other public places.
under chief justice earl warren the u s supreme court also made landmark decisions in other areas of american life.
in 1962 the court ruled that a school prayer adopted by the new york state board of regents violated the constitutional prohibition against government supported religion.
in gideon v wainwright 1963 the court required that every felony defendant be provided a lawyer regardless of the defendants ability to pay.
in 1964 the court ruled in escobedo v illinois that a person accused of a crime must be allowed to consult a lawyer before being interrogated by police.
two years later in miranda v arizona 1966 the court issued a bitterly criticized ruling when it ordered that an accused person in police custody be informed of certain basic rights the right to remain silent the right to know that anything said to authorities can be used against the individual in court and the right to have a defense attorney present during interrogation since then these requirements have been known as miranda rights in addition the court established rules for police to follow in informing suspects of their legal rights before questioning could begin.
freedom summer during late 1963 and throughout 1964 the civil rights movement grew in scope visibility and power.
racism however 1334 chapter 12 religion romanticism and reform 1800 1860 in 1851 the t hirty two year old melville produced moby dick one of the worlds greatest novels.
in the story of captain ahabs obsessive quest for an accursed white whale that had devoured his leg melville explored the darker recesses of the soul.
on one level the book is a ripping good yarn of adventure on the high seas.
on another level however it explores the unfathomable depths and darkness of human complexity as the vengeful ahabs crazed obsession with finding and killing the massive white whale turns the captain into a monster of destruction who sacrifices his ship the pequod and his crew.
walt whitman the most controversial writer during the nineteenth century was walt whitman a new york journalist and poet.
the swaggering whitman was a self promoting robust personality.
after meeting whitman thoreau wrote that he was not only eager to talk about himself but reluctant to have the conversation stray from the subject for long unlike thoreau whitman did not fear the age of steam and wrote excitedly about industrial development urban life working men sailors and simple humanity born in 1819 on a long island farm whitman moved with his family to brooklyn where he worked as a carpenter teacher democratic party activist and editor of the brooklyn eagle.
he frequently took the ferry across the east river to bustling manhattan where he was fascinated by the citys restless energy.
by the time he met ralph waldo emerson whitman had been simmering simmering but emerson brought him to a boil with his emphasis on defying tradition and celebrating the commonplaces of life including sexuality and the body.
all of these themes found their way into whitmans controversial first book of unconvenwalt whitman this engraving of a tional free verse poems leaves of thirty seven year old walt whitman grass 1855.
in its first year it sold appeared in his acclaimed poetry all of ten copies.
one reviewer called collection leaves of grass.
it an intensely vulgar nay absolutely romanticism in america 527 beastly book leaves of grass however became more influential with each passing year.
the brash whitman introduced his book by declaring that i celebrate myself and sing myself he was unapologetically an american one of the roughs.
disorderly fleshy and sensual.
eating drinking and breeding like emerson he was a self proclaimed pioneer on behalf of a new mightier world a varied world a bustling world of labor dignified by common people his poems were remarkable for their energy exuberance and intimacy and were seasoned with frank sexuality and homoerotic overtones.
they expressed the color and texture of american democracy immense in passion pulse and power thoreau for one viewed whitman as a liberating force in american culture and described him as the greatest democrat the world has seen although leaves of grass was banned in boston because of its explicit sexuality emerson found it the most extraordinary piece of wit and wisdom that america has yet contributed more conventional literary critics however shuddered at the shocking grossness of whitmans homosexual references manly love the love of comrades for the friend i love lay sleeping by my side.
yet whitman could never be truly honest about such matters for homosexuality was a felony in the nineteenth century.
in the colonial period at least five men had been executed for sodomy and many states retained the death penalty in the nineteenth century as the most severe punishment for crimes against nature thomas jefferson had unsuccessfully urged that castration be substituted as the punishment in virginia.
newspapers the flowering of american literature coincided with a massive expansion in newspaper readership sparked by rapid improvements in printing technology.
the emerging availability of newspapers costing only a penny transformed daily reading into a form of popular entertainment.
the penny dailies explained one editor politics in an oyster house 1848 commissioned by social activist john h b latrobe this painting captures the public debates that were fueled by newspapers and magazines.
528 chapter 24 the reactionary twenties c ommitted suicide.
membership tumbled and klan organizations splintered or shut down altogether.
several states passed anti klan laws and others banned the wearing of masks and burning of crosses.
by 1930 nationwide membership had dwindled to 100 000 mostly southerners.
yet the impulse underlying the klan lived on fed by deep seated fears and hatreds that have yet to disappear.
fundamentalism while fighting growing immorality and the alien menace the klan also defended old time religion against dangerous ideas circulating in progressive or liberal protestant churches.
the most threatening ideas were that the bible was not literally the word of god and that charles darwins theories of biological evolution were true.
conservative protestants embraced a militant fundamentalism distinctive for its hostility toward new liberal beliefs and its insistence on the literal truth of the bible.
the result was a religious civil war often called the m odernist fundamentalist conflict.
it divided congregations and whole denominations.
a burst of protestant fundamentalism swept the country largely as a reaction to the spread of modernism in mainline protestantism which sought to accommodate christian teaching with modern science.
in a famous 1922 sermon titled shall the fundamentalists win harry emerson fosdick the progressive pastor at new york citys first presbyterian church dismissed biblical fundamentalism as immeasurable folly the bible he explained was not literally the word of god but instead was a representation of gods wonders.
christianity had nothing to fear from darwinian evolution or modern science he argued for liberal christianity saves us from the necessity of apologizing for immature states in the development of the biblical revelation fosdicks liberalism he was an outspoken critic of racism and social injustice outraged fundamentalists who launched an effort to try him for heresy.
fosdick decided to resign instead.
among national leaders however only the great commoner william jennings bryan the former democratic congressman secretary of state and three time presidential candidate had the support prestige and eloquence to transform fundamentalism into a popular crusade.
bryan was a strange bird a liberal progressive and pacifist populist in politics and a right wing religious crusader.
he remained a firm believer in the literal truth of the bible.
bryan backed new state laws banning the teaching of evolution in public schools.
he condemned darwins theory of evolution which suggested that human beings over millions of years had evolved from monkeys and apes reactionary conservatism and immigration restriction 1069 with the same passion he had once directed against republican presidential candidates.
the scopes trial during the 1920s anti evolution bills were introduced in numerous state legislatures but the only victories came in the s outh and there were few of those.
miriam ma ferguson the first woman governor of texas her husband pa ferguson had earlier been impeached as governor outlawed school textbooks that included sections on darwinism.
i am a christian mother who believes that jesus christ died to save humanity she declared and i am not going to let that kind of rot go into texas schoolbooks the dramatic highpoint of the fundamentalist war on darwinism came not in texas but in tennessee where in 1925 the legislature outlawed the teaching of evolution in public schools and colleges.
in the mining town of dayton in eastern tennessee civic leaders eager to create publicity for their depressed economy persuaded john t scopes a t wenty four year old substitute high school science teacher to become a test case against the new law.
he was arrested for teaching darwins theory of evolution.
the scopes trial did indeed bring worldwide publicity to dayton but not the kind town leaders had hoped for.
before the start of the twelve day trial on july 10 1925 the sweltering streets of dayton overflowed with evangelists atheists hot dog and soda pop peddlers and some 200 newspaper and radio reporters.
main street merchants festooned their shop windows with pictures of apes and monkeys lampooning darwinian evolution.
one store urged visitors dont monkey around when you come to dayton come to us a man tattooed with bible verses preached on a street corner while a live monkey was paraded about town.
the two warriors pitting science against fundamentalism were both national celebrities bryan who had offered his services to the prosecution and chicagoan clarence darrow the nations most famous defense attorney a tireless defender of the rights of the working class who had volunteered to defend scopes and evolution.
bryan insisted that the trial was about a states right to determine what was taught in the public schools.
it was a contest between evolution and christianity a duel to the death darrow who viewed the law as a blood sport countered scopes is not on trial.
civilization is on trial his goal was to prevent bigots and ignoramuses from controlling the education of the united states by proving that america was founded on liberty and not on narrow mean intolerable and brainless prejudice of soulless religio maniacs on july 20 the seventh day of the trial the defense called bryan as an expert witness on biblical interpretation.
darrow began by asking him about 1070 chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 thereafter johnson told congress that we have talked long enough in this country about equal rights.
it is time now to write the next chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 war on poverty in 1964 president johnson visited tom fletcher a father of eight children living in a tar paper shack in rural kentucky.
fletcher became a poster father for the war on poverty though as it turned out his life benefited little from its programs.
asserted must be encouraged to get as much education as he has the ability to take the momentum generated by the higher education and medicare acts helped carry 435 more great society bills through congress.
among them was the appalachian regional development act of 1966 which allocated 1 billion for programs in impoverished mountain areas.
the housing and urban development act of 1965 provided 3 billion for urban renewal projects in inner city ghettoes.
funds to help low income families pay their rent followed in 1966 and the same year a new department of housing and urban development appeared headed by robert c weaver the first african american cabinet member.
in implementing the many different great society programs lyndon johnson had in the words of one washington reporter brought to harvest a generations backlog of ideas and social legislation no president reported time magazine was more passionately earnestly and all encompassingly dedicated to and consumed by his work the immigration act little noticed in the stream of great society legislation was the immigration and nationality services act of 1965 the great society 1347 which johnson signed in a ceremony on liberty island in new york harbor.
it abolished the discriminatory annual quotas based upon an immigrants national origin and treated all nationalities and races equally.
the old system greatly favored immigrants from great britain and the countries of western and northern europe over those from southern and eastern europe asia and africa.
in place of quotas it created hemispheric ceilings on visas issued 170 000 for persons from outside the western hemisphere 120 000 for persons from within.
it also stipulated that no more than 20 000 people could come from any one country each year.
voting rights legislation building upon the successes of freedom summer martin luther king jr organized an effort in early 1965 to register the 3 million unregistered african american voters in the south.
on february 6 the white house announced that it would urge congress to enact a voting rights bill.
to keep the pressure on the president and congress activists converged on selma alabama where only 250 of the 15 000 blacks of voting age were registered voters.
king told his staff on february 10 that to get the voting rights bill passed we need to make a dramatic statement.
that drama occurred three weeks later.
on sunday march 7 some 600 black and white civil rights protesters assembled near the edmund pettus bridge to begin a fi fty four mile march to the state capitol in montgomery.
before reaching the bridge however the marchers were assaulted by 500 state troopers and local police using billy clubs tear gas and bullwhips.
in what came to be called bloody sunday the violence was televised for all to see.
fifty injured marchers were hospitalized.
the news from selma reported the washington post will shock and alarm the whole nation it did.
dr king torn between congressional appeals to call off the march and the demands of militants that it continue announced that a second march would be held.
a federal judge agreed to allow the marchers to continue once president johnson agreed to provide soldiers and federal marshals for their protection.
by march 25 when the demonstrators reached montgomery some 25 000 people were with them and king delivered a rousing address in which he said the battle is in our hands.
and we can answer with creative nonviolence the call to higher ground to which the new directions of our struggle summons us several days earlier on march 15 johnson had urged congress to overcome the crippling legacy of bigotry and injustice by making the cause of civil rights our cause too he concluded by slowly speaking the words of the movements hymn and we shall overcome 1348 chapter 24 the reactionary twenties the economy made the transition from war to peace.
the brief postwar depression so weakened the unions that in 1921 business groups in chicago designated the open shop to be the american plan of employment.
unlike the closed shop which forced businesses to hire only union members the open shop gave an employer the right to hire anyone.
a labor organizer identified another reason for the weakness of unions in the new era the ford car has done an awful lot of harm to the unions.
as long as men have enough money to buy a s econd hand ford and tires and gasoline theyll be out on the road and paying no attention to union meetings employers often required workers to sign yellow dog contracts which forced them to agree not to join a union.
owners also used labor spies blacklists and intimidation to block unions.
some employers such as henry ford tried to kill the unions with kindness by introducing programs of industrial democracy guided by company sponsored unions or various schemes of welfare capitalism such as profit sharing bonuses pensions health programs and recreational activities.
the result was that union membership dropped from about 5 million in 1920 to 3 5 million in 1929 as industrial production soared and joblessness fell to 3 percent.
but the a nti union effort led by businesses that wanted to keep wages low and unions weak helped to create a purchasing power crisis whereby the working poor were not earning enough income to buy the abundance of goods being churned out by ever m ore productive industries.
productivity increased by 43 percent in the roaring twenties but wages barely rose.
in fact large groups of hourly workers such as miners and textile mill hands saw their income drop.
executives used company profits to pay dividends to stockholders invest in new equipment and increase their own salaries while doing little to help wage earners.
in 1929 an estimated 5 percent of the nations workforce executives received one third of the nations income.
in other words the m uch trumpeted new economy was not benefiting enough working class americans to be sustainable.
the gap between income levels and purchasing power would be a major cause of the great depression as the republican formula of high tariffs low wages low taxes little regulation and anti unionism would eventually implode.
isolationism in foreign affairs in addition to the senates rejection of american membership in the league of nations the postwar spirit of isolation found other expressions.
george jean nathan a drama critic expressed the sentiments of many americans when he announced that the great problems of the world social political economic a republican resurgence 1081 and theological do not concern me in the slightest.
what concerns me alone is myself and the interests of a few close friends yet the desire to stay out of foreign wars did not mean that the united states could ignore its expanding global interests.
as a result of the great war the united states had become the worlds chief banker and american investments and loans enabled foreigners to purchase u s exports.
war debts and reparations probably nothing did more to heighten americas isolationism from foreign affairs and anti american feelings among e uropeans than the complex issue of paying off huge war debts during the 1920s.
in 1917 when france and great britain ran out of money to pay for military supplies during the first world war the u s government had advanced them massive loans first for the war effort and then for postwar reconstruction projects.
most americans including andrew w mellon expected the w ar related debts to be paid back but europeans had a different perception.
the european allies had held off the german army at great cost while the united states was raising an army in 1917 the british also noted that after the american revolution the newly independent united states had repudiated old debts to british investors the french likewise pointed out that they had never been repaid for helping the americans win the revolution and gain their independence.
but the most difficult challenges in the 1920s were the practical problems of repayment.
to get u s dollars to use to pay their w ar related debts european nations had to sell their goods to the united states.
however soaring american tariff rates during the 1920s made imported european goods more expensive and the war related debts incurred by britain and france harder to pay.
the french and the british insisted that they could repay their debts to the united states only if they could collect the 33 billion in reparations owed them by defeated germany.
that was an unrealistic assumption because the german economy was in a shambles during the 1920s ravaged by runaway inflation.
twice during the 1920s the financial strain on germany brought the structure of international payments to the verge of collapse and both times the international reparations commission called in private american bankers to work out rescue plans.
loans provided by u s banks thus propped up the german economy so that germany could pay its reparations to britain and france thereby enabling them to pay their debts to the united states.
attempts at disarmament after the great war many americans decided that the best way to keep the peace was to limit the size of armies and navies.
the united states had no intention of maintaining a large army 1082 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation convinced the new congress to propose the first ten constitutional amendments now known as the bill of rights.
after attending a parade celebrating the ratification of the constitution dr benjamin rush a philadelphia physician noted with satisfaction that it is done.
we have become a nation other celebrants shared the hope that the new frame of government would last.
our constitution is in actual operation benjamin franklin wrote to a friend in 1789.
everything appears to promise that it will last but in this world nothing is certain but death and taxes george washington was even more uncertain about the future predicting that the constitution would not last for more than twenty years the constitution has lasted much longer of course and in the process its adaptability has provided a model of resilient republican government.
the constitution was by no means perfect after all it has been amended twenty seven times it was a bundle of messy compromises and concessions that left many issues the most important of which was slavery undecided or ignored.
few of the constitutions supporters liked it in its entirety but most believed that it was the best frame of government obtainable and that it would continue to evolve and improve over time.
the constitution confirmed that the united states would be the first democratic republic in history.
the founders believed that they were creating a unique political system based on a new science of politics combining the best aspects of democracies and republics.
in a democracy the people rule sixth pillar an engraving published in 1788 in the massachusetts centinel after massachusetts became the sixth state to ratify the constitution.
by the end of 1788 five more states would approve and the new constitution would soon go into effect.
the last two states to ratify were north carolina in 1789 and rhode island in 1790 the federalist era 269 ratification of the constitution order of r atification state date of ratification delaware december 7 1787 pennsylvania december 12 1787 new jersey december 18 1787 georgia january 2 1788 connecticut january 9 1788 massachusetts february 6 1788 maryland april 28 1788 south carolina may 23 1788 new hampshire june 21 1788 virginia june 25 1788 new york july 26 1788 north carolina november 21 1789 rhode island may 29 1790 in a republic the officials elected by the people rule.
at the constitutional convention the delegates combined aspects of both approaches so that they balanced and regulated each other and ensured that personal freedoms and the public welfare were both protected in the process.
the federalist era the constitution was ratified because it promised to create a more powerful national government better capable of managing a rapidly growing republic.
yet it was one thing to ratify a new constitution and quite another to make the new government run smoothly.
with each passing year the united states witnessed growing debate over how to interpret and apply the provisions of the new constitution.
during the 1790s a decade called the age of passion the federal government would confront rebellions states threatening to secede international tensions and foreign wars as well as something left unmentioned in the constitution the formation of fiercely competing political parties federalists and democratic republicans more commonly known as jeffersonian republicans or simply as republicans.
the two political parties came to represent very different visions for america.
the democratic republicans were mostly southerners like virginians thomas jefferson and james madison who wanted the country to remain a 270 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation any other american he grasped both the complex issues of government finance and envisioned what america would become the worlds most prosperous capitalist nation.
hamilton was a self made and self educated aristocrat.
born out of wedlock in the west indies in 1755 he was deserted by his scottish father and left an orphan at thirteen by the death of his mother.
with the help of friends and relatives he found his way at age fifteen to new jersey in late 1772 before moving a year later to new york city.
there he entered kings college now columbia university.
when the war with britain erupted hamilton joined the continental army as a captain at the ripe age of nineteen.
after he distinguished himself in the battles of trenton and princeton hamilton became one of general washingtons favorite aides.
after the war hamilton established a thriving legal practice in new york city a fellow lawyer said he surpassed all of us in his abilities married into a prominent family and served as a member of the confederation congress.
during the revolutionary war hamilton had witnessed the near fatal weaknesses of the confederation congress.
its lack of authority and money almost lost the war.
now as treasury secretary he believed that the federal government should encourage the hustling bustling creative spirit that distinguished americans from other peoples.
hamilton became the foremost advocate for an energetic government promoting capitalist development.
in contrast to jefferson the southern planter hamilton the urban capitalist believed that the united states was too dependent on agriculture for its economic well being.
he championed trade banking finance investment alexander hamilton the powerful and manufacturing as well as bustling secretary of the treasury from 1789 to commercial cities as the most essential 1795 elements of americas future.
hamiltons vision of a c apitalist america 275 hamiltons economic reforms the united states was born in debt.
to fight the war for independence it had borrowed heavily from the dutch and the french.
now after the war it had to find a way to pay off the debts.
yet there was no national bank no national currency and very few mills and factories.
in essence the american republic was bankrupt.
it fell to alexander hamilton to determine how the debts should be repaid and how the new national government could balance its budget.
governments have four basic ways to pay their bills impose taxes or fees on individuals and businesses levy tariffs taxes on imported goods borrow money by selling interest paying government bonds to investors and last but not least print money.
under hamiltons leadership the united states did all of these things and more.
to raise funds the new congress with hamiltons support enacted tariffs of 5 to 10 percent on the value of a wide variety of imported items.
tariffs were hotly debated for two reasons 1 they were the source of most of the federal governments annual revenue and 2 tariffs also protected american manufacturers by taxing their foreign competitors especially those in britain.
by discriminating against imported goods tariffs enabled american manufacturers to charge higher prices for their products sold in the united states.
this penalized consumers particularly those in the southern states that were most dependent upon imported goods.
in essence tariffs benefited the nations young manufacturing sector most of which was in new england at the expense of the agricultural sector since farm produce was rarely imported.
tariff policy soon became an explosive political issue.
dealing with debts the levying of tariffs marked but one major element in alexander hamiltons ambitious plan to put the new republic on a sound financial footing.
in a series of brilliant reports submitted to congress between january 1790 and december 1791 hamilton outlined his visionary program for the economic development of the united states.
the first of two reports on public credit dealt with how the new federal government should refinance the massive debt that the states and the confederation government had accumulated during the war for independence.
hamilton insisted that the debts be repaid.
after all he explained a capitalist economy depends upon its integrity and reliability debts being paid contracts being enforced and private property being protected.
by selling government bonds to pay the interest due on the huge war related debts hamilton argued the u s government would also give investors 276.

chapter 12 for a discussion of these movements.
jackson and the politics of democracy what political conflicts did president andrew jackson face and how did he resolve them.
the public figure who came to symbolize the triumph of democracy was andrew jackson who came out a loser in the presidential election of 1824 his victory four years later his actions as president and the great political party that formed around him refashioned national politics in a more democratic mold.
no wonder historians have called the spirit of the age jacksonian democracy.
the election of 1824 and j q adamss administration as monroes second term ended the ruling republican party was in disarray and could not agree on who should succeed to the presidency.
the partys congressional caucus chose william crawford of georgia an old line jeffersonian.
but a majority of congressmen showed their disapproval of this outmoded method of nominating candidates by refusing to attend the caucus.
monroe himself favored john quincy adams of massachusetts.
this gave the new england statesman an important boost but did not discourage others from entering the contest.
supporters of henry clay and john c calhoun mounted campaigns for their favorites and a group of local leaders in his home state of tennessee tossed jacksons hat into the ring.
initially jackson was not given much of a chance.
unlike other aspirants he had not played a conspicuous role in national politics his sole claim to fame was as a military hero and not even his original supporters believed this would be sufficient to catapult him into the white house.
but after testing the waters calhoun withdrew and chose instead to run for vice president.
then crawford suffered a debilitating stroke that weakened his chances.
with one southerner out of the race and another disabled jackson began to pick up support in slaveholding states.
he also found favor among those in the north and west who were disenchanted with the economic nationalism of clay and adams.
in the election jackson won a plurality of the electoral votes but he lacked the necessary majority.
the contest was thrown into the house of representatives where the legislators were to choose from among the three top candidates.
adams emerged victorious over jackson and crawford.
clay who had just missed making the final three provided the winning margin by persuading his supporters to vote for adams.
when adams proceeded to appoint clay as his secretary of state the jacksonians charged that a corrupt bargain had deprived their favorite of the presidency.
although there was no evidence that clay had bartered votes for the promise of a high office the charge was widely believed.
as a result adams assumed office under a cloud of suspicion.
adams had a difficult and frustrating presidency.
adams sought to encourage industrial development improvements in transportation and centralized credit.
among the reforms he urged on congress were federal bankruptcy legislation debt reduction road construction geographical and astronomical exploration and the creation of a new national university and naval academy.
however the political winds were blowing against nationalistic programs partly because the country was just recovering from a depression that many thought chapter 1 new world encounters clash of cultures interpreting murder in early maryland new world conquest sparked unexpected often embarrassing contests over the alleged superiority of european culture.
not surprisingly the colonizers insisted they brought the benefits of civilization to the primitive and savage peoples of north america.
native americans never shared this perspective voicing a strong preference for their own values and institutions.
in early seventeenth century maryland the struggle over cultural superiority turned dramatically on how best to punish the crime of murder an issue about which both native americans and europeans had firm opinions.
the actual events that occurred at captain william claibornes trading post in 1635 may never be known.
surviving records indicate that several young males identified as wicomess indians apparently traveled to claibornes on business but to their great annoyance they found the proprietor entertaining susquehannock indians their most hated enemies.
the situation deteriorated rapidly after the susquehannock men ridiculed the wicomess youths whereat some of claibornes people that saw it did laugh unwilling to endure public humiliation the wicomess later ambushed the susquehannock group killing five and then returned to the trading post where they murdered three englishmen.
wicomess leaders realized immediately that something had to be done.
they dispatched a trusted messenger to inform the governor of maryland that they intended to offer satisfaction for the harm.
done to the english the murder of the susquehannock was another matter best addressed by the native americans themselves.
the governor praised the wicomess for coming forward announcing that i expect that those men who have done this outrage should be delivered unto me to do with them as i shall think fit the wicomess spokesman was dumbfounded.
the governor surely did not understand basic native american legal procedure.
it is the manner amongst europeans imagined a new world that often bore little relation to reality.
this early engraving depicts the coast of north america as a dangerous place where hostile indians bizarre navigational hazards and sea monsters greeted english sailors.
us indians that if any such like accident happens he explained we do redeem the life of a man that is so slain with a 100 arms length of roanoke which is a sort of beads that they make and use for money.
the governors demand for prisoners seemed doubly impertinent since you english settlers are here strangers and coming into our country you should rather conform your selves to the customs of our country than impose yours upon us at this point the governor hastily ended the conversation perhaps uncomfortably aware that if the legal tables had been turned and the murders committed in england he would be the one loudly defending the customs of our country uropeans sailing in the wake of admiral christopher columbus constructed a narrative of superiority that survived long after the wicomess had been dispersed a fate that befell them in the late seventeenth century.
the story recounted first in europe and then in the united states depicted e chapter 1 new world encounters persuasive rhetoric was often their only effective source of power.
it required considerable oratorical skills for an indian leader to persuade independent minded warriors to support a certain policy.
before the arrival of the white settlers indian wars were seldom very lethal.
young warriors attacked neighboring bands largely to exact revenge for a previous insult or the death of a relative or to secure captives.
fatalities when they did occur sparked cycles of revenge.
some captives were tortured to death others were adopted into the community as replacements for fallen relatives.
a world transformed how did europeans and native americans interact during the period of first contact.
bring astonishment.
think then what must be the effect on me and mine the sight of you and your people whom we have at no time seen.
things so altogether new as to strike awe and terror to our hearts what indians desired most was peaceful trade.
the earliest french explorers reported that natives waved from shore urging the europeans to exchange metal items for beaver skins.
in fact the indians did not perceive themselves at a disadvantage in these dealings.
they could readily see the technological advantage of guns over bows and arrows.
metal knives made daily tasks much easier.
and to acquire such goods they gave up pelts which to them seemed in abundant supply.
the english have no sense one indian informed a french priest.
they give us twenty knives like this for one beaver skin another native announced that the beaver does everything perfectly well it makes kettles hatchets swords knives bread.
in short it makes everything the man who recorded these observations reminded french readers in case they had missed the point that the indian was making sport of us europeans trading sessions along the eastern frontier were really cultural seminars.
the europeans tried to make sense out of indian customs and although they may have called the natives savages they quickly discovered that the indians drove hard bargains.
they demanded gifts they set the time and place of trade.
the arrival of large numbers of white men and women on the north american continent profoundly altered native american cultures.
change did not occur at the same rates in all places.
indian villages located on the atlantic coast came under severe pressure almost immediately inland groups had more time to adjust.
wherever they lived however indians discovered that conquest strained traditional ways of life and as daily patterns of experience changed almost beyond recognition native peoples had to devise new answers view the closer look new responses and new ways to survive in physical and social environments that eroded tradition.
historian james merrell reminded us that the indians found themselves living in a world that from their perspective was just as new as that which greeted the european invaders.
an early european image of native americans cultural negotiations native americans were not passive victims of geopolitical forces beyond their control.
so long as they remained healthy they held their own in the early exchanges and although they eagerly accepted certain trade goods they generally resisted other aspects of european cultures.
the earliest recorded contacts between indians and explorers suggest curiosity and surprise rather than hostility.
a southeastern indian who encountered hernando de soto in 1540 expressed awe at least that is what a spanish witness recorded the things that seldom happen europeans first learned of native americans from the sailors who followed columbus.
images such as this one from 1505 show the indians as lustful scantily clad cannibals.
the fact that the male subjects in this image have beards common on european men at the time but virtually unknown among native americans confirms that the artist had never actually laid eyes on the people he meant to portray.
a world transformed the indians used the occasions to study the newcomers.
they formed opinions about the europeans some flattering some less so but they never concluded from their observations that indian culture was inferior to that of the colonizers.
they regarded the beards worn by european men as particularly revolting.
as an eighteenth century englishman said of the iroquois they seem always to have looked upon themselves as far superior to the rest of mankind and accordingly call themselves ongwehoenwe i e men surpassing all other men for europeans communicating with the indians was always an ordeal.
the invaders reported having gained deep insight into native american cultures through sign languages.
how much accurate information explorers and traders took from these crude improvised exchanges is a matter of conjecture.
in a letter written in 1493 columbus expressed frustration i did not understand those people nor they me except for what common sense dictated although they were saddened and i much more so because i wanted to have good information concerning everything in the absence of meaningful conversation europeans often concluded that the indians held them in high regard perhaps seeing the newcomers as gods.
such one sided encounters involved a good deal of projection a mental process of translating alien sounds and gestures into messages that europeans wanted to hear.
sometimes the adventurers did not even try to communicate assuming from superficial observation as did the sixteenthcentury explorer giovanni da verrazzano that they have no religion and that they live in absolute freedom and that everything they do proceeds from ignorance ethnocentric europeans tried repeatedly to civilize the indians.
in practice that meant persuading natives to dress like the colonists attend white schools live in permanent structures and most important accept christianity.
the indians listened more or less patiently but in the end they usually rejected european values.
one south carolina trader explained that when indians were asked to become more english they said no for they thought it hard that we should desire them to change their manners and customs since they did not desire us to turn indians to be sure some indians were strongly attracted to christianity but most paid it lip service or found it irrelevant to their needs.
as one huron told a french priest it would be useless for me to repent having sinned seeing that i never have sinned another huron announced that he did not fear punishment after death since we cannot tell whether everything that appears faulty to men is so in the eyes of god among some indian groups gender figured significantly in a persons willingness to convert to christianity.
native men who traded animal skins for european goods had more frequent contact with the whites and they proved more receptive to the arguments of missionaries.
but native women jealously guarded traditional culture a system that often sanctioned polygamy a husband having several wives and gave women substantial authority over the distribution of food within the village.
french jesuits seemed especially eager to undermine the independence of native american women.
among other demands missionaries insisted on monogamous marriages an institution based on christian values but that made little sense in indian societies where constant warfare against the europeans killed off large numbers of young males and increasingly left native women without sufficient marriage partners.
the white settlers educational system proved no more successful than their religion was in winning cultural converts.
young indian scholars deserted stuff y classrooms at the first chance.
in 1744 virginia offered several iroquois boys a free education at the college of william and mary.
the iroquois leaders rejected the invitation because they found that boys who had gone to college were absolutely good for nothing being neither acquainted with the true methods of killing deer catching beaver or surprising an enemy even matrimony seldom eroded the indians attachment to their own customs.
when native americans and whites married unions the english found less desirable than did the french or spanish the european partner usually elected to live among the indians.
impatient settlers who regarded the indians simply as an obstruction to progress sometimes developed more coercive methods such as enslavement to achieve cultural conversion.
again from the white perspective the results were disappointing.
indian slaves ran away or died.
in either case they did not become europeans.
threats to survival trade and disease over time cooperative encounters between the native americans and europeans became less frequent.
the europeans found it almost impossible to understand the indians relation to the land and other natural resources.
english planters cleared the forests and fenced the fields and in the process radically altered the ecological systems on which the indians depended.
the european system of land use inevitably reduced the supply of deer and other animals essential to traditional native cultures.
dependency also came in more subtle forms.
the indians welcomed european commerce but like so many consumers throughout recorded history they discovered that the objects they most coveted inevitably brought them into debt.
to pay for the trade goods the indians hunted more aggressively and even further reduced the population of fur bearing mammals.
commerce eroded indian independence in other ways.
after several disastrous wars the yamasee war in south carolina 1715 for example the natives learned that demonstrations of force usually resulted in the suspension of normal trade on which the indians had grown quite dependent for guns and ammunition among other things.
a hardened english businessman made the point quite bluntly.
when asked if the catawba indians would harm his traders he responded that the danger would be.
little from them because they are too fond of our trade to lose it for the pleasure of shedding a little english blood it was disease however that ultimately destroyed the cultural integrity of many north american tribes.
european adventurers exposed the indians to bacteria and viruses against which they possessed no natural immunity.
smallpox measles and influenza decimated the native american population.
other diseases such as alcoholism took a terrible toll.
chapt er 1 new world encounters view the map asia native american population loss 1500 1700 arctic ocean greenland on r beufort sea.
ma r baffin island arctic great slave l subarctic pe at ha ba sc ar.
e r ac l athabasca co t chewan r skat.
sa south plateau l winnipeg ssouri r mi lba arka nsas r san juan taos santa fe gila r s zo ra os southeast southwest san pedro de lagunas charles town san mateo st augustine r de r ran og ri el paso del norte r ed b r pe c miss is r sipp i s o rad ri lo co t ke la great basin plains ou miss nia califor sn ake r.
ny r qubec sault trois rivires ste.
marie ft pentagoet montreal ft la pointe portsmouth ft orange boston ft good hope plymouth northeast providence new haven ft crvecoeur.
r new amsterdam ft casimir ft christina r io r atlantic st marys oh jamestown ocean roanoke edenton grea pacific ocean labrador sea hudson bay nor th.
lum bia r vancouver i rd lia victoria island great bear l ckenzie r s est coa northw gulf of alaska baffin bay a yu k san miguel gulf of mexico del aguayo arctic and subarctic northwest coast california southwest great basin plateau plains northeast southeast represents 4 people per 100 km caribbean sea extent of european settlement 1700 major trading centers and settlements population loss to 1700 areas of minimal population loss more than 40 800 miles more than 50 800 kilometers more than 60 0 south america native american population loss 1500 1700 this interactive map demonstrates the pervasive native american population loss in north america during the first two hundred years of their contact with europeans.
the map further illustrates that the highest percentage of native american population loss occurred in north american regions initially under spanish rule.
within a generation of initial contact with europeans the carib indians who gave the caribbean its name were virtually extinct.
the decimation of native american peoples was an aspect of ecological transformation known as the columbian exchange.
european conquerors exposed the indians to several new fatal diseases the indians introduced the invaders to marvelous plants such as corn and potatoes which altered the course of european history.
see the feature essay the columbian exchange and the global environment ecological revolution pp.
the algonquian communities of new england experienced appalling rates of death.
one massachusetts colonist reported in 1630 that the indian peoples of his region above twelve years since were swept away by a great grievous plague.
so that there are verie few left to inhabite the country settlers possessed no knowledge of germ theory it was not formulated until the midnineteenth century and speculated that a christian god had providentially cleared the wilderness of heathens.
historical demographers now estimate that some tribes suffered a 90 to 95 percent population loss within the first century west africa ancient and complex societies of european contact.
the population of the arawak indians of santo domingo for example dropped from about 3 770 000 in 1496 to only 125 in 1570 the death of so many indians decreased the supply of indigenous laborers who were needed by the europeans to work the mines and to grow staple crops such as sugar and tobacco.
the decimation of native populations may have persuaded colonists throughout the new world to seek a substitute labor force in africa.
indeed the enslavement of blacks has been described as an effort by europeans to repopulate the new world.
indians who survived the epidemics often found that the fabric of traditional culture had come unraveled.
the enormity of the death toll and the agony that accompanied it called traditional religious beliefs and practices into question.
the survivors lost not only members of their families but also elders who might have told them how properly to bury the dead and give spiritual comfort to the living.
some native peoples such as the iroquois who lived a long way from the coast and thus had more time to adjust to the challenge withstood the crisis better than did those who immediately confronted the europeans and africans.
refugee indians from the hardest hit eastern communities were absorbed into healthier western groups.
however horrific the crisis may have been it demonstrated powerfully just how much the environment a source of opportunity as well as devastation shaped human encounters throughout the new world.
sophisticated trade networks that linked the villagers of senegambia with urban centers in northwest africa morocco tunisia and cyrenaica.
great camel caravans regularly crossed the sahara carrying trade goods that were exchanged for gold and slaves.
sub saharan africas well developed links with islam surprised a french priest who in 1686 observed african pilgrims going to visit mecca to visit mahomets tomb although they are eleven or twelve hundred leagues distance from it west africans spoke many languages and organized themselves into diverse political systems.
several populous states sometimes termed empires exercised loose control over large areas.
ancient african empires such as ghana were vulnerable to external attack as well as internal rebellion and the oral and written histories of this region record the rise and fall of several large kingdoms.
when european traders first arrived the list of west africa ancient and complex societies what was the character of the west african societies that european traders first encountered.
during the era of the european slave trade roughly from the late fifteenth through the mid nineteenth centuries a number of enduring myths about sub saharan west africa were propagated.
even today commentators claim that the people who inhabited this region four hundred years ago were isolated from the rest of the world and had a simple self sufficient economy.
indeed some scholars still depict the vast region stretching from the senegal river south to modern angola as a single cultural unit as if at one time all the men and women living there must have shared a common set of african political religious and social values.
sub saharan west africa defies such easy generalizations.
the first portuguese who explored the african coast during the fifteenth century encountered a great variety of political and religious cultures.
many hundreds of years earlier africans living in this region had come into contact with islam the religion founded by the prophet muhammad during the seventh century.
islam spread slowly from arabia into west africa.
not until ad 1030 did a kingdom located in the senegal valley accept the muslim religion.
many other west africans such as those in ancient ghana resisted islam and continued to observe traditional religions.
as muslim traders from north africa and the middle east brought a new religion to parts of west africa they expanded artists in west africa depicted the european traders who arrived in search of gold and slaves.
this sixteenth century benin bronze relief sculpture shows two portuguese men.
complete the assignment the columbian exchange and the global environment ecological revolution on myhistorylab feature essay m odern americans often speak of the degradation of the global environment in apocalyptic terms as if the current generation confronts a unique challenge in world history.
no doubt many chemical compounds produced during the twentieth century have proved far more toxic than their inventors ever imagined.
but contemporary concerns about the future of the planet should not cause us to lose sight of the historical sweep of these problems.
we are certainly not the first society to experience a massive ecological transformation caused by the inevitable intervention of human beings into the processes of nature.
recapturing an earlier moment of environmental history known as the columbian exchange reminds us that the moral dimensions of change are often a matter of perspective.
what one group proclaims as providential progress may strike others as utter disaster.
the first major ecological revolution occurred as a direct result of new world exploration during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
the earliest explorers had expected america to be an extension of europe a place inhabited by familiar plants and animals.
they were surprised.
the exotic flora of the new world sketched from sixteenth century drawings included the food staple maize and the succulent pineapple.
equally strange to european eyes were buffalo rattle snakes catfish and the peculiar absence of horses and cattle.
no domestic animal was common to both sides of the atlantic except the dog.
and perhaps the most striking difference was between the columbian exchange and the global environment ecological revolution the people themselves.
both native americans and europeans found each other to be the most exotic people they had ever encountered.
the most immediate biological consequence of contact between the people of europe africa and the new world was the transfer of disease.
within a year of columbuss return from the caribbean a new and more virulent strain of syphilis appeared in europe and became identified as the american disease.
by 1505 syphilis had spread all the way to china.
the effect of old world diseases in the americas was catastrophic.
native americans had little natural immunity to common african and european diseases because america remained biologically isolated after the reimmersion of the bering land bridge.
when they were exposed to influenza typhus measles and especially smallpox they died by the millions.
indeed european exploration of america set off the worst demographic disaster in world history.
within fifty years of the first contact epidemics had virtually exterminated the native population of hispaniola and devastated the densely populated valley of mexico.
also unsettling but by no means as destructive was the transfer of plants and animals from the old world to the new.
spanish colonizers carried sugar and bananas across the atlantic and in time these crops transformed the economies of latin america.
even more spectacular was the success of european animals in america.
during the sixteenth century pigs sheep and cattle arrived as passengers on european ships and in the fertile new world environment they multiplied more rapidly than they had in europe.
some animals survived shipwrecks.
on sable island a small desolate island off the coast of nova scotia one can still see the small longhaired cattle the successors of the earliest cattle transported to america.
other animals escaped from the ranches of new spain generating new breeds such as the fabled texas longhorn.
no european animal more profoundly affected native american life than the horse.
once common in north america the horse mysteriously disappeared from the continent sometime during the last ice age.
the early spanish explorers reintroduced the horse to north america and the sight of this large powerful animal at first terrified the indians.
mounted conquistadores discovered that if they could not frighten indian foes into submission they could simply outmaneuver them on horseback.
the native americans of the southwest quickly adapted the horse to their own use.
sedentary farmers acquired new hunting skills and soon the indians were riding across the great plains in pursuit of buffalo.
the comanche apache sioux and blackfoot tribes just to name a few became dependent on the horse.
mounted indian warriors galloped into battle unaware that it was their white adversaries who had brought the horse to america.
equally dramatic was the effect of american crops on european and african societies.
from his first trip to the new world columbus brought back a plant that revolutionized the diets of both humans and animals maize.
during the next century american beans squash and sweet potatoes appeared on european tables.
the pepper and tomato other new world discoveries added a distinctive view the closer look columbian exchange flavor to mediterranean cooking.
despite strong prohibitions on the use of tobacco in russia a user might have his nose amputated european demand for tobacco grew astronomically during the seventeenth century.
the potato caught on more slowly in europe because of a widespread fear that root crops caused disease.
the most rapid acceptance of the white potato came in ireland where it became a diet staple in the 1600s.
irish immigrants unaware of the genealogy of this native american crop reintroduced the potato into massachusetts bay in 1718 and in west africa corn gradually replaced traditional animal feeds of low yield.
these sweeping changes in agriculture and diet helped reshape the old world economies.
partly because of the rich new sources of nutrition from america the population of europe which had long been relatively stable nearly doubled in the eighteenth century.
even as cities swelled and industries flourished european farmers were able to feed the growing population.
in many ways the seeds and plants of the new world were far more valuable in western economic development than all the silver of mexico and peru.
questions for discussion 1 how did the transfer of diseases plants and animals affect the peoples of europe and the americas.
2 why did the reintroduction of the horse transform the native american societies of the southwest and the great plains.
3 how did american crops affect the old world.
chapt er 1 new world encounters ca were generally settled by clan elders.
the senior leaders allocated economic view the map african slave trade 1500 1870 and human resources.
they determined who received land and who might take a wife critical decisions because within the europe villages of west africa women and chilfrance dren cultivated the fields.
the communities were economically self sufficient.
not black sea only were they able to grow enough food spain to feed themselves but they also produced portugal trade goods such as iron kola and gum.
the first europeans to reach the tunisia me d algiers iterran ean sea west african coast by sail were the tri morocco po portuguese.
strong winds and currents li along the atlantic coast moved southcyrenaica s a h ara desert ward which meant a ship could sail with the wind from portugal to west africa without difficulty.
the problem was returning.
advances in maritime mali technology allowed the portuguese to ghana overcome these difficulties.
by conjoloff senegambian structing a new type of ship one unitstates ing european hull design with lateen senegal africa valley slave coast triangular sails from the middle east gold coast benin portuguese caravels were able to navigate biafra y c oast successfully against african winds and r o iv currents.
during the fi fteenth century equator portuguese sailors discovered that by sailing far to the west often as far as the indian azores they could on their return trips kongo ocean at l a n t i c to europe catch a reliable westerly wind.
ocean columbus was evidently familiar with angola the technique.
before attempting to cross the atlantic ocean he sailed to the gold coast and on the way he undoubtedly studied the wind patterns that would 1000 miles carry his famed caravels to the new 1000 kilometers world and back again.
the portuguese journeyed to africa portuguese french in search of gold and slaves.
mali and dutch british joloff officials were willing partners in this major overland commerce but insisted that europeans trade routes respect trade regulations established by africans.
they required the europeans trade routes in africa african trade routes were well established by the late 1600s.
to pay tolls and other fees and restricted trade restrictions and a deadly disease environment confined european settlements primarily to the foreign traders to conducting their coastal regions.
business in small forts or castles located at the mouths of the major rivers.
local merchants acquired some slaves and gold in the interior and major states would have included mali benin and kongo.
many transported them to the coast where they were exchanged for other africans lived in what are known as stateless societies really european manufactures.
transactions were calculated in terms of largely autonomous communities organized around lineage struclocal african currencies a slave would be offered to a european tures.
in these respects african and native american cultures had trader for so many bars of iron or ounces of gold.
much in common.
european slave traders accepted these terms largely because whatever the form of government men and women they had no other choice.
the african states fielded formidable constructed their primary social identity within well defined linarmies and outsiders soon discovered they could not impose eage groups which consisted of persons claiming descent from a their will on the region simply by demonstrations of force.
common ancestor.
disputes among members of lineage groups a spi n se a europe on the eve of conquest moreover local diseases proved so lethal for europeans six out of ten of whom would die within a single years stay in africa that they were happy to avoid dangerous trips to the interior.
the slaves were usually men and women taken captive during wars others were victims of judicial practices designed specifically to supply the growing american market.
by 1650 most west african slaves were destined for the new world rather than the middle east.
even before europeans colonized the new world the portuguese were purchasing almost a thousand slaves a year on the west african coast.
the slaves were frequently forced to work on the sugar plantations of madeira portuguese and the canaries spanish atlantic islands on which europeans experimented with forms of unfree labor that would later be more fully and more ruthlessly established in the american colonies.
it is currently estimated that approximately 10 7 million africans were taken to the new world as slaves.
the figure for the eighteenth century alone is about 5 5 million of which more than one third came from west central africa.
the bight of benin the bight of biafra and the gold coast supplied most of the others.
the peopling of the new world is usually seen as a story of european migrations.
but in fact during every year between 1650 and 1831 more africans than europeans came to the americas.
as historian davis eltis wrote in terms of immigration alone.
america was an extension of africa rather than europe until late in the nineteenth century europe on the eve of conquest how do you explain spains central role in new world exploration and colonization.
in ancient times the west possessed a mythical appeal to people living along the shores of the mediterranean sea.
classical writers speculated about the fate of atlantis a fabled western civilization that was said to have sunk beneath the ocean.
fallen greek heroes allegedly spent eternity in an uncharted western paradise.
but because the ships of greece and rome were ill designed to sail the open ocean the lands to the west remained the stuff of legend and fantasy.
in the fifth century an intrepid irish monk st brendan reported finding enchanted islands far out in the atlantic.
he even claimed to have met a talking whale named jasconius who allowed the famished voyager to cook a meal on his back.
in the tenth century scandinavian seafarers known as norsemen or vikings actually established settlements in the new world but almost a thousand years passed before they received credit for their accomplishment.
in the year 984 a band of vikings led by eric the red sailed west from iceland to a large island in the north atlantic.
eric who possessed a fine sense of public relations named the island greenland reasoning that others would more willingly colonize the icebound region if the country had a good name a few years later erics son leif founded a small settlement he named vinland at a location in northern newfoundland now called l anse aux meadows.
at the time the norse voyages went unnoticed by other europeans.
the hostility of native americans poor lines of communication climatic cooling and political upheavals in scandinavia made maintenance of these distant outposts impossible.
at the time of his first voyage in 1492 columbus seemed to have been unaware of these earlier exploits.
building new nation states at the time of the viking settlement other europeans were unprepared to sponsor transatlantic exploration.
nor would they be in a position to do so for several more centuries.
medieval kingdoms were loosely organized and until the early fifteenth century fierce provincial loyalties widespread ignorance of classical learning and dreadful plagues such as the black death discouraged people from thinking expansively about the world beyond their own immediate communities.
in the fifteenth century however these conditions began to change.
europe became more prosperous political authority was more centralized and the renaissance fostered a more expansive outlook among literate people in the arts and sciences.
the renaissance encouraged first in italy and later throughout europe bold new creative thinking that challenged the orthodoxies of the middle ages.
a major element in the shift was the slow but steady growth of population after 1450 historians are uncertain about the cause of the increase after all neither the quality of medicine nor sanitation improved much but the result was a substantial rise in the price of land since there were more mouths to feed.
landlords profited from these trends and as their income expanded they demanded more of the luxury items such as spices silks and jewels that came from distant asian ports.
economic prosperity created powerful new incentives for exploration and trade.
this period also witnessed the centralization of political authority under a group of rulers whom historians refer to collectively as the new monarchs.
before the mid fifteenth century feudal nobles dominated small districts throughout europe.
conceding only nominal allegiance to larger territorial leaders the local barons taxed the peasants and waged war pretty much as they pleased.
they also dispensed what passed for justice.
the new monarchs challenged the nobles autonomy.
the changes that accompanied the challenges came slowly and in many areas violently but the results altered traditional political relationships between the nobility and the crown and between the citizen and the state.
the new monarchs of europe recruited armies and supported these expensive organizations with revenues from national taxes.
they created effective national courts.
while these monarchs were often despotic they personified the emergent nation states of europe and brought a measure of peace to local communities weary of chronic feudal war.
the story was the same throughout most of western europe.
the tudors of england represented by henry vii r 1485 1509 ended a long civil war known as the war of the roses.
louis xi the french monarch r 1461 1483 strengthened royal authority by reorganizing state finances.
the political unification of spain began in 1469 with the marriage of ferdinand of aragon and isabella of castile setting off a nation building process that involved driving both the jews and muslims out chapt er 1 new world encounters of spain.
these strong willed monarchs forged nations out of groups of independent kingdoms.
if political centralization had not occurred the major european countries could not possibly have generated the financial and military resources necessary for worldwide exploration.
a final prerequisite to exploration was reliable technical knowledge.
ptolemy second century ad and other ancient geographers had mapped the known world and had even demonstrated that the world was round.
during the middle ages however europeans lost effective contact with classical tradition.
within arab societies the old learning had survived indeed flourished and when europeans eventually rediscovered the classical texts during the renaissance they drew heavily on the work of arab scholars.
this new learning generated great intellectual curiosity about the globe and about the world that existed beyond the mediterranean.
the invention of printing from movable type by johann gutenberg in the 1440s greatly facilitated the spread of technical knowledge.
indeed printing sparked a communications revolution whose impact on the lives of ordinary people was as far reaching as that caused by telephones television and computers in modern times.
sea captains published their findings as quickly as they could engage a printer and by the beginning of the sixteenth century a small though growing number of educated readers throughout europe were well informed about the exploration of the new world.
the printing press invited europeans to imagine exciting opportunities that they had hardly perceived when the vikings sailed the north atlantic.
imagining a new world how did spanish conquest of central and south america transform native american cultures.
by 1500 centralization of political authority and advances in geographic knowledge brought spain to the first rank as a world power.
in the early fifteenth century though spain consisted of several autonomous kingdoms.
it lacked rich natural resources and possessed few good seaports.
in fact there was little about this land to suggest its people would take the lead in conquering and colonizing the new world.
by the end of the century however spain suddenly came alive with creative energy.
the union of ferdinand and isabella sparked a drive for political consolidation that because of the monarchs fervid catholicism took on the characteristics of a religious crusade.
spurred by the militant faith of their monarchs the armies of castile and aragon waged holy war known as the reconquista against the independent states in southern spain that earlier had been captured by muslims.
in 1492 the moorish islamic kingdom of granada fell and for the first time in centuries the entire iberian peninsula was united under christian rulers.
spanish authorities showed no tolerance for people who rejected the catholic faith.
during the reconquista thousands of jews and moors were driven from the country.
indeed columbus undoubtedly encountered such refugees as he was preparing for his famous voyage.
from this volatile social and political environment came the conquistadores men eager for personal glory and material gain uncompromising in matters of religion and unswerving in their loyalty to the crown.
they were prepared to employ fire and sword in any cause sanctioned by god and king and these adventurers carried european culture to the most populous regions of the new world.
long before spaniards ever reached the west indies they conquered the indigenous peoples of the canary islands a strategically located archipelago in the eastern atlantic.
the harsh labor systems the spanish developed in the canaries served as models of subjugation in america.
indeed the spanish experience paralleled that of the english in ireland.
an early fifteenth century spanish chronicle described the canary natives as miscreants.
who do not acknowledge their creator and live in part like beasts many islanders quickly died of disease others were killed in battle or enslaved.
the new spanish landholders introduced sugar a laborintensive plantation crop.
the landowners forced slaves captured in africa to provide the labor.
this oppressive process was driven by dreams of great wealth and would be repeated many times by european colonists through the centuries.
myths and reality if it had not been for christopher columbus cristoforo colombo of course spain might never have gained an american empire.
little is known about his early life.
born in genoa in 1451 of humble parentage columbus soon devoured the classical learning that had so recently been rediscovered and made available in printed form.
he mastered geography and perhaps while sailing the coast of west africa he became obsessed with the idea of voyaging west across the atlantic ocean to reach cathay as china was then known.
in 1484 columbus presented his plan to the king of portugal.
however while the portuguese were just as interested as columbus in reaching cathay they elected to voyage around the continent of africa instead of following the route suggested by columbus.
they suspected that columbus had substantially underestimated the circumference of the earth and that for all his enthusiasm he would almost certainly starve before reaching asia.
the portuguese decision eventually paid off quite handsomely.
in 1498 one of their captains vasco da gama returned from the coast of india carrying a fortune in spices and other luxury goods.
undaunted by rejection columbus petitioned isabella and ferdinand for financial backing.
they were initially no more interested in his grand design than the portuguese had been.
but time was on columbuss side.
spains aggressive new monarchs envied the success of their neighbor portugal.
columbus boldly played on the rivalry between the countries talking of wealth and empire.
indeed for a person with little success or apparent support he was supremely confident.
one contemporary reported that when columbus made up his mind he was as sure he would discover what he did discover and find what he did find as if he held it in a chamber under lock and key columbuss stubborn lobbying on behalf of the enterprise of the indies gradually wore down opposition in the spanish court and the two sovereigns provided him with a small fleet that contained two of the most famous caravels ever constructed the nia and the pinta as well as the square rigged nao santa maria.
the imagining a new world watch the video how should we think of columbus.
cristoforo columbo better known to americans as christopher columbus was a fifteenth century sailor from genoa.
dreaming of reaching the rich markets of asia by sailing west from europe he instead stumbled upon the islands of the caribbean sea.
in so doing he ushered in a new age of sustained contact between the peoples of the americas and the peoples of europe africa and asia.
indomitable admiral set sail for cathay in august 1492 the year of spains unification.
educated europeans of the fifteenth century knew the world was round.
no one seriously believed that columbus and his crew would tumble off the edge of the earth.
the concern was with size not shape.
columbus estimated the distance to the mainland of asia to be about 3 000 nautical miles a voyage his small ships would have no difficulty completing.
the actual distance is 10 600 nautical miles however and had the new world not been in his way he and his crew would have run out of food and water long before they reached china as the portuguese had predicted.
after stopping in the canary islands to refit the ships columbus continued his westward voyage in early september.
when the tiny spanish fleet sighted an island in the bahamas after only thirtythree days at sea the admiral concluded he had reached asia.
since his mathematical calculations had obviously been correct he assumed he would soon encounter the chinese.
it never occurred to columbus that he had stumbled upon a new world.
he assured his men his patrons and perhaps himself that the islands were indeed part of the fabled indies or if not the indies themselves then they were surely an extension of the great asian landmass.
he searched for the splendid cities marco polo had described but instead of meeting wealthy chinese columbus encountered native americans whom he appropriately if mistakenly called indians after his first voyage of discovery columbus returned to the new world three more times.
but despite his considerable courage and ingenuity he could never find the treasure his financial supporters in spain angrily demanded.
columbus died in 1506 a frustrated but wealthy entrepreneur unaware that he had reached a previously unknown continent separating asia from europe.
the final disgrace came in 1500 with the publication of a sensationalist account of amerigo vespuccis travels across the atlantic that contained falsified dates to suggest that vespucci had visited the mainland prior to other explorers such as columbus and henry cabot.
chapt er 1 new world encounters this misleading account convinced german mapmakers that it was vespucci who had proved america to be a new continent distinct from asia.
before the misconception could be corrected the name america gained general acceptance throughout europe.
only two years after columbuss first voyage spain and portugal almost went to war over the anticipated treasure of asia.
pope alexander vi negotiated a settlement that pleased both kingdoms.
portugal wanted to exclude the spanish from the west coast of africa and what was more important from columbuss new route to india spain insisted on maintaining complete control over lands discovered by columbus which then still were regarded as extensions of china.
the treaty of tordesillas 1494 divided the entire world along a line located 270 leagues west of the azores.
any new lands discovered west of the line belonged to spain.
at the time no european had ever seen brazil which turned out to be on portugals side of the line.
to this day brazilians speak portuguese.
the treaty failed to discourage future english dutch and french adventurers from trying their luck in the new world.
society in the new world.
rather they came for instant wealth preferably in gold and were not squeamish about the means they used to obtain it.
bernal daz one of the first spaniards to migrate to the region explained he had traveled to america to serve god and his majesty to give light to those who were in darkness and to grow rich as all men desire to do in less than two decades the indians who had inhabited the caribbean islands had been exterminated victims of exploitation and disease.
for a quarter century the conquistadores concentrated their energies on the major islands that columbus had discovered.
rumors of fabulous wealth in mexico however aroused the interest of many spaniards including hernn corts a minor government functionary in cuba.
like so many members of his class he dreamed of glory military adventure and riches that would transform him from an ambitious court clerk into an honored hidalgo.
on november 18 1518 corts and a small army left cuba to verify the stories of mexicos treasure.
events soon demonstrated that corts was a leader of extraordinary ability.
his adversary was the legendary aztec emperor montezuma.
the confrontation between the two powerful personalities is one of the more dramatic of early american history.
a fear of competition from rival conquistadores coupled with a burning desire to conquer a vast new empire drove corts forward.
determined to push his men through any obstacle he scuttled the ships that had carried them to mexico in order to the conquistadores faith and greed line of demarcation treaty of tordesillas 1494 spains new discoveries unleashed a horde of conquistadores on the caribbean.
these independent adventurers carved out small settlements on cuba hispaniola jamaica and puerto rico in the 1490s and early 1500s.
they were not interested in creating a permanent north america gilbert cabot corts 1519 tenochtitln europe france asia columbus 1492 africa n 1521 south america s 14 ama da g 1498 pa c i f i c ocean pa c i f i c ocean equator dia hispaniola magella equator 15 maya empire pa c i f i c ocean corts lan 1 cuba portugal spain de soto 1539 1542 mag el s umbu col 492 england cartier 1535 verrazano 1524 coronado 1540 1542 vera cruz aztec empire frobisher la salle 1679 1682 pa c i f i c ocean gulf of mexico indian ocean ano del c 2 at l a n t i c ocean english french portuguese spanish voyages of european exploration the routes of the major voyagers to the new world and asia.
early explorers established land claims for the competing european states.
australia imagining a new world read the document bartolom de las casas of the island of hispaniola in matters of war corts possessed obvious technological superiority over the aztec troops.
the sound of gunfire initially frightened the indians.
moreover aztec troops had never seen horses much less armored horses carrying sword wielding spaniards.
but these elements would have counted for little had corts not also gained a psychological advantage over his opponents.
at first montezuma thought that the spaniards were gods representatives of the fearful plumed serpent quetzalcoatl.
instead of resisting immediately the emperor hesitated.
when montezumas resolve hardened it was too late.
cortss victory in mexico coupled with other conquests in south america transformed spain at least temporarily into the wealthiest state in europe.
from plunder to settlement the virgin of guadalupe is perhaps the best known religious symbol of mexico.
the image reflects the sixteenth century encounter between europeans and indians.
the virgin mary was already an important religious figure among the spanish when they arrived in america.
like the indian juan diego to whom she is said to have appeared and offered hope comfort and protection the virgin is dark skinned.
this 1531 representation shows her clothed in a robe adorned with stars and surrounded by a crown of sunrays.
each year hundreds of thousands of people visit the shrine of the virgin at tepeyac outside mexico city.
prevent them from retreating.
corts led his band of six hundred followers across rugged mountains and on the way gathered allies from among the tlaxcalans a tributary people eager to free themselves from aztec domination.
following the conquest of mexico renamed new spain the spanish crown confronted a difficult problem.
ambitious conquistadores interested chiefly in their own wealth and glory had to be brought under royal authority a task easier imagined than accomplished.
adventurers like corts were stubbornly independent quick to take offense and thousands of miles away from the seat of imperial government.
the crown found a partial solution in the encomienda system.
the monarch rewarded the leaders of the conquest with indian villages.
the people who lived in the settlements provided the encomenderos with labor tribute in exchange for legal protection and religious guidance.
the system of course cruelly exploited indian laborers.
one historian concluded the first encomenderos without known exception understood spanish authority as provision for unlimited personal opportunism corts alone was granted the services of more than twenty three thousand indian workers.
the encomienda system made the colonizers more dependent on the king for it was he who legitimized their title.
in the words of one scholar the new economic structure helped to transform a frontier of plunder into a frontier of settlement spains rulers attempted to maintain tight personal control over their american possessions.
the volume of correspondence between the two continents much of it concerning mundane matters was staggering.
all documents were duplicated several times by hand.
because the trip to madrid took many months a year often passed before receipt of an answer to a simple request.
but somehow the cumbersome system worked.
in mexico officials appointed in spain established a rigid hierarchical order directing the affairs of the countryside from urban centers.
the spanish also brought catholicism to the new world.
the dominicans and franciscans the two largest religious orders established indian missions throughout new spain.
some friars tried to protect the native americans from the worst forms of exploitation.
one courageous dominican fra bartolom de las casas published an eloquent defense of indian rights historia de las indias which among other things questioned the legitimacy of european conquest of the new world.
las casass work provoked heated debate in spain and while the crown had no intention of repudiating the vast american empire it did initiate certain reforms designed to bring greater love and moderation to spanish indian relations.
it is impossible to ascertain how many converts the friars made.
in 1531 however a newly converted chapt er 1 new world encounters christian reported a vision of the virgin a dark skinned woman of obvious indian ancestry who became known throughout the region as the virgin of guadalupe.
this figure the result of a creative blending of indian and european cultures served as a powerful symbol of mexican nationalism in the wars for independence fought against spain almost three centuries later.
about two hundred fifty thousand spaniards migrated to the new world during the sixteenth century.
another two hundred thousand made the journey between 1600 and 1650 most colonists were single males in their late twenties seeking economic opportunities.
they generally came from the poorest agricultural regions of southern spain almost 40 percent migrating from andalusia.
since so few spanish women migrated especially in the sixteenth century the men often married indians and blacks unions which produced mestizos and mulattos.
the frequency of interracial marriage indicated that among other things the people of new spain were more tolerant of racial differences than were the english who settled in north america.
for the people of new spain social standing was affected as much or more by economic worth as it was by color.
persons born in the new world even those of spanish parentage criollos were regarded as socially inferior to natives of the mother country peninsulares.
spain claimed far more of the new world than it could possibly manage.
spains rulers regarded the american colonies primarily as a source of precious metal and between 1500 and 1650 an estimated 200 tons of gold and 16 000 tons of silver were shipped back to the spanish treasury in madrid.
this great wealth however proved a mixed blessing.
the sudden acquisition of so much money stimulated a horrendous infl ation that hurt ordinary spaniards.
they were hurt further by long debilitating european wars funded by american gold and silver.
moreover instead of developing its own industry spain became dependent on the annual shipment of bullion from america and in 1603 one insightful spaniard declared the new world conquered by you has conquered you in its turn this somewhat weakened although still formidable empire would eventually extend its territorial claims north to california and the southwest see chapter 10 the triumph of white mens democracy our union it must be preserved to which calhoun responded the union.
next to liberty the most dear.
may we always remember that it can only be preserved by distributing equally the benefits and the burdens of the union in 1830 and 1831 the movement against the tariff gained strength in south carolina.
calhoun openly took the lead elaborating further on his view that states had the right to set aside federal laws.
in 1832 congress passed a new tariff that lowered the rates slightly but retained the principle of protection.
supporters of nullification argued that the new law simply demonstrated that no genuine relief could be expected from washington.
they then succeeded in persuading the south carolina state legislature to call a special convention.
when the convention met in november 1832 the members voted overwhelmingly to nullify the tariffs of 1828 and 1832 and to forbid the collection of customs duties within the state.
jackson reacted with characteristic decisiveness.
he alerted the secretary of war to prepare for possible military action issued a proclamation denouncing nullification as treasonous and asked congress to vote him the authority to use the army to enforce the tariff.
at the same time he sought to pacify the nullifiers somewhat by recommending a lower tariff.
congress responded by enacting the force bill which gave the president the military powers he sought and the compromise tariff of 1833 the latter was primarily the work of jacksons political enemy henry clay but the president signed it anyway.
faced with jacksons clear intention to use force if necessary and somewhat appeased by the prospect of a lower tariff south carolina suspended view the closer look indian removal unorganized territory ohio indiana illinois virginia missouri kentucky springfield cherokee nashville north carolina creek seminole chickasaw fort coffee tennessee arkansas territory new echota chickasaw choctaw alabama ch choct ta choctaw south carolina cherokee 1835 1838 creek georgia vicksburg mexico mississippi atlantic ocean mobile louisiana florida territory new orleans gulf of mexico ceded lands and dates of cessions routes of indian removal indian reservations cherokees trail of tears 200 miles boundaries of 1830 200 kilometers indian removal because so many native americans uprooted from their lands in the east died on the forced march to oklahoma the route they followed became known as the trail of tears.
treaty signed in 1835 by a minority faction was met with defiance from the majority but removal was forced in 1838 seminole the bank war and the second party system the nullification ordinance in late january 1833 and formally rescinded it in march after the new read the document south carolinas ordinance of nullification tariff had been enacted.
to demonstrate that they had not conceded their constitutional position the convention delegates concluded their deliberations by nullifying the force bill.
the nullification crisis revealed that south carolinians would not tolerate any federal action that seemed contrary to their interests or raised doubts about the institution of slavery.
the nullifiers philosophy implied the right of secession as well as the right to declare laws of congress null and void.
a fear of northern meddling with slavery was the main spur to the growth of a militant doctrine of state sovereignty in the south.
at the time of the nullification crisis the other slave states had not yet developed such strong anxieties about the future of the peculiar institution and had not embraced south carolinas radical conception of state sovereignty.
jackson was himself a southerner and a slaveholder a man who detested abolitionists.
in general he was a proslavery president later he would use his executive power to stop antislavery literature from being carried by the u s mail.
some farsighted southern loyalists however were alarmed by the unionist doctrines that jackson propounded in his proclamation vice president john c calhoun emerged as a champion of states rights during the nullification against nullification.
more strongly than any crisis when cartoons such as this example depicted the emaciated south burdened by tariffs while previous president he had asserted that the the north grew fat at the southerners expense.
federal government was supreme over the states and that the union was indivisible.
he had further justified the use of force against states that denied federal authority.
for the subsequent depression.
but after nicholas biddle took over the banks presidency in 1823 the institution regained public confidence.
biddle was an able manager who probably understood the the bank war and the second mysteries of banking and currency better than any other american party system of his generation.
a philadelphia gentleman of broad culture extensive education and some political experience he was also arrogant what were the arguments for and against the bank and vain.
he was inclined to rely too much on his own judgment of the united states.
and refused to admit his mistakes.
but his record prior to the conjacksons most important and controversial use of executive power frontation with jackson was a good one.
in 1825 and again in 1828 was his successful attack on the bank of the united states.
the bank he acted decisively to curb an overextension of credit by state banks war revealed some of the deepest concerns of jackson and his supand helped avert a recurrence of the boom and bust cycle.
porters and dramatically expressed their concept of democracy.
it the actual performance of the bank was not the only target also aroused intense opposition to the president and his policies an of criticism about it.
old line jeffersonians had always opposed it opposition that crystallized in a new national party the whigs.
the on principle both because they viewed its establishment as uncondestruction of the bank and the economic disruption that followed stitutional and because it placed too much power in the hands of brought to the forefront the issue of the governments relationship a small privileged group.
the bank was a chartered monopoly to the nations financial system.
differences on this question helped an essentially private corporation that performed public services to sustain and strengthen the new two party system.
in return for exclusive economic rights.
because of its great influence the bank tended to be blamed for any economic problems.
for those who had misgivings about the rise of the national marmr.
biddles bank ket the bank epitomized the forces threatening the independence the bank of the united states had long been embroiled in puband prosperity of small producers.
in an era of rising white mens lic controversy.
its role in precipitating the panic of 1819 by first democracy an obvious and telling objection to the bank was simply extending credit freely and then suddenly calling in its loans had that it possessed great power and privilege without being under led many especially in the south and the west to blame the bank popular control.
chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire read the document homestead act of 1862 between 1862 and 1890 the government gave away 48 million acres under the homestead act of 1862 a law of great significance it gave 160 acres of land to anyone who would pay 10 registration fee and pledge to live on the land cultivating it for five years.
sam had promised to give to the head of each family who settled in this new country a popular camp song reflected the same motive come along come along dont be alarmed uncle sam is rich enough to give us all a farm.
uncle sam owned about one billion acres of land in the 1860s much of it mountain and desert land unsuited for agriculture.
by 1900 the various land laws had distributed half of it.
between 1862 and 1890 the government gave away 48 million acres under the homestead act of 1862 sold about 100 million acres to private citizens and corporations granted 128 million acres to railroad companies to tempt them to build across the unsettled west and sold huge tracts to the states.
the homestead act of 1862 a law of great significance gave 160 acres of land to anyone who would pay a 10 registration fee and pledge to live on it and cultivate it for five years.
the offer set off a mass migration of land hungry europeans dazzled by a country that gave its land away.
americans also seized on the acts provisions and between 1862 and 1900 nearly 600 000 families claimed free homesteads under it.
yet the homestead act did not work as congress had hoped.
few farmers and laborers had the cash to move to the frontier buy farm equipment and wait out the year or two before the farm became self supporting.
tailored to the timber and water conditions of the east the act did not work as well in the semiarid west.
in the fertile valleys of the mississippi 160 acres provided a generous farm.
a farmer on the great plains needed either a larger farm for dry farming or a smaller one for irrigation.
the timber culture act of 1873 attempted to adjust the homestead act to western conditions.
it allowed homesteaders to claim an additional 160 acres if they planted trees on a quarter of it within four years.
a moderately successful act it distributed 10 million acres of land encouraged needed forestation and enabled homesteaders to expand their farms to a workable size.
cattle ranchers lobbied for another law the desert land act of 1877 which allowed individuals to obtain 640 acres in the arid states for 1 25 an acre provided they irrigated part of it within three years.
the act invited fraud.
more than 2 6 million acres of land were distributed much of it fraudulently.
the timber and stone act of 1878 applied only to lands unfit for cultivation and valuable chiefly for timber or stone.
it permitted anyone in california nevada oregon and washington to buy up to 160 acres of forest land for 2 50 an acre.
like ranchers lumber companies used employees to file false claims.
by 1900 3 6 million acres of rich forest land had been claimed under the measure.
speculators made ingenious use of the land laws.
sending agents in advance of settlement they moved along choice river bottoms or irrigable areas accumulating large holdings to be held for high prices.
in the arid west where control of water meant control of the surrounding land shrewd ranchers plotted their holdings accordingly.
in colorado one cattleman john f iliff owned only 105 small parcels of land but by placing them around the few water holes he effectively dominated an empire stretching over 6 000 square miles.
water in fact became a dominant western issue since aside from the pacific northwest northern california parts of the rocky mountain west and the eastern half of the great plains much of the trans mississippi west was arid receiving less than twenty inches of rainfall annually.
people speculated in water as if it were gold and planned great irrigation systems in utah eastern colorado and californias central valley to make the desert bloom a sign in modesto california read water wealth contentment health irrigators received a major boost in 1902 when the national reclamation act newlands act set aside most of the proceeds from the sale of public lands in sixteen western states to finance irrigation projects in the arid states.
over the next decades dams canals and irrigation systems channeled water into dry areas creating a hydraulic society that was rich in crops and cities such as los angeles and phoenix but ever thirstier and in danger of outrunning the precious water on which it all depended.
as beneficiaries of the governments policy of land grants for railway construction the railroad companies were the wests largest landowners.
eager to have immigrants settle on the land they owned near the railroad right of way and eager to boost their freight and passenger business the companies sent agents to the east and europe.
attractive brochures touted life in the west.
railroad lines set up land departments and bureaus of immigration.
the land departments priced the land arranged credit terms and even gave free farming courses to immigrants.
the bureaus of immigration employed agents in europe met immigrants at eastern seaports and ran special cars for land seekers heading west.
half a billion acres of western land were given or sold to speculators and corporations.
at the same time only 600 000 homestead patents were issued covering 80 million acres.
thus only one acre in every nine initially went to individual pioneers the intended beneficiaries of the nations largesse.
two thirds of all homestead claimants before 1890 failed in their efforts to farm their new land.
territorial government as new areas of the west opened they were organized as territories under the control of congress and the president.
the territorial system started with the famous northwest ordinance of 1787 which the bonanza west established the rules by which territories became states.
washington ran the territories like a passive group of colonial mandates the president appointed the governor and judges in each territory congress detailed their duties set their budgets and oversaw their activities.
territorial officials had almost absolute power over the territories.
until they obtained statehood then the territories depended on the federal government for their existence.
the national political parties especially the republicans funneled government funds into the territorial economies and in areas such as wyoming and the dakotas where resources were scarce economic growth depended on this money.
many early settlers held patronage jobs or hoped for them traded with governmentsupported native americans sold supplies to army troops and speculated in government lands.
in a large portion of the trans mississippi west a generation grew up under territorial rule.
inevitably these citizens developed distinct ideas about politics government and the economy.
the spanish speaking southwest in the nineteenth century almost all spanish speaking people in the united states lived in california arizona new mexico texas and colorado.
their numbers were small california had only 8 086 mexican residents in 1900 but the influence of their culture and institutions was large.
in some respects the southwestern frontier was more spanish american than anglo american.
pushing northward from mexico the spanish gradually established the present day economic structure of the southwest.
they brought with them techniques of mining stock raising and irrigated farming.
after winning independence in the 1820s the mexicans brought new laws and ranching methods as well as chaps and the burro.
both spanish and mexicans created the legal framework for distributing land and water a precious resource in the southwest.
they gave large grants of land to communities for grazing to individuals as rewards for service and to the various native american pueblos.
in southern california the californios descendants of the original colonizers began after the 1860s to lose their once vast landholdings to drought and mortgages.
some turned to crime and became feared bandidos others such as jos mara amador lived in poverty and remembered better days when i was but a little boy i drained the chocolate pot but now i am a poor man and am condemned to slop.
in 1875 romualdo pacheco an aristocratic native son served as governor of california and then went on to congress.
but as the californios died out mexican americans continued the spanish mexican influence.
in 1880 one fourth of the residents of los angeles county were spanish speaking.
in new mexico spanish speaking citizens remained the majority ethnic group until the 1940s and the spanish mexican culture dominated the territory.
contests over land grants became new mexicos largest industry lawyers who dealt in them amassed huge holdings.
after 1888 las gorras blancas the white caps a secret organization of spanish americans attacked the movement of anglo ranchers into the las vegas community land grant.
armed and hooded they cut down fences and scattered the stock of those they viewed as intruders.
throughout the southwest the spanish mexican heritage gave a distinctive shape to society.
men headed the families and dominated economic life.
women had substantial economic rights though few political ones and they enjoyed a status their english american counterparts did not have.
wives kept full control of property acquired before their marriage they also held half title to all property in a marriage which later caused many southwestern states to pass community property laws.
in addition the spanish mexican heritage fostered a modified economic caste system a strong roman catholic influence and the primary use of the spanish language.
continuous immigration from mexico kept language and cultural ties strong.
spanish names and customs spread even among anglos.
david starr jordan arriving from indiana to become the first president of stanford university in california bestowed spanish names on streets houses and a stanford dormitory.
spanish was the regions first or second language.
confronted by sheriff pat garrett in a darkened room new mexicos famous outlaw billy the kid died asking quin es.
quin es who is it.
the bonanza west why was the west a bonanza of dreams and getrich quick schemes.
between 1850 and 1900 wave after wave of newcomers swept across the trans mississippi west.
there were riches for the taking hidden in gold washed streams spread lushly over grass covered prairies or available in the gullible minds of greedy newcomers.
the nineteenthcentury west took shape in the search for mining cattle and land bonanzas that drew eager settlers from the east and around the world.
as with all bonanzas the consequences in the west were uneven growth boom and bust economic cycles and wasted resources.
society seemed constantly in the making.
people moved here and there following river bottoms gold strikes railroad tracks and other opportunities.
instant cities arose.
san francisco salt lake city and denver were the most spectacular examples but every cow town and mining camp witnessed similar phenomena of growth.
boston needed more than two centuries to attract one third of a million people san francisco did the same in a little more than twenty years.
many westerners had left home to get rich quickly and they adopted institutions that reflected that goal.
the west was an idea as well as a region and the idea molded them as much as they molded it.
the mining bonanza mining was the first important magnet to attract people to the west.
many hoped to strike it rich in gold and silver but at least half the newcomers had no intention of working in the mines.
instead they provided food clothing and services to the thousands of miners.
leland stanford and collis p huntington who later built the central pacific railroad set up a general store in sacramento where they sold shovels and supplies.
stephen j field later a prominent justice of the u s supreme court followed the gold rush to california to practice law.
chapter 25 transition to modern america on myhistorylab time line 1919 u s agents arrest 1 700 in red scare raids eighteenth amendment prohibition ratified nineteenth amendment passed granting women the right to vote fordney mccumber tariff becomes law t s eliot publishes the waste land newspapers expose ku klux klan graft torture and murder senate probes teapot dome scandal national origins quota act restricts immigration from europe and bans immigration from asia 1925 john scopes convicted of teaching theory of evolution in violation of tennessee law july charles lindbergh completes first nonstop transatlantic flight from new york to paris may sacco and vanzetti executed august babe ruth hits 60th home run september 1928 hoover defeats smith for president chapter review the second industrial revolution the rural counterattack what was new about the american economy in the 1920s.
how did conservatives resist the changes of the decade.
the american economy in the 1920s underwent a second industrial revolution.
powered by electricity and featuring the mass production of automobiles and other consumer goods the second industrial revolution lifted the american standard of living to new heights.
p 589 the changes of the 1920s alarmed many conservatives who tried to resist them.
the police and courts cracked down on radicals prohibition outlawed liquor the ku klux klan attacked immigrants and minorities congress restricted immigration and fundamentalist christians decried the changing code of morality and the teaching of evolution in the schools.
p 598 city life in the jazz age politics in the 1920s how did life in the cities change after world war i.
during the 1920s the focus of american life shifted to the cities which for the first time contained most of the american population.
women found new opportunities to express themselves and sports music literature and the arts flourished as never before.
p 592 how did the politics of the 1920s reflect changes in the economy and in american society.
the 1920s were a decade of republican politics.
presidents harding coolidge and hoover favored business and the wealthy.
in the election of 1928 voters had a clear choice between hoover the candidate of the countryside and conservatism and al smith the candidate of the cities and change hoover won in a landslide.
p 603 key terms and definitions harlem renaissance an african american cultural literary and artistic movement centered in harlem in new york city in the 1920s.
harlem the largest black community in the world outside of africa was considered the cultural capital of african americans.
p 595 prohibition the ban on the manufacture sale and transportation of alcoholic beverages in the united states.
the eighteenth amendment adopted in 1919 established prohibition.
it was repealed by the twentyfirst amendment in 1933 p 600 red scare a wave of anticommunist antiforeign and antilabor hysteria that swept over america in 1919 it resulted in the deportation of many alien residents and violated the civil liberties of many of its victims.
p 599 nativism hostility to things foreign.
p 602 national origins quota act this 1924 law established a quota system that restricted immigration from asia and southern and eastern europe and reduced the annual total of immigrants.
p 603 study resources scopes trial also called the monkey trial the 1924 scopes trial was a contest between modern liberalism and religious fundamentalism.
john t scopes was prosecuted for teaching darwinian evolution in defiance of tennessee state law.
he was found guilty and fined 100.
scopess conviction was later set aside on a technicality.
p 603 teapot dome scandal a 1924 scandal in which secretary of the interior albert fall was convicted of accepting bribes in exchange for leasing government owned oil lands in wyoming teapot dome and california elks hill to private businessmen.
p 603 critical thinking questions 1 how did the automobile increase the independence of young people during the 1920s.
3 what did the red scare and the desire for immigration reform have in common.
2 why did the new opportunities for women upset conservatives.
4 how did the presidential election of 1928 reflect the anxieties of the postwar era.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter review beyond the frontier what were the challenges of settling the country west of the mississippi.
west of the mississippi river settlers encountered new conditions including vast treeless plains and towering mountain ranges.
above all they left behind the water and timber on which they had depended in the east forcing them to devise new ways to deal with the different challenges.
p 391 settlement of the west why did americans and others move to the west.
americans moved west for many reasons including a desire to get rich seek religious freedom and improve health.
the federal government helped out with generous land laws and laws favoring irrigation in the arid west.
in the southwest a proud culture took shape around spanish laws and customs involving water the rights of women and the sale ownership and use of land.
p 400 crushing the native americans the bonanza west how did white americans crush the culture of the native americans as they moved west.
native americans had a complex culture suited to the various environments in which they lived.
the united states government and white settlers employed various methods political military legal and cultural to oust the indians from their lands civilize them and contain and control them.
p 392 why was the west a bonanza of dreams and get rich quick schemes.
the west attracted many people seeking a better economic life.
many failed but others found bonanzas in mining cattle ranching and farming.
in many of these areas western development paralleled trends in the rest of the nation larger and larger businesses new uses for technology and the employment of outside capital.
p 403 key terms and definitions ghost dances a religious movement that arose in the late nineteenth century under the prophet wavoka a paiute indian.
its followers believed that dances and rites would cause white men to disappear and restore lands to the native americans.
the u s government outlawed the ghost dances and army intervention to stop them led to the wounded knee massacre.
p 396 wounded knee massacre in december 1890 troopers of the seventh cavalry under orders to stop the ghost dance religion among the sioux took chief big foot and his followers to a camp on wounded knee creek in south dakota.
it is uncertain who fired the first shot but two hundred native americans were killed.
p 396 dawes severalty act legislation passed by congress in 1887 that aimed to break up traditional indian life by promoting individual land ownership.
it divided tribal lands into small plots that were distributed among members of each tribe.
provisions were made for education and eventual citizenship.
the law led to corruption and exploitation and weakened tribal culture.
p 397 gold rush of 1849 prospectors made the first gold strikes along the sierra nevada mountains in california in 1849 touching off a mining boom that set the pattern for subsequent strikes in other regions.
p 401 overland trail the route from the mississippi valley to the pacific coast in the last half of the nineteenth century.
p 401 homestead act of 1862 legislation granting 160 acres to anyone who paid a 10 fee and pledged to live on and cultivate the land for five years.
between 1862 and 1900 nearly 600 000 families claimed homesteads under its provisions.
p 402 national reclamation act newlands act passed in 1902 this legislation set aside most of the proceeds from the sale of public land in sixteen western states to fund irrigation projects.
p 402 placer mining mining that included using a shovel and washing pan to separate gold from the ore in streams and riverbeds.
placer miners worked as individuals or in small groups.
p 404 comstock lode discovered in 1859 near virginia city nevada this ore deposit was the richest discovery in the history of mining.
named after t p comstock the deposit produced silver and gold worth more than 306 million.
p 404 chinese exclusion act of 1882 legislation passed in 1882 that excluded chinese immigrants for ten years and denied u s citizenship to chinese nationals.
it was the first u s exclusionary law aimed at a specific racial group.
p 405 exodusters a group of about 6 000 african americans who left louisiana mississippi and texas in 1879 for freer lives as farmers or laborers in kansas.
p 406 dry farming a farming technique developed to allow farming in the more arid parts of the west where settlers had to deal with far less rainfall than they had east of the mississippi.
furrows were plowed approximately a foot deep and filled with a dust mulch to loosen soil and slow evaporation.
p 408 bonanza farms huge farms covering thousands of acres on the great plains.
in relying on large size and new machinery they represented a development in agriculture similar to that taking place in industry.
p 409 national grange of the patrons of husbandry founded by oliver h kelly in 1867 the grange sought to relieve the drabness of farm life by providing a social educational and cultural outlet for its members.
it also set up grain elevators cooperative stores warehouses insurance companies and farm machinery factories.
p 409 turners thesis put forth by historian frederick jackson turner in 1893 this thesis asserted that the existence of a frontier and its settlement had shaped american character given rise to individualism independence and self confidence and fostered the american spirit of invention and adaptation.
later historians modified the thesis by pointing out the environmental and other consequences of frontier settlement the federal governments role in peopling the west and the clash of races and cultures that took place on the frontier.
p 411 study resources critical thinking questions 1 what kinds of conditions did settlers find as they moved into lands west of the mississippi river and how had the peoples who already lived there dealt with these conditions.
2 what was the nature of indian culture on the plains and how did it deal with the hordes of settlers moving into the area.
3 by what methods did settlers move west and adjust to the bonanzas they found in the west and southwest.
4 what were the three bonanzas that drew settlers into the west and in what ways did they lead to the destruction of native american culture and shape the growth of the area.
myhistorylab y sto y ab media ed a assignments ss g e ts find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 11 slaves and masters the morning and skitted to the hog pen with a heavy mallet in his hand.
when he tapped mister hog tween the eyes with that mallet malitis set in mighty quick free blacks in the old south free blacks occupied an increasingly precarious position in the antebellum south.
white southerners fears of free blacks inciting slave revolts and their reaction to attacks by abolitionists led slaveholders after 1830 increasingly to defend slavery as a positive good rather than a necessary evil.
southerners articulated this defense of slavery in terms of race emphasizing a dual image of the black person under the domesticating influence of a white master the slave was a child a happy sambo outside of this influence he was a savage beast.
beginning in the 1830s all of the southern states passed a series of laws cracking down on free blacks.
these laws forced free people of color to register or have white guardians who were responsible for their behavior.
invariably free henry box brown emerges from the crate in which he escaped from slavery blacks were required to carry papers proving their free stain richmond virginia to freedom in philadelphia.
tus and in some states they had to obtain official permission to move from one county to another.
licensing laws were everything by taking the side of the slaves.
in southern louisiana invoked to exclude blacks from several occupations and attempts there was even a small group of mulatto planters who lived in luxury by blacks to hold meetings or form organizations were frequently supported by the labor of other african americans.
blocked by the authorities.
sometimes vagrancy and apprenticeship however although some free blacks were able to create niches laws were used to force free blacks into a state of economic depenof relative freedom their position in southern society became dency barely distinguishable from outright slavery.
increasingly precarious.
beginning in the 1830s southern whites although beset by special problems of their own most free sought to draw the line between free and unfree more firmly as a blacks identified with the suffering of the slaves when circumline between black and white.
free blacks were an anomaly in this stances allowed they protested against the peculiar institution system increasingly the southern answer was to exclude degrade and worked for its abolition.
many of them had once been slaves and even enslave those free people of color who remained within themselves or were the children of slaves often they had close relatheir borders.
just before the outbreak of the civil war a campaign tives who were still in bondage.
furthermore they knew that the developed in some southern states to carry the pattern of repression discrimination from which they suffered was rooted in slavery and and discrimination to its logical conclusion several state legislatures the racial attitudes that accompanied it.
so long as slavery existed proposed laws giving free people of color the choice of emigrating their own rights were likely to be denied and even their freedom from the state or being enslaved.
was at risk former slaves who could not prove they had been legally freed were subject to reenslavement.
this threat existed even in the north under federal fugitive slave laws escaped slaves could be returned to bondage.
even blacks who were born free were not white society in the perfectly safe.
kidnapping or fraudulent seizure by slave catchers antebellum south was always a possibility.
because of the elaborate system of control and surveillance free what divided and united white southern society.
blacks in the south were in a relatively weak position to work against those who know the old south only from modern novels films slavery.
the case of denmark vesey showed that a prosperous and and television programs are likely to envision a land filled with well situated free black might make a stand in the struggle for freemajestic plantations.
pillared mansions behind oak lined carriagedom but it also revealed the dangers of revolutionary activity and the ways are portrayed as scenes of aristocratic splendor where courtly odds against success.
the wave of repression against the free black gentlemen and elegant ladies attended by hordes of uniformed population that followed the vesey conspiracy heightened the danblack servants lived in refined luxury.
it is easy to conclude from gers and increased the odds.
consequently most free blacks found such images that the typical white southerner was an aristocrat who that survival depended on creating the impression of loyalty to the belonged to a family that owned large numbers of slaves.
planter regime.
in some parts of the lower south groups of relatively the great houses existed and some wealthy slaveholders did privileged free people of color mostly of racially mixed origin were maintain as aristocratic a lifestyle as was ever seen in the united sometimes persuaded that it was to their advantage to preserve the states.
but census returns indicate that this was the world of status quo.
as skilled artisans and small business owners depenonly a small percentage of slaveowners and a minuscule portion dent on white favors and patronage they had little incentive to risk white society in the antebellum south of the total white population.
the number of large planters who had the means to build great houses and entertain lavishly those who owned at least fifty slaves comprised fewer than 1 percent of all whites.
most southern whites were nonslaveholding yeoman farmers.
yet even those who owned no slaves grew to depend on slavery in other ways whether economically because they hired slaves or psychologically because having a degraded class of blacks below them made them feel better about their own place in society.
however the class divisions between slaveholders and nonslaveholders did contribute to the political rifts that became increasingly apparent on the eve of the civil war.
the planters world the great planters although few in number had a weighty influence on southern life.
they set the tone and values for much of the rest of society especially for the less wealthy slaveowners who sought to imitate the planters style of living to the extent that resources allowed.
although many of them were too busy tending to their plantations to become openly involved in politics wealthy planters held more than their share of high offices and often exerted a decisive influence on public policy.
within those regions of the south in which plantation agriculture predominated they were a ruling class in every sense of the term.
contrary to legend a majority of the great planters of the pre civil war period were self made rather than descendants of the old colonial gentry.
some were ambitious young men who married planters daughters.
others started as lawyers and used their fees and connections to acquire plantations.
as the cotton kingdom spread westward to alabama mississippi and louisiana a greater proportion of the largest slaveholders were men who began their careers in commerce land speculation banking and even slave trading.
stephen duncan of mississippi probably the most prosperous cotton planter in the south during the 1850s he owned eight plantations and 1018 slaves had invested the profits from his banking operations.
among the largest sugar planters of southern louisiana at this time were maunsel white and john burnside irish immigrants who had prospered as new orleans merchants and isaac franklin former king of the slave traders.
to be successful a planter had to be a shrewd entrepreneur who kept a careful eye on the market the prices of slaves and land and the extent of his indebtedness.
reliable factors the agents who marketed the crop and provided advances against future sales could assist him in making decisions but a planter who failed to spend a good deal of time with his account books could end up in serious trouble.
managing the slaves and plantation production was also difficult and time consuming even when overseers were available to supervise day to day activities.
hence few planters could be the men of leisure featured in the popular image of the old south.
likewise despite typical images of women in the old south full hoop skirts and wide front porches elaborate parties in plantation houses dripping with spanish moss elegant ladies gossiping over tea few women fit the stereotype of the southern belle.
not only were plantation mistresses a tiny minority of the women who lived and worked in the slave states before the civil war but even those who were part of the planter elite rarely lived lives of leisure.
see the feature essay harriet jacobs and maria norcom women of southern households pp.
some of the richest and most secure plantation families did aspire to live in the manner of a traditional landed aristocracy.
a few were so successful that they were accepted as equals by visiting english nobility.
big houses elegant carriages fancy dress balls and excessive numbers of house servants all reflected aristocratic aspirations.
the romantic cult of chivalry described in the popular novels of sir walter scott was in vogue in some circles and even led to the nonviolent reenactment of medieval tournaments.
dueling despite efforts to repress it remained the standard way to settle affairs of honor among gentlemen.
another sign of gentility was the tendency of planters sons to avoid trade as a primary or secondary career in favor of law or the military.
planters daughters were trained from girlhood to play the piano speak french dress in the latest fashions and sparkle in the drawing room or on the dance floor.
the aristocratic style originated among the older gentry of the seaboard slave states but by the 1840s and 1850s it had spread southwest as a second generation of wealthy planters began to displace the rough hewn pioneers of the cotton kingdom.
planters racism and paternalism no assessment of the planters outlook or worldview can be made without considering their relations with their slaves.
planters by the census definition owned more than half of all the slaves in the south and set standards for treatment and management.
it is clear from their private letters and journals as well as from proslavery propaganda that most planters liked to think of themselves as benevolent masters.
rather than seeing slavery as a brutal form of economic exploitation they argued that blacks needed the slave system to ensure that they were cared for and protected.
often they referred to their slaves as if they were members of an extended patriarchal family a favorite phrase was our people according to this ideology of paternalism blacks were a race of perpetual children requiring constant care and supervision by superior whites.
paternalistic rhetoric increased greatly after abolitionists began to charge that most slaveholders were sadistic monsters.
paternalism went hand in hand with racism.
in a typical proslavery apology georgia lawyer thomas reade cobb wrote that a state of bondage so far from doing violence to the law of the africans nature develops and perfects it and that in that state he enjoys the greatest amount of happiness and arrives at the greatest degree of perfection of which his nature is capable slaveholders justified slavery by the supposed mental and moral inferiority of africans.
it was only in the 1830s and 1840s that a full blown modern racism developed on both sides of the atlantic.
racial scientists developed theories relating skull size to mental ability and some proslavery apologists even developed religious theories of polygenesis arguing that blacks were not descended from adam and eve.
this racial ideology helped slaveholders believe that a benevolent christian could justly enslave another human being.
while some historians have argued that paternalism was part of a social system that was organized like a family hierarchy rather than a brutal profit making arrangement there was no inconsistency between planters paternalism and capitalism.
slaves were chapter 26 franklin d roosevelt and the new deal read the document huey long share our wealth 1935 townsends proposal for 200 monthly pensions and increases in unemployment benefits.
congress then passed the social security act by overwhelming margins.
critics began to point out its shortcomings as they have ever since.
the old age pensions were paltry.
designed to begin in 1942 they ranged from 10 to 85 a month.
not everyone was covered many of those who most needed protection in their old age such as farmers and domestic servants were not included.
and all participants regardless of income or economic status paid in at the same rate with no supplement from the general revenue.
the trust fund also took out of circulation money that was desperately needed to stimulate the economy in the 1930s.
other portions of the act were equally open to question.
the cumbersome unemployment system offered no aid to those currently read the document frances perkins and the social security act 1935 1960 this political cartoon published in the chicago tribune in 1935 illustrates that conservatives and other opponents of the new deal vehemently asserted that fdrs recovery and reform program represented a dangerous threat to americans economic liberties and the political freedoms secured by the constitution of the united states.
problem in 1934 and president roosevelt sent its recommendations to congress the following january.
the proposed legislation had three major parts.
first it provided for old age pensions financed equally by a tax on employers and workers without government contributions.
in addition it gave states federal matching funds to provide modest pensions for the destitute elderly.
second it set up a system of unemployment compensation on a federal state basis with employers paying a payroll tax and with each state setting benefit levels and administering the program locally.
finally it provided for direct federal grants to the states on a matching basis for welfare payments to the blind handicapped needy elderly and dependent children.
although there was criticism from conservatives who mourned the passing of traditional american reliance on self help and individualism the chief objections came from those who argued that the administrations measure did not go far enough.
democratic leaders however defeated efforts to incorporate despite the administrations boosterism many believed that social security could not fulfill its promises.
impact of the new deal out of work only to people who would lose their jobs in the future and the benefits depending on the state ranged from barely adequate to substandard.
the outright grants to the handicapped and dependent children were minute in terms of the need in new york city for example a blind person received only 5 a week in 1937 the conservative nature of the legislation reflected roosevelts own fiscal orthodoxy but even more it was a product of his political realism.
despite the severity of the depression he realized that establishing a system of federal welfare went against deeply rooted american convictions.
he insisted on a tax on participants to give those involved in the pension plan a vested interest in social security.
he wanted them to feel they had earned their pensions and that in the future no one would dare take them away.
with those taxes in there he explained privately no damned politician can ever scrap my social security program above all fdr had succeeded in establishing the principle of government responsibility for the aged the handicapped and the unemployed.
whatever the defects of the legislation social security stood as a landmark of the new deal creating a system to provide for the welfare of individuals in a complex industrial society.
labor legislation the other major reform achievement in 1935 was passage of the national labor relations act or the wagner act as it became known.
senator robert wagner of new york introduced legislation in 1934 to outlaw company unions and other unfair labor practices in order to ensure collective bargaining for unions.
fdr who had little knowledge of labor management relations and apparently little interest in them opposed the bill.
in 1935 however wagner began to gather broad support for his measure which passed the senate in may with only twelve opposing votes and the president seeing passage as likely gave it his approval.
the bill moved quickly through the house and roosevelt signed it into law in july.
the wagner act created a national labor relations board to preside over labor management relations and enable unions to engage in collective bargaining with federal support.
the act outlawed a variety of union busting tactics and in its key provision decreed that whenever the majority of a companys workers voted for a union to represent them management would be compelled to negotiate with the union on all matters of wages hours and working conditions.
with this unprecedented government sanction labor unions could now recruit the large number of unorganized workers throughout the country.
the wagner act the most far reaching of all new deal measures led to the revitalization of the american labor movement and a permanent change in labor management relations.
three years later congress passed a second law that had a lasting impact on american workers the fair labor standards act.
a long sought goal of the new deal this measure aimed to establish both minimum wages and maximum hours of work per week.
since labor unions usually were able to negotiate adequate levels of pay and work for their members the act was aimed at unorganized workers and met with only grudging support from unions.
southern conservatives opposed it strongly both on ideological grounds it meant still greater government involvement in private enterprise and because it threatened the low southern wages that had attracted northern industry since reconstruction.
roosevelt finally succeeded in winning passage of the fair labor standards act in 1938 but only at the cost of exempting many key industries from its coverage.
the act provided for a minimum wage of 40 cents an hour by 1940 and a standard workweek of forty hours with time and a half for overtime.
despite its loopholes the legislation did lead to pay raises for the twelve million workers earning less than 40 cents an hour.
more important like social security it set up a system however inadequate that congress could build on in the future to reach more generous and humane levels.
other new deal reform measures met with a mixed reception in congress.
proposals to break up the huge public utility holding companies created by promoters in the 1920s and to levy a soak the rich tax on the wealthy stirred up bitter debate and these bills were passed only in greatly weakened form.
roosevelt was more successful in passing a banking act that made important reforms in the federal reserve system.
he also gained congressional approval of the rural electrification administration rea which helped bring electricity to the 90 percent of american farms that still did not have it in the 1930s.
all in all roosevelts record in reform was similar to that in relief and recovery modest success but no sweeping victory.
a cautious and pragmatic leader fdr moved far enough to the left to overcome the challenges of coughlin townsend and long without venturing too far from the mainstream.
his reforms improved the quality of life in america significantly but he made no effort to correct all the nations social and economic wrongs.
impact of the new deal what was the lasting impact of the new deal.
the new deal had a broad influence on the quality of life in the united states in the 1930s.
government programs reached into areas hitherto untouched.
many of them brought about long overdue improvements but others failed to make any significant dent in historic inequities.
the most important advances came with the dramatic growth of labor unions the conditions for working women and minorities in nonunionized industries showed no comparable advance.
rise of organized labor trade unions were weak at the onset of the great depression with a membership of fewer than three million workers.
most were in the american federation of labor afl composed of craft unions that served the needs of skilled workers.
the nations basic industries such as steel and automobiles were unorganized the great mass of unskilled workers thus fared poorly in terms of wages and working conditions.
section 7a of the nra had led to some growth in afl ranks but the unions conservative leaders eager to cooperate with business failed to take full advantage of the opportunity to organize the mass production industries.
john l lewis head of the united mine workers took the lead in forming the committee on industrial organization cio in 1935 the son of a welsh coal miner lewis was a dynamic and ruthless man.
he had led the mine workers since 1919 and was determined to spread the benefits of unions throughout industry.
lewis first battled chapter 18 the industrial society departments which became critical components of later american industries.
costly to build they limited entry into the industry to the handful who could afford them.
great steel districts arose in pennsylvania ohio and alabama in each case around large coal deposits that fueled the huge furnaces.
pittsburgh became the center of the industry its giant mills employing thousands of workers.
output shot up.
in 1874 the united states produced less than half the amount of pig iron produced in great britain.
by 1890 it took the lead and in 1900 it produced four times as much as britain.
iron ore abounded in the fabulous deposits near lake superior the greatest deposits in the world.
in the mines of the mesabi range in minnesota giant steam shovels loaded ore onto railroad cars for transport to ships on the great lakes.
powered lifts self loading devices and other innovations sped the process.
by the turn of the century historian peter temin noted the transport of lake ores had become an intricate ballet of large and complex machines like the railroads steel companies grew larger and larger.
in 1880 only nine companies could produce more than 100 000 tons a year.
by the early 1890s several companies exceeded 250 000 tons and two including the great carnegie steel company produced more than one million tons a year.
as operations expanded managers needed more complex skills.
product development marketing and consumer preferences became important.
competition was fierce and steel companies like the railroads tried secret agreements pools and consolidation.
during the 1880s and 1890s they moved toward vertical integration a type of organization in which a single company owns and controls the entire process from the unearthing of the raw materials to the manufacture and sale of the finished product.
such companies combined coal and iron mines transportation companies blast furnaces and rolling mills into integrated networks.
andrew carnegie emerged as the undisputed master of the industry.
born in scotland he came to the united states in 1848 at the age of twelve.
settling near pittsburgh he went to work as a bobbin boy in a cotton mill earning 1 20 a week.
he soon took a job in a telegraph office where in 1852 his hard work and skill caught the eye of thomas a scott of the pennsylvania railroad.
starting as scotts personal telegrapher carnegie spent a total of twelve years on the pennsylvania a training ground for company managers.
by 1859 he had become a divisional superintendent.
he was twenty four years old.
soon rich from shrewd investments carnegie plunged into the steel industry in 1872 on the monongahela river south of pittsburgh he built the giant j edgar thomson steel works named after the president of the pennsylvania railroad his biggest customer.
with his warmth and salesmanship he attracted able partners and subordinates such as henry clay frick and charles m schwab whom he drove hard and paid well.
although he had written magazine articles defending the rights of workers carnegie kept the wages of the laborers in his mills low and disliked unions.
with the help of frick he crushed a violent strike at his homestead works in 1892 see p 434.
in 1878 he won the steel contract for the brooklyn bridge.
during the next decade as city building boomed he converted the huge homestead works near pittsburgh to the manufacture of structural beams and angles which went into the new york city elevated railway the first skyscrapers and the washington read the document andrew carnegie wealth 1889 the machinery dwarfs the workers in this colored engraving of steel making using the bessemer process at andrew carnegies pittsburgh steel works.
men worked twelve hours a day in the blazing heat and deafening roar of the machines.
carnegie profits mounted from 2 million in 1888 to 40 million in 1900 that year carnegie steel alone produced more steel than great britain.
employing twenty thousand people it was the largest industrial company in the world.
in 1901 carnegie sold it.
believing that wealth brought social obligations he wanted to devote his full time to philanthropy.
he found a buyer in j pierpont morgan who in the late 1890s had put together several steel companies including federal steel carnegies chief rival.
carnegie steel had blocked morgans well known desire for control and in mid 1900 when a war loomed between the two interests morgan decided to buy carnegie out.
in early january 1901 morgan told charles m schwab go and find his price schwab cornered carnegie on the golf course carnegie listened and the next day he handed schwab a note scribbled in blunt pencil asking almost a half billion dollars.
morgan glanced at it and said i accept this price an industrial empire drawing other companies into the combination on march 3 1901 morgan announced the creation of the united states steel corporation.
the new firm was capitalized at 1 4 billion the first billion dollar company.
it absorbed more than 200 other companies employed 168 000 people and produced 9 million tons of iron and steel a year.
it controlled three fifths of the countrys steel business.
soon there were other giants including bethlehem steel republic steel and national steel.
as the nineteenth century ended steel products rare just thirty years before had altered the landscape.
huge firms investment bankers and professional managers dominated the industry.
rockefeller and oil petroleum worked comparable changes in the economic and social landscape although mostly after 1900 distilled into oil it lubricated the machinery of the industrial age.
there seemed little use for gasoline the internal combustion engine had only just been developed but kerosene another major distillate brought inexpensive illumination into almost every home.
whale oil cottonseed oil and even tallow candles were expensive to burn consequently many people went to bed at nightfall.
kerosene lamps opened the evenings to activity altering the patterns of life.
like other changes in these years the oil boom happened with surprising speed.
in the mid 1850s petroleum was a bothersome smelly fluid that occasionally rose to the surface of springs and streams.
clever entrepreneurs bottled it in patent medicines a few scooped up enough to burn.
other entrepreneurs soon found that drilling reached pockets of oil beneath the earth.
in 1859 edwin l drake drilled the first oil well near titusville in northwest pennsylvania and the black gold fever struck.
chemists soon discovered ways to transform petroleum into lubricating oil grease paint wax varnish naphtha and paraffin.
within a few years there was a world market in oil.
at first growth of the oil industry was chaotic.
early drillers and refiners produced for local markets and since drilling wells and even erecting refineries cost little competition flourished.
output fluctuated dramatically prices rose and fell with devastating effect.
refineries usually a collection of wooden shacks and tanks were centered in cleveland and pittsburgh near the original oilproducing regions.
a young merchant from cleveland named john d rockefeller imposed order on the industry.
i had an ambition to build he later recalled and beginning in 1863 at the age of twenty four he built the standard oil company soon to become one of the titans of corporate business.
like morgan rockefeller considered competition wasteful small scale enterprise inefficient and consolidation the path of the future.
consolidation revolutionized the way of doing business all over the world he said.
the time was ripe for it.
it had to come though all we saw at the moment was the need to save ourselves from wasteful conditions methodically rockefeller absorbed or destroyed competitors in cleveland and elsewhere.
as ruthless in his methods as carnegie he lacked the steel masters spontaneous charm.
he was distant and taciturn a man of deep religious beliefs who taught bible classes at clevelands erie street baptist church.
like carnegie he demanded efficiency relentless cost cutting and the latest technology.
he attracted exceptional lieutenants although as one said he could see farther ahead than any of them and then see around the corner nothing in haste nothing ill done rockefeller often said to himself.
your future hangs on every day that passes paying careful attention to detail he counted the stoppers in barrels shortened barrel hoops to save metal and in one famous incident reduced the number of drops of solder on kerosene cans from forty to thirty nine.
in large scale production rockefeller realized even small reductions meant huge savings.
research uncovered other ways of lowering costs and improving products and herman frasch a brilliant standard oil chemist solved problem after problem in the refining of oil.
in the end rockefeller triumphed over his competitors by marketing products of high quality at the lowest unit cost.
but he employed other less savory methods as well.
he threatened rivals and bribed politicians.
he employed spies to harass the customers of competing refiners.
above all he extorted railroad rebates that lowered his transportation costs and undercut competitors.
by 1879 he controlled 90 percent of the countrys entire oil refining capacity.
vertically integrated standard oil owned wells timberlands barrel and chemical plants refineries warehouses pipelines and fleets of tankers and oil cars.
its marketing organization served as the model for the industry.
standard exported oil to asia africa and south america its five gallon kerosene tin like coca cola bottles and cans of a later era was a familiar sight in the most distant parts of the world.
to manage it all the company developed a new plan of business organization the trust which had profound significance for american business.
in 1881 samuel c t dodd standards attorney set up the standard oil trust with a board of nine trustees empowered to hold control and manage all standards properties.
stockholders exchanged their stock for trust certificates on which dividends were paid.
on january 2 1882 the first of the modern trusts was born.
as dodd intended it immediately centralized control of standards far flung empire.
competition almost disappeared profits soared.
a trust movement swept the country as industries with similar problems whiskey lead and sugar among others followed standards example.
the word trust became synonymous with monopoly amid vehement protests from the public.
antitrust became a watchword for a generation of reformers from the 1880s through the era of woodrow wilson.
but rockefellers purpose had been management of a monopoly not monopoly itself which he had already achieved.
during the 1890s rockefeller helped pioneer another form of industrial consolidation the holding company.
taking advantage of an 1889 new jersey law that allowed companies to purchase other companies he moved standard oil to new jersey and bought up his own subsidiaries to form a holding company.
the trust he had learned was somewhat cumbersome and it was under attack in congress and the courts.
holding companies offered the next step in industrial management.
they were simply large scale mergers in which a central corporate organization purchased the stock of the member companies and established direct formal control.
chapter 18 the industrial society some of the inventions transformed communications.
in 1866 cyrus w field improved the transatlantic cable linking the telegraph networks of europe and the united states.
by the early 1870s land and submarine cables ran to brazil japan and the china coast in the next two decades they reached africa and spread across south america.
diplomats and business leaders could now talk to their counterparts in berlin or hong kong.
even before the telephone the cables quickened the pace of foreign affairs revolutionized journalism and allowed businesses to expand and centralize.
the typewriter 1867 stock ticker 1867 cash register 1879 calculating machine 1887 and adding machine 1888 helped business transactions.
high speed spindles automatic looms and electric sewing machines transformed the clothing industry which for the first time in history turned out ready made clothes for the masses.
in 1890 the census bureau first used machines to sort and tabulate data on punched cards a portent of a new era of informathe business of invention tion storage and processing.
in 1879 george eastman patented a process for coating gelatin america has become known the world around as the home of on photographic dry plates which led to celluloid film and motion invention boasted the commissioner of patents in 1892 it had pictures.
by 1888 he was marketing the kodak camera which not always been so until the last third of the nineteenth cenweighed 35 ounces took 100 exposures and cost 25.
even though tury the country had imported most of its technology.
then an early kodaks had to be returned to the factory camera and all for extraordinary group of inventors and tinkerers specialists in film developing they revolutionized photography.
now almost anyinvention thomas a edison called them began to study the one could snap a picture.
world around them.
some of their inventions gave rise to new other innovations changed the diet.
there were new processes industries a few actually changed the quality of life.
for flour canned meat vegetables condensed milk and even beer in the very act of inventing edison and others drew on a from an offshoot of louis pasteurs discoveries about bacteria.
deeper invention a realization that people could mold nature packaged cereals appeared on breakfast tables.
refrigerated railroad to their own ends.
they could create out of first nature as one cars ice cooled brought fresh fruit from florida and california to environmental historian has noted a second nature shaped as they wished.
all parts of the country.
in the 1870s gustavus f swift a chicago the number of patents issued to inventors reflected the trend.
meat packer hit on the idea of using the cars to distribute meat during the 1850s fewer than 2 000 patents were issued each year.
nationwide.
setting up disassembly factories to butcher meat by the 1880s and 1890s the figure reached more than 20 000 a henry ford later copied them for his famous assembly lines he year.
between 1790 and 1860 the u s patent office issued just started an era of cheap beef as a newspaper said.
36 000 patents in the decade of the 1890s alone it issued more no innovation however rivaled the importance of the telethan 200 000 phone and the use of electricity for light and power.
the telephone was the work of alexander graham bell a shrewd patents issued by decade 1850 1899 and genial scot who settled in boston in 1871.
221 277 interested in the problems of the deaf bell experimented with ways to transmit speech electrically 195 104 and after several years he had developed electrified metal disks that much like the human ear converted sound waves to electrical impulses and back again.
on march 10 1876 he transmitted the first sentence over a telephone mr.
watson come here i want 124 672 you later that year he exhibited the new device to excited crowds at the centennial exposition in philadelphia.
64 302 in 1878 the year a telephone was installed in the white house the first telephone exchange opened in new haven connecticut.
fighting off 19 591 competitors who challenged the patent the young bell telephone company dominated the growing industry.
by 1895 there were about 310 000 phones 1850 1859 1860 1869 1870 1879 1880 1889 1890 1899 a decade later there were ten million about one for every ten people.
american telephone and source u s bureau of the census historical statistics of the united states colonial times to telegraph company formed by the bell interests in 1970 bicentennial edition washington dc 1975 other companies followed suit including american sugar refining the northern securities company and the national biscuit company.
merger followed merger.
by 1900 1 percent of the nations companies controlled more than one third of its industrial production.
a decade later a congressional investigation showed that two individuals rockefeller and morgan between them controlled businesses worth more than 22 billion.
in 1897 rockefeller retired with a fortune of nearly 900 million but for standard oil and petroleum in general the most expansive period was yet to come.
the great oil pools of texas and oklahoma had not yet been discovered.
plastics and other oil based synthetics were several decades in the future.
there were only four usable automobiles in the country and the day of the gasoline engine automobile and airplane lay just ahead.
an industrial empire in 1896 records made of hard rubber and shellac appeared on the market the following year a phonograph sold for 20.
in 1904 someone had the idea of recording on both sides of the disk and the phonograph record in its modern form was born.
for the first time in history people could listen again and again to a favorite symphony or piano solo.
the phonograph made human experience repeatable in a way never before possible.
in 1879 came an even larger triumph the incandescent lamp.
sir joseph william swan an english inventor had already experimented with the carbon filament but edisons task involved more than finding a durable filament.
he set out to do nothing less than change light.
a trial and error inventor edison tested sixteen hundred materials before producing late in 1879 the carbon filament he wanted.
then he had to devise a complex system of conductors meters and generators by which electricity could be divided and distributed to homes and businesses.
with the financial backing of j p morgan he organized the edison illuminating company and built the pearl street power station in new york city the testing ground of the new apparatus.
on in the late 1870s the electric light and power transfer were only at inventive stages having been september 4 1882 as morgan and others explored unsuccessfully by a number of inventors.
at that time thomas edison with his ideas and watched edison threw a switch and lit proven analytical abilities undertook the problem.
it was edisons interest in technological systems that the house of morgan the stock exchange led him to a general system of incandescent lighting in the fall of 1878 the new york times and a number of other buildings.
amazed a times reporter marveled that writ1885 became another of the vast holding companies consolidating ing stories in the office at night seemed almost like writing in more than a hundred local systems.
daylight power stations soon opened in boston philadelphia if the telephone dissolved communication barriers as old as and chicago.
by 1900 there were 2 774 stations lighting some the human race thomas alva edison the wizard of menlo park two million electric lights around the country.
in a nation alive invented processes and products of comparable significance.
born with light the habits of centuries changed.
a flick of the switch lit in 1847 edison had little formal education although he was an homes and factories at any hour of the day or night.
avid reader.
like carnegie he went into the new field of telegraphy.
in a rare blunder edison based his system on low voltage direct tinkering in his spare time he made several important improvecurrent which could be transmitted only about two miles.
george ments including a telegraph capable of sending four messages over a westinghouse the inventor of the railroad air brake demonstrated single wire.
gathering teams of specialists to work on specific probthe advantages of high voltage alternating current for transmission lems edison built the first modern research laboratory at menlo over great distances.
in 1886 he formed the westinghouse electric park new jersey.
it may have been his most important invention.
company and with the inventor nikola tesla a hungarian immithe laboratory edison promised would turn out a minor grant developed an alternating current motor that could convert invention every ten days and a big thing every six months or so electricity into mechanical power.
electricity could light a lamp in 1877 it turned out a big thing.
worried about a telephones high or illuminate a skyscraper pull a streetcar or drive an entire railcost edison set out to invent a telephone repeater which became road run a sewing machine or power a mammoth assembly line.
the phonograph.
those unable to afford a phone he thought could transmitted easily over long distances it freed factories and citrecord their voices for replay from a central telephone station.
using ies from location near water or coal.
electricity in short brought tin foil wrapped around a grooved rotating cylinder he shouted the a revolution.
verses of mary had a little lamb and then listened in awe as the buried under pavement or strung from pole to pole wires machine played them back.
i was never so taken aback in all my of every description trolley telephone and power marked the life he later said.
everybody was astonished.
i was always afraid of birth of the modern city.
things that worked the first time read the document thomas edison the success of the electric light complete the assignment shopping in a new society on myhistorylab feature essay shopping in a new society macys was founded by rowland hussey macy who between 1843 and 1855 opened four retail dry goods stores including the original macys store in downtown haverhill massachusetts established in 1851 to serve the mill industry employees of the area.
o f all the innovations that changed the way people lived between the 1870s and 1920s one of the most important was the rise and development of the department store those sprawling urban empires of goods and services that fueled the mass consumption of the new society.
a significant invention in itself the department store took advantage of myriad other changes in american and european society especially the industrial transformation that led to the mass production of consumer goods in varieties and amounts never seen before.
that industrial revolution in turn drew on breakthroughs in transportation including a vast railroad network that linked cities and villages and ended the relative isolation and selfsufficiency of the nations island communities the railroads tied people together brought in products from outside fostered greater interdependence and encouraged economic specialization.
in the cities new streetcar systems another revolution in transportation carried shoppers directly to stores workplaces and other destinations regardless of the weather.
as a new york city department store suggested one winter ladies if walking is too bad just take the cars the advice took hold.
the word commuter first entered the language in the 1870s.
as machines turned out a plethora of new products it became vital to sell them and a new science of marketing spread.
printers ink the first major advertising journal began publishing in 1881 the rotary press invented in 1875 initiated a new era in newspaper advertising.
woodcuts halftones and photoengraving added illustrations to catch the consumers eye.
liking the results businesses spent more on advertising every year.
in 1870 they spent about 50 million in 1900 about 95 million in 1920 over 500 million.
by the 1970s it was 22 4 billion.
ads and billboards sprouted up everywhere touting cigarettes cars perfumes and cosmetics.
advertising agents using new statistical sampling techniques developed modern concepts of market testing and research.
when people see your name constantly in the paper printers ink argued they begin to believe they know you and it is but a short step from advertising to patronage reflecting common values department stores flourished in europe as well as in america particularly in paris.
emile zola the famed french novelist said the department store democratized luxury offering the public for the first time in history free admission to displays of material goods.
shop he and others pointed out had become a verb.
in the united states r h macy in new york city john wanamaker in philadelphia and marshall field in chicago turned the department store into a national institution.
there people learned to browse a relatively new concept and to buy.
innovations in pricing display and advertising helped customers develop wants they had not known they had.
in 1870 wanamaker took out the first full page newspaper ad and by 1891 macy too had turned to fullpage advertisements often placed on pages next to an article of special interest to women.
the ads were hard to resist follow the crowd an 1885 ad in a new york newspaper said and it will always take you to r h macy co what better evidence do you wish that ours is the all around store of new york city.
ride our bicycles read our books cook in our saucepans dine off our china wear our silks get under our blankets smoke our cigars drink our wines shop at macys and life will cost you less and yield you more than you dreamed possible.
even the surroundings often evoked a dream.
cash registers a new invention rang up every sale and by the 1880s electric lights highlighted the goods.
electric elevators and escalators carried shoppers to new heights.
plate glass windows a product of discoveries in the technology of glassmaking flooded the stores with daylight.
windows on the street levels became show windows a term developed in the united states.
window shopping another new word became popular.
looking through those windows store owners soon noted were women hundreds of them and it was around women that they built their businesses.
woman is a shopper as an industry journal noted.
out of that fact has come the modern department store in these years growing numbers of women worked in factories telephone exchanges and business offices and they could spend their wages on items they desired.
by 1880 2 6 million women were in the work force in 1890 4 million.
in 1900 more than 5 million women one fifth of all adult women worked outside the home.
within limits of course that meant money in womens pockets and the new department stores tailored their advertising and wares to appeal to women.
they also did everything they could to make their stores safe clean and appealing.
in 1892 macys built a new ladies waiting room calling it the most luxurious and beautiful department devoted to the comfort of ladies to be found in a mercantile establishment in the city soon there were ladies lunch rooms dressing rooms specially lit to show off evening gowns in broad daylight and shelves of hats glass and china with monograms and other special designs.
it was not unusual for a department store to stock 1 300 types of womens shoes.
the department store along with advertising brand names and other innovations brought americans of all backgrounds into a national market.
even as the country itself grew a homogeneity of goods bound it together touching cities and farms east and west rich and poor.
a common language of consumption turned americans into a community of consumers who were surrounded by goods unavailable just decades before and able to purchase them.
they had learned to make want and buy.
these are lessons not forgotten.
the department store even today accounts for more than one tenth of all annual commercial sales in the united states.
the spread of the world wide web has added like transportation and communication innovations in an earlier era another route for consumers to buy the alluring products of the department stores.
the so called cyber monday of the 2011 christmas season enticed those who preferred to shop and spend their money buying goods online.
according to the new york times on cyber monday shoppers bought 1 25 billion worth of goods over the internet.
somehow one suspects this would not have surprised macy wanamaker and their nineteenth century colleagues.
questions for discussion 1 what conditions between the 1870s and 1920s led to the rise of the department store.
2 what changes did department stores bring in peoples lives.
chapter 18 the industrial society the sellers why were the new methods of advertising so important.
the increased output of the industrial age alone was not enough to ensure huge profits.
the products still had to be sold and that gave rise to the new science of marketing.
some business leaders such as swift in meatpacking james b duke in tobacco and rockefeller in oil built extensive marketing organizations of their own.
others relied on retailers merchandising techniques and advertising developing a host of methods to convince consumers to buy.
in 1867 businesses spent about 50 million on advertising in 1900 they spent more than 500 million and the figure was increasing rapidly.
the first advertising agency n w ayer and son of philadelphia began to service businesses in the mid 1870s and it was followed by numerous imitators.
the rotary press 1875 churned out newspapers and introduced a new era in newspaper advertising.
woodcuts halftones and photoengraving added illustrations to catch the consumers eye.
bringing producer and consumer together nationwide advertising was the final link in the national market.
from roadside signs to newspaper ads it pervaded american life.
r h macy in new york john wanamaker in philadelphia and marshall field in chicago turned the department store into a national institution.
there people could browse a relatively new concept and buy.
innovations in pricing display and advertising helped customers develop wants they did not know they had.
in 1870 wanamaker took out the first full page newspaper ad and macy an aggressive advertiser touted goods suitable for the millionaire at prices in reach of the millions the chain store an american term spread across the country.
the a p grocery stores begun in 1859 numbered sixty seven by 1876 all marked by a familiar red and gold facade.
by 1915 there were a thousand of them.
in 1880 f w woolworth bored with the family farm opened the first five and ten cent store in utica new york.
he had fifty nine stores in 1900 the year he adopted the bright red storefront and heaping counters to lure customers in and persuade them to buy.
in similar fashion sears roebuck and montgomery ward sold to rural customers through mail order catalogs a means of selling that depended on effective transportation and a high level of customer literacy.
as a traveler for a dry goods firm aaron montgomery ward had seen an unfulfilled need of people in the rural west.
he started the mail order trend in 1872 with a one sheet price list offered from a chicago loft.
by 1884 he offered almost ten thousand items in a catalog of 240 pages.
richard w sears also saw the possibilities in the mail order business.
starting with watches and jewelry he gradually expanded his list.
in the early 1880s he moved to chicago and with alvah c roebuck founded sears roebuck and company.
sears sold anything and everything prospering in a business that relied on mutual faith between unseen customers and distant distributors.
sears catalogs soon more than five hundred pages long exploited four color illustration and other new techniques.
by the early 1900s sears distributed six million catalogs annually.
advertising brand names chain stores and mail order houses brought americans of all varieties into a national market.
even as the country grew a certain homogeneity of goods bound it together touching cities and farms east and west rich and poor.
there was a common language of consumption.
the market some contemporaries thought also bridged ethnic and other differences.
a prominent english economist wrote in 1919 widely as the scandinavians are separated from the italians and the native americans from the poles in sentiment in modes of living and even in occupations they are yet purchasers of nearly the same goods.
they buy similar clothes furniture and implements the theory had severe limits ethnic and racial differences remained entrenched in the society.
but americans had become a community of consumers surrounded by goods unavailable just a few decades before and able to purchase them.
they had learned to make want and buy.
see feature essay shopping in a new society on pp 426 427.
the wage earners who were the wage earners in the new economy.
although entrepreneurs were important it was the labor of millions of men and women that built the new industrial society.
in their individual stories nearly all unrecorded lay much of the achievement drama and pain of these years.
in a number of respects their lot improved during the last quarter of the nineteenth century.
real wages rose working conditions improved and the workers influence in national affairs increased.
between 1880 and 1914 wages of the average worker rose about 7 a year.
like others workers also benefited from expanding health and educational services.
working men working women working children still life for workers was not easy.
before 1900 most wage earners worked at least ten hours a day six days a week.
if skilled they earned about 20 cents an hour if unskilled just half that.
on average workers earned between 400 and 500 a year.
it took about 600 for a family of four to live decently.
construction workers machinists government employees printers clerical workers and western miners made more than the average.
eastern coal miners agricultural workers garment workers and unskilled factory hands made considerably less.
there were few holidays or vacations and there was little respite from the grueling routine.
skilled workers could turn the system to their own ends new york city cigar makers for example paid someone to read to them while they worked but the unskilled seldom had such luxury.
they were too easily replaced.
a bit of advice to you said a guidebook for immigrant jews in the 1890s do not take a moments rest.
run do work and keep your own good in mind work was not only grueling it was very dangerous.
safety standards were low and accidents were common more the wage earners common in fact than in any other industrial nation in the world at that time.
on the railroads 1 in every 26 workers was injured and 1 in every 399 was killed each year.
thousands suffered from chronic illness unknowing victims of dust chemicals and other pollutants.
in the early 1900s physician alice hamilton established a link between jobs and disease but meanwhile illness weakened or struck down many a breadwinner.
the breadwinner might be a woman or a child both worked in increasing numbers.
in 1870 about 15 percent of women over the age of 16 were employed for wages in 1900 20 percent 5 3 million women were.
of 303 occupations listed in the 1900 census women were represented in 296 the textile industry was their largest single employer.
between 1870 and 1900 the number of working children rose nearly 130 percent to 1 8 million.
in 1900 1 out of every 10 girls and 1 out of every 5 boys between the ages of 10 and 15 held jobs.
in paterson new jersey an important industrial city about half of all boys and girls aged 11 to 14 had jobs.
there were so many children in the labor force that when people spoke of child labor they often meant boys and girls under the age of fourteen.
boys were paid little enough but girls made even less.
girls it was argued were headed for marriage those who worked were just doing so in order to help out their families.
we try to employ girls who are members of families a box manufacturer said for we dont pay the girls a living wage in this trade most working women were young and single.
many began working at sixteen or seventeen worked a half dozen years or so married and quit.
in 1900 only 5 percent of all married women were employed outside the home although african american women were an important exception.
among them 25 percent of married women worked in 1900 usually on southern farms or as low paid laundresses or domestic servants.
as clerical work expanded women learned new skills such as typing and stenography.
moving into formerly male occupations they became secretaries bookkeepers typists telephone operators and clerks in the new department stores.
a few women very few became ministers lawyers and doctors.
arabella mansfield admitted to the iowa bar in 1869 was the first woman lawyer in the country.
but change was slow and in the 1880s some law schools still were refusing to admit women because they had not the mentality to study law among women entering the professions the overwhelming majority became nurses schoolteachers and librarians.
in such professions a process of feminization occurred women became a majority of the workers a small number of men took the management roles and most men left for other jobs lowering the professions status.
in most jobs status and pay were divided unequally between men and women.
many of both sexes thought a womans place was in the home queen of a little house no matter how humble where there are children rolling on the floor when employed in read the document mother jones the march of the mill children factories women tended to occupy jobs that were viewed as natural extensions of household activity.
they made clothes and textiles processed food and made cigars tobacco and shoes.
in the womens garment industry which employed large numbers of women they were the sewers and finishers doing jobs that paid less men were the higher paid cutters and pressers.
in the long day the story of a new york working girl as told by herself 1906 the working girl a young schoolteacher earned 2 50 a week paid 1 00 for her room and had 1 50 for food clothes transportation and any social life.
for breakfast she had bread butter and coffee for lunch bread and butter for dinner potato soup bread and butter.
in pittsburgh a worker in a pickle factory said of her day i have stood ten hours i have fitted 1 300 corks i have hauled and loaded 4 000 jars of pickles.
my pay is seventy cents exhausted such workers fell into bed at night and crawled out again at dawn to begin another long day in general adults earned more than chilmany children in the late nineteenth century grew up in the nations factories working long hours for dren the skilled more than the unskilled low wages in often dangerous conditions.
these girls bundling brooms at an indiana manufacturing native born more than foreign born plant were photographed by lewis hine.
chapter 3 putting down roots on myhistorylab time line 1619 first blacks arrive in virginia 1660 charles ii is restored to the english throne first navigation act passed by parliament second navigation staple act passed plantation duty imposed to close loopholes in commercial regulations king philips metacomets war devastates new england bacons rebellion threatens governor berkeleys government in virginia william penn receives charter for pennsylvania charter of the massachusetts bay company revoked duke of york becomes james ii dominion of new england established james ii driven into exile during glorious revolution rebellions break out in massachusetts new york and maryland jacob leisler executed salem village wracked by witch trials parliament establishes board of trade stono uprising of south carolina slaves terrifies white planters chapter 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america view the closer look european claims in north america 1750 and 1763 russian america hudson bay french fishing rights hudson s bay company ce.
ec r eb u q spanish a louisiana ne w pa c i f i c ocean mississip pi r r st pierre miquelon fr.
t la wr en la ke s s ind ian re se rv e ri missou grea t.
io r oh proclamation line of 1763 british colonies at l a n t i c ocean st domingue fr.
ai sp g lf off gulf mexico puerto rico sp.
n cuba guadeloupe fr.
martinique fr.
jamaica st lucia fr.
caribbean sea guiana dutch new granada british claims french claims spanish claims russian claims 1000 miles brazil port.
1000 kilometers north america after 1763 the peace of paris 1763 redrew the map of north america.
great britain received all the french holdings except a few islands in the atlantic and some sugar producing islands in the caribbean.
british officials later accused the americans of ingratitude.
england they claimed had sent troops and provided funds to liberate the colonists from the threat of french attack.
the americans appreciative of the aid from england cheered on the british but dragged their feet at every stage refusing to pay the bills.
these charges were later incorporated into a general argument justifying parliamentary taxation in america.
the british had a point.
the colonists were in fact slow in providing the men and materials needed to fight the french.
nevertheless they did make a significant contribution to the war effort and it was perfectly reasonable for americans to regard themselves at the very least as junior partners in the empire.
after all they had supplied almost twenty thousand soldiers and spent well over 2 million.
in a single year in fact massachusetts enlisted five thousand men out of an adult male population of about fifty thousand a commitment that in the words of one military historian meant the war was being waged on a scale comparable to the great wars of modern times after making such a sacrifice indeed after demonstrating their loyalty to the mother country the colonists would surely have been disturbed to learn that general james conclusion rule britannia.
wolfe the hero of quebec had stated the americans are in general the dirtiest the most contemptible cowardly dogs that you can conceive.
there is no depending upon them in action.
they fall down in their own dirt and desert in battalions officers and all conclusion rule britannia.
james thomson an englishman understood the hold of empire on the popular imagination of the eighteenth century.
in 1740 he composed words that british patriots have proudly sung for more than two centuries rule britannia rule the waves britons never will be slaves.
colonial americans at least those of british background joined the chorus.
by midcentury they took their political and cultural cues from great britain.
they fought its wars purchased its consumer goods flocked to hear its evangelical preachers and read its many publications.
without question the empire provided the colonists with a compelling source of identity.
an editor justified the establishment of new hampshires first newspaper in precisely these terms.
by this means the publisher observed the spirited englishman the mountainous welshman the brave scotchman and irishman and the loyal american may be firmly united and mutually resolved to guard the glorious throne of britannia.
as british brothers in defending the common cause even new immigrants the germans scots irish and africans who felt no political loyalty to great britain and no affinity to english culture had to assimilate to some degree to the dominant english culture of the colonies.
americans hailed britannia.
in 1763 they were the victors the conquerors of the backcountry.
in their moment of glory the colonists assumed that britains rulers saw the americans as brothers as equal partners in the business of empire.
only slowly would they learn the british had a different perception.
for them american was a way of saying not quite english chapter 4 experience of empire on myhistorylab time line 1680 el pop leads pueblo revolt against the spanish in new mexico 1689 william and mary accede to the english throne 1706 birth of benjamin franklin 1714 george i of hanover becomes monarch of great britain 1732 colony of georgia is established birth of george washington 1734 1736 first expression of the great awakening at northampton massachusetts 1740 george whitefield electrifies listeners at boston 1745 colonial troops capture louisbourg 1748 american lutheran ministers ordained in philadelphia albany congress meets braddock is defeated by the french and indians in western pennsylvania seven years war is formally declared british are victorious at quebec wolfe and montcalm are killed in battle george iii becomes king of great britain peace of paris ending french and indian war is signed junpero serra begins to build missions in california mexico declares independence from spain chapter 19 toward an urban society 1877 1900 the overcrowded city one day around 1900 harriet vittum a settlement house worker in chicago went to the aid of a young polish girl who lived in a nearby slum.
the girl aged 15 had discovered she was pregnant and had taken poison.
an ambulance was on the way and vittum told of the poisoning rushed over to do what she could.
quickly she raced up the three flights of stairs to the floor where the girl and her family lived.
pushing open the door she found the father several male boarders and two or three small boys asleep on the kitchen floor.
in the next room the mother was on the floor among several women boarders and one or two small children.
glancing out the window vittum saw the wall of another building so close she could reach out and touch it.
there was a third room in it lay the 15 year old girl along with two more small children who were asleep.
looking at the scene vittum thought about the girls life in the crowded tenement.
should she try to save her.
vittum asked herself.
should she even try to bring the girl back to the misery and hopelessness of the life she was living in that awful place.
the young girl died and in later years vittum often told her story.
it was easy to see why.
the girls life in the slum the children on the floor the need to take in boarders to make ends meet the way the mother and father collapsed at the end of a workday that began long before sunup all reflected the experiences of millions of people living in the nations cities.
ittum and people like her were attempting to respond to the overwhelming challenges of the nations burgeoning cities.
people poured into cities in the last part of the nineteenth century lured by glitter and excitement by friends and relatives who were already there and above all by the greater opportunities for jobs and higher wages.
between 1860 and 1910 the rural population of the united states almost doubled the number of people living in cities increased sevenfold.
little of the increase came from natural growth since urban families had high rates of infant mortality a declining fertility rate and a high death rate from injury and disease.
many of the newcomers came from rural america and many more came from europe latin america and asia.
in one of the most significant migrations in american history thousands of african americans began in the 1880s to move from the rural south to northern cities.
by 1900 there were large black communities in new york baltimore chicago washington d c and other cities.
yet to come was the even greater black migration during world war i two major forces reshaped american society between 1870 and 1920 one was industrialization the other was urbanization the headlong rush of people from their rural roots into the modern urban environment.
in these years cities grew upward and outward v read the document charles loring brace the life of the street rats 1872 the kitchen of a tenement apartment was often a multipurpose room.
here the tenement dwellers prepared and ate their meals the room might also serve as a workroom and it might be used as sleeping quarters for one or more members of the family.
source the museum of the city of new york the byron collection.
attracting millions of newcomers and influencing politics education entertainment and family life.
by 1920 they had become the center of american economic social and cultural life.
the lure of the city why did cities in the united states grow between 1880 and 1900.
between 1870 and 1900 the city like the factory became a symbol of a new america.
drawn from farms small towns and foreign lands newcomers swelled the population of older cities and created new ones almost overnight.
at the beginning of the civil war only one sixth of the american people lived in cities of eight thousand people or more.
by 1900 one third did by 1920 one half.
we live in the age of great cities wrote the reverend samuel lane loomis in 1887.
each successive year finds a stronger and more irresistible current sweeping in towards the centers of life the current brought growth of an explosive sort.
thousands of years of history had produced only a handful of cities with more than a half million in population.
in 1900 the united states had six such cities including three new york chicago and philadelphia with populations greater than one million.
chapter review growth and diversity what difficulties did native americans face in maintaining their cultural independence on the frontier.
religious revivals in provincial societies how did the great awakening transform the religious culture of colonial america.
britains american colonies experienced extraordinary growth during the eighteenth century.
german and scots irish migrants poured into the backcountry where they clashed with native americans.
the indians played off french and british imperial ambitions in the middle ground but disease and encroachment by european settlers undermined the indians ability to resist.
p 80 the great awakening brought a new form of evangelical religion to ordinary americans.
it emphasized personal salvation through a new birth and membership in a large community of believers.
itinerant preachers such as george whitefield drew huge crowds throughout the colonies.
other ministers followed whitefield inviting ordinary americans to question traditional religious authorities.
p 90 spanish borderlands of the eighteenth century clash of political cultures why was the spanish empire unable to control its northern frontier.
why were eighteenth century colonial assemblies not fully democratic.
during the late 1600s and early 1700s the spanish empire expanded its authority north of mexico.
new settlements were established in the southwest and california.
although the spanish constructed missions and forts a lack of settlers and troops made it impossible for them to impose effective imperial authority.
much of the territory they claimed remained under the control of indian peoples.
p 83 most eighteenth century colonial governments were comprised of a royal governor an appointed governors council and an elected assembly.
although these representative assemblies did not allow women blacks or the poor to vote they did enfranchise most of the white adult male population.
assemblies guarded their privileges and powers often conflicting with royal governors who tried to expand their authority.
p 92 the impact of european ideas on american culture century of imperial war how did european ideas affect eighteenthcentury american life.
during the enlightenment educated europeans and american colonists like benjamin franklin brought scientific reason to the study of religion nature and society.
by midcentury economic growth sparked a consumer revolution that introduced colonists to an unprecedented array of imported manufactured items.
new ideas and goods helped integrate the american colonies into mainstream british culture.
p 87 why did colonial americans support great britains wars against france.
france and britain waged almost constant war in north america.
by 1750 britains american colonists believed the french in canada planned to encircle their settlements cutting them off from the rich lands of the ohio valley.
the seven years war drove the french from canada a victory that generated unprecedented enthusiasm for the british empire in the colonies.
p 95 study resources key terms and definitions backcountry in the eighteenth century the edge of settlement extending from western pennsylvania to georgia.
this region formed the second frontier as settlers moved west from the atlantic coast into the interior.
p 80 middle ground a geographical area where two distinct cultures meet and merge with neither holding a clear upper hand.
p 83 enlightenment philosophical and intellectual movement that began in europe during the eighteenth century.
it stressed the use of reason to solve social and scientific problems.
p 87 consumer revolution period between 1740 and 1770 when english exports to the american colonies increased by 360 percent to satisfy americans demand for consumer goods.
p 89 great awakening a sudden spontaneous and fervent series of protestant evangelical revivals beginning in the 1730s and through the 1740s and 1750s that occurred throughout the colonies.
the great awakening encouraged men and women to take an active role in their salvation and helped connect scattered colonists together with a unifying belief that with gods assistance social and political progress was possible in colonial america.
p 90 itinerant preachers these charismatic preachers spread revivalism throughout america during the great awakening.
p 91 albany plan plan of intercolonial cooperation proposed by prominent colonists including benjamin franklin at a conference in albany new york in 1754 the plan called for a grand council of elected delegates from the colonies that would have powers to tax and provide for the common defense.
although rejected by the colonial and british governments it was a prototype for colonial union.
p 96 seven years war worldwide conflict 1756 1763 that pitted britain against france.
with help from the american colonists the british won the war and eliminated france as a power on the north american continent.
also known as the french and indian war.
p 97 peace of paris of 1763 treaty ending the french and indian war by which france ceded canada to britain.
p 99 critical thinking questions 1 what factors ultimately served to undermine the middle ground.
4 what are the similarities and differences between the impact of the enlightenment and the great awakening on colonial society.
2 what impact did the spanish empire have on the culture of 5 why did colonists place greater political trust in their elected the borderlands.
assemblies than in their royally appointed governors.
3 what impact did enlightenment ideas and commercial goods have on american politics.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 12 the pursuit of perfection which sponsored national meetings of black leaders beginning in 1830 provided an important forum for independent black expression.
their most eloquent statement came in 1854 when black leaders met in cleveland to declare their faith in a separate identity proclaiming we pledge our integrity to use all honorable means to unite us as one people on this continent black newspapers such as freedoms journal first published in 1827 and the north star founded by douglass in 1847 gave black writers a chance to preach their gospel of liberation to black readers.
african american authors also produced a stream of books and pamphlets attacking slavery refuting racism and advocating various forms of resistance.
one of the most influential publications was david walkers appeal.
to the colored citizens of the world which appeared in 1829 walker denounced slavery in the most vigorous language possible and called for a black revolt against white tyranny.
free blacks in the north did more than make verbal protests against racial injustice.
they were also the main conductors on the fabled underground railroad that opened a path for fugitives from slavery.
it has been supposed that benevolent whites were primarily responsible for organized efforts to guide and assist fugitive slaves read the document david walker a black abolitionist speaks but modern research has shown that the underground railroad was largely a black operated enterprise.
courageous ex slaves such as harriet tubman and josiah henson made regular forays into the slave states to lead other blacks to freedom and many of the stations along the way were run by free blacks.
in northern towns and cities free blacks organized vigilance committees to protect fugitives and thwart the slave catchers.
groups of blacks even used force to rescue recaptured fugitives from the authorities.
in boston in 1851 one such group seized a slave named shadrack from a u s marshal who was in the process of returning him to bondage.
in deeds as well as words free blacks showed their unyielding hostility to slavery and racism.
historians have debated the question of whether the abolitionist movement of the 1830s and early 1840s was a success or a failure.
it obviously failed to convert a majority of americans to its position that slavery was a sinful institution that should be abolished immediately.
this position implied that blacks should be granted equality as american citizens so it ran up against the powerful commitment to white supremacy prevailing in all parts of the country.
in the south abolitionism caused a strong counteraction and helped inspire a more militant and uncompromising defense of slavery.
the belief that peaceful agitation or what abolitionists called moral suasion would convert slaveholders and their northern sympathizers to abolition was obviously unrealistic.
but in another sense the crusade was successful.
it brought the slavery issue to the forefront of public consciousness and convinced a substantial and growing segment of the northern population that the souths peculiar institution was morally wrong and potentially dangerous to the american way of life.
the south helped the antislavery cause in the north by responding hysterically and repressively to abolitionist agitation.
in 1836 southerners in congress forced adoption of a gag rule requiring that abolitionist petitions be tabled without being read at about the same time the post office refused to carry antislavery literature into the slave states.
prominent northerners who had not been moved to action by abolitionist depictions of slave suffering became more responsive to the movement when it appeared their own civil liberties might be threatened.
the politicians who later mobilized the north against the expansion of slavery into the territories drew strength from the antislavery and antisouthern sentiments that abolitionists had already called forth.
from abolitionism to womens rights david walker was a free african american who operated a second hand clothing shop in boston and spoke out on abolition.
unlike many abolitionists walker advocated violent action the rebellion of slaves and the killing of masters.
abolitionism also served as a catalyst for the womens rights movement.
from the beginning women were active participants in the abolitionist crusade.
between 1835 and 1838 the american antislavery society bombarded congress with petitions mostly calling for abolition of slavery in the district of columbia.
more than half of the thousands of antislavery petitions sent to washington had womens signatures on them.
some antislavery women went further and defied conventional ideas of their proper sphere by becoming public speakers and demanding an equal role in the leadership of antislavery societies.
the most famous of these were the grimk sisters sarah and angelina who attracted enormous attention being the rebellious daughters of a south carolina slaveholder.
when some reform turns radical male abolitionists objected to their speaking in public to mixed audiences of men and women garrison came to their defense and helped forge a link between blacks and womens struggles for equality.
the battle to participate equally in the antislavery crusade made a number of women abolitionists acutely aware of male dominance and oppression.
for them the same principles that justified the liberation of the slaves also applied to the emancipation of women from all restrictions on their rights as citizens.
in 1840 garrisons american followers withdrew from the first worlds anti slavery convention in london because the sponsors refused to seat the women in their delegation.
among the women thus excluded were lucretia mott and elizabeth cady stanton.
wounded by mens reluctance to extend the cause of emancipation to include women stanton and mott began discussing plans for a womens rights convention.
they returned to new york where a campaign was already under way to reform the states laws limiting the rights of married women spearheaded by a young jewish activist ernestine rose and judge thomas herttell the political radical and freethinker who had introduced the first bill to reform the states marriage laws to the new york state legislature.
see the law and society essay the legal rights of married women reforming the law of coverture pp.
the campaign for womens rights came to a head at the famous seneca falls convention that stanton and mott organized in upstate new york in 1848 the declaration of sentiments issued by this first national gathering of feminists charged that the history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on the part of man toward woman having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over her it went on to demand that all women be given the right to vote and that married women be freed from unjust laws giving husbands control of their property persons and children.
rejecting the cult of domesticity with its doctrine of separate spheres these women and their male supporters launched the modern movement for gender equality.
group of slaves at nashoba tennessee and set them to work earning their freedom in an atmosphere of rational cooperation the rapid demise of both of these model communities suggested that utopian socialism did not easily take root in american soil.
but the impulse survived.
in the 1840s a number of americans including the prominent editor horace greeley became interested in the ideas of the french utopian theorist charles fourier.
fourier called for cooperative communities in which everyone did a fair share of the work and tasks were allotted to make use of the natural abilities and instincts of the members.
between 1842 and 1852 about thirty fourierist phalanxes were established in the northeastern and midwestern states and approximately a hundred thousand people lived for a time in these communities or otherwise supported the movement.
the phalanxes were not purely socialistic in fact they were organized as joint stock companies.
but they did give the members an opportunity to live and work in a communal atmosphere.
like the owenite communities they were short lived surviving view the map utopian communities before the civil war oneida brook farm amana new harmony radical ideas and experiments hopes for individual or social perfection were not limited to reformers inspired by evangelicalism.
between the 1820s and 1850s a great variety of schemes for human redemption came from those who had rejected orthodox protestantism.
some were secular humanists carrying on the freethinking tradition of the enlightenment but most were seekers of new paths to spiritual or religious fulfillment.
a movement that achieved remarkable success or notoriety was spiritualism the belief that one could communicate with the dead.
these philosophical and religious radicals attacked established institutions prescribed new modes of living and founded utopian communities to put their ideas into practice.
a radical movement of foreign origin that gained a toehold in jacksonian america was utopian socialism.
in 1825 1826 the british manufacturer and reformer robert owen visited the united states and founded a community based on common and equal ownership of property at new harmony indiana.
about the same time owens associate frances wright gathered a nashoba at l a n t i c ocean icaria 400 miles 400 kilometers gulf of mexico utopian communities fourierists shakers owenites others utopian communities before the civil war the search for new paths to spiritual or religious fulfillment attracted many to utopian communitarian societies.
by far the largest of these societies during the period before the civil war was the shakers who by the 1830s had established twenty settlements in seven states with a combined membership of approximately six thousand.
their rule of celibacy meant that shaker communities gained members through adoption and conversion rather than by natural reproduction.
complete the assignment the war against demon drink on myhistorylab feature essay the war against demon drink mid charnels and pest houses though we may roam be it ever so frightful theres no plague like rum.
a charm from below seems to lead to the snare and leaves us in darkness and gloom and despair.
rum rum curst curst rum theres no plague like rum theres no plague like rum.
t unes like this one rang from the windows of american homes in the mid nineteenth century signaling the rise of one of the longest lasting social revolutions in american history the temperance movement.
the rise of this movement was especially astonishing because drinking was so widespread in early america.
americans in the new republic loved to drink.
they drank at weddings funerals and civic celebrations.
they drank at work during the day and at home at night.
not only did they enjoy wine and beer but rum whiskey and rye.
by 1830 the average american drank nearly ten gallons of distilled spirits per year nearly twice the average per person in 1790 and almost four times what americans drink today.
while drinking was not limited to men it was an important aspect of male bonding culture at work and in the tavern.
drinking together offered an opportunity for sociability across class lines in the early republic.
artisans drank in the workplace and during the revolution toasting was both a social and political ritual in workingmens revolutionary committees.
when george washingtons presidential home was built in 1792 1793 the laborers and craftsmen were treated to a drink when the cornerstone had been set again when each of three floors was completed and when they began work on the roof rafters.
in philadelphia paper mills it was customary for journeymen to receive a half pint of spirits at eleven oclock each morning and again in the afternoon.
because many journeymen and apprentices boarded in the masters home drinking together carried over into the household sphere as well.
in the 1820s household commodity production began to decline with masters separating their workshops from their homes.
as historian paul johnson explains by 1830 the doorway to a middle class home separated radically different kinds of space drunkenness and promiscuous sociability on the outside privacy and icy sobriety indoors master artisans who now headed growing manufactories began to realize that the new market values of efficiency and productivity were at odds with the sociability and drinking of the old workplace.
they were primed and ready for the message of evangelical temperance reformers.
the temperance reformers viewed indulgence in alcohol as a threat to public morality.
drunkenness was seen as a loss of self control and moral responsibility that spawned crime vice and disorder.
above all it threatened the family.
the main target of temperance propaganda was the husband and father who abused neglected or abandoned his wife and children because he was a slave to the bottle.
women played a vital role in the movement and were instrumental in making it a crusade for the protection of the home.
the drinking habits of the poor or laboring classes also aroused great concern.
particularly in urban areas the respectable and propertied elements lived in fear that lower class mobs crazed with drink would attack private property and create social chaos.
in 1826 a group of clergymen previously active in mission work organized the american temperance society to coordinate and extend the work already begun by local churches and moral reform societies.
the original aim was to encourage abstinence from ardent spirits or hard liquor there was no agreement on the evils of beer and wine.
the society sent out lecturers issued a flood of literature and sponsored essay contests.
its agents organized revival meetings and called on those in attendance to sign a pledge promising abstinence from spirits.
the campaign was enormously effective.
by 1834 there were five thousand local branches with more than a million members.
some workingmen defiantly insisted on their right to drink and built their own autonomous social life in grog halls and taverns with heavy drinking an important part of it.
as one workingclass letter writer angrily asked who are the most temperate men of modern times.
those who quaff the juice of the grape with their friends with the greatest good nature after the manner of the ancient patriarchs without any malice a pair of prints issued by a d fillmore in 1855 extolling the social and moral benefits of temperance and condemning the evils of alcohol.
on the tree of temperance the fruits are labeled with the names of virtues including industry philanthropy goodwill and charity on either side the church and the schoolhouse represent the twin ideals of religion and education that were believed to flourish in a temperance regime.
the tree of intemperance demonstrates the evils of drink using religious imagery of a serpent with an apple in its mouth and branches labeled with social and moral evils such as ignorance vice and crime as well as anarchy counterfeiting and dueling.
the men attempting to chop down the tree are temperance reformers celebrating the 1851 maine prohibition law.
in their hearts or the cold water palefaced money making men who make the necessities of their neighbors their opportunity for grinding the face of the poor but others joined temperance societies of their own.
the first washingtonian society was born in 1840 when four baltimore craftsmen attended a temperance lecture intending to mock the speaker but instead were converted to the cause.
they persuaded their friends to swear off liquor and quickly touched off a wave of temperance activity among journeymen apprentices and other members of the working class.
unlike middle class evangelicals who reserved their gospel for the sober washingtonian societies sought out the confirmed drunkard and offered him salvation.
they also offered more concrete mutual benefits such as soup kitchens for the poor.
the washingtonians held weekly experience meetings to testify and confess their own experiences with demon drink and to swear off the bottle.
the societies also tried to recreate the enjoyable community aspects of tavern life with temperance songs poems and theatrical shows.
t s arthurs ten nights in a bar room and what i saw there penned in 1854 was a huge best seller and the stage adaptation was one of the longest running and most popular plays of the antebellum era entertaining large crowds of teetotalers.
washingtonian societies spread like wildfire anyone could start one including women children and african americans.
in utica new york alone there was a martha washington union an irish hibernian association a workingmens temperance union youth clubs and even a black womens temperance association.
while most washingtonian societies presented themselves as young mens associations the average age of the men involved was between thirty and thirty five and the majority of members may have been women.
beginning in the 1840s the temperance movement like other reform movements of the period turned from evangelical hope in individual redemption to a drive for legal regulation.
it won some success in the 1850s maine enacted dry laws in 1851 followed by twelve more states by 1855 beginning in the 1850s as new waves of immigration from ireland and germany brought a surge of beer and whiskey consumption temperance became entangled with the politics of nativism and like other reform efforts it was soon overshadowed by the sectional conflict over slavery.
but the mass movement of the cold water army did achieve some significant goals.
although it may be doubted whether huge numbers of confirmed drunkards were cured the movement did succeed in altering the drinking habits of middleclass american males by making temperance a mark of respectability.
per capita consumption of hard liquor declined more than 50 percent during the 1830s and by 1850 was down to one third of what it had been in 1830 and the antebellum temperance movement set the stage for national prohibition one of the few major social reforms to take place by constitutional amendment on january 29 1920 when the eighteenth amendment outlawing the manufacture sale and transportation of liquor in the united states took effect.
with the enactment of national prohibition temperance at last became embedded temporarily in the law of the nation.
questions for discussion 1 why was heavy drinking so prevalent in america in the early nineteenth century.
2 why did the temperance movement become so active in the 1820s and 1830s.
3 how did the temperance movement change the drinking habits of middle class american males.
chapter 12 the pursuit of perfection for an average of only two years.
the common complaint of the founders was that americans were too individualistic to cooperate in the ways that fouriers theories required.
two of the most successful and long lived manifestations of pre civil war utopianism were the shakers and the oneida community.
the shakers officially known as the millennial church or the united society of believers began as a religious movement in england.
in 1774 a shaker leader mother ann lee brought their radical beliefs to the united states.
lee believed herself to be the feminine incarnation of christ and advocated a new theology based squarely on the principle of sexual equality.
the shakers named for their expressions of religious fervor through vigorous dancelike movements believed in communal ownership and strict celibacy.
they lived simply and minimized their contact with the outside world because they expected christs second coming to occur momentarily.
the oneida community was established in 1848 read the document ralph waldo emerson self reliance 1841 ralph waldo emerson who was born in boston in 1803 was a famous essayist lecturer and poet.
he is perhaps best known as the leader of the transcendentalist movement.
at oneida new york and was inspired by an unorthodox brand of christian perfectionism.
its founder john humphrey noyes believed the second coming of christ had already occurred hence human beings were no longer obliged to follow the moral rules that their previously fallen state had required.
at oneida traditional marriage was outlawed and a carefully regulated form of free love was put into practice.
it was the literary and philosophical movement known as transcendentalism that inspired the eras most memorable experiments in thinking and living on a higher plane.
the main idea was that the individual could transcend material reality and ordinary understanding attaining through a higher form of reason or intuition a oneness with the universe as a whole and with the spiritual forces that lay behind it.
transcendentalism was the major american version of the romantic and idealist thought that emerged in the early nineteenth century.
throughout the western world and especially in germany romanticism was challenging the rationalism and materialism of the enlightenment in the name of exalted feeling and cosmic spirituality.
most american transcendentalists were unitarians or ex unitarians who were dissatisfied with the sober rationalism of their denomination and sought a more intense kind of spiritual experience.
unable to embrace evangelical christianity because of intellectual resistance to its doctrines they sought inspiration from a philosophical and literary idealism of german origin.
their prophet was ralph waldo emerson a brilliant essayist and lecturer who preached that each individual could commune directly with a benign spiritual force that animated nature and the universe which he called the oversoul emerson was a radical individualist committed to self culture and the sufficiency of the private man he carefully avoided all involvement in organized movements or associations because he believed they limited the freedom of the individual to develop inner resources and find a personal path to spiritual illumination.
in the vicinity of emersons home in concord massachusetts a group of like minded seekers of truth and spiritual fulfillment gathered during the 1830s and 1840s.
among them for a time was margaret fuller the leading woman intellectual of the age.
in woman in the nineteenth century 1845 she made a strong claim for the spiritual and artistic equality of women.
one group of transcendentalists led by the reverend george ripley rejected emersons radical individualism and founded a cooperative community at brook farm near roxbury massachusetts in 1841 for the next four years group members worked the land in common conducted an excellent school on the principle that spontaneity rather than discipline was the key to education and allowed ample time for conversation meditation communion with nature and artistic activity of all kinds.
visitors and guest lecturers included such luminaries as emerson margaret fuller and theodore parker the unitarian theologian and radical reformer.
in 1845 brook farm was reconstituted as a fourierist phalanx but some of the original spirit persisted until its dissolution in 1849 another experiment in transcendental living adhered more closely to the individualistic spirit of the movement.
between 1845 and 1847 henry david thoreau a young disciple of emerson lived by himself in the woods along the shore of walden pond and conclusion counterpoint on reform carefully recorded his thoughts and impressions.
in a sense he pushed the ideal of self culture to its logical outcome a utopia of one.
the result was walden published in 1854 one of the greatest achievements in american literature.
conclusion counterpoint on reform one great american writer observed at close quarters the perfectionist ferment of the age but held himself aloof suggesting in his novels and tales that pursuit of the ideal led to a distorted view of human nature and possibilities.
nathaniel hawthorne lived in concord knew emerson and margaret fuller and even spent time at brook farm.
but his sense of human frailty made him skeptical about the claims of transcendentalism and utopianism.
he satirized transcendentalism as unworldly and overoptimistic in his allegorical tale the celestial railroad and gently lampooned the denizens of brook farm in his novel the blithedale romance 1852.
his view of the dangers of pursuing perfection too avidly came out in his tale of a father who kills his beautiful daughter by trying to remove her one blemish a birthmark.
his greatest novels the scarlet letter 1850 and the house of the seven gables 1851 imaginatively probed new englands puritan past and the shadows it cast on the present.
by dwelling on original sin as a psychological reality hawthorne told his contemporaries that their efforts to escape from guilt and evil were futile.
one simply had to accept the world as an imperfect place.
although he did not engage in polemics against humanitarian reformers and cosmic optimists hawthorne wrote parables and allegories that implicitly questioned the fundamental assumptions of pre civil war reform.
one does not have to agree with hawthornes antiprogressive view of the human condition to acknowledge that the dreams of perfectionist reformers promised more than they could possibly deliver.
revivals could not make all men like christ temperance could not solve all social problems abolitionist agitation could not bring a peaceful end to slavery and transcendentalism as emerson himself sometimes conceded could not fully emancipate people from the limitations and frustrations of daily life.
the consequences of perfectionist efforts were often far different from what their proponents expected.
in defense of the reformers however one could argue that hawthornes skepticism and fatalism were a prescription for doing nothing in the face of intolerable evils.
if the reform impulse was long on inspirational rhetoric but somewhat short on durable practical achievements it did at least disturb the complacent and opportunistic surface of american life and open the way to necessary changes.
complete the assignment the legal rights of married women reforming the law of coverture on myhistorylab law and society b y the common law in effect in the united states in the early nineteenth century women lost their legal personality when they married.
the system of coverture governed the union of husband and wife married women were under the wing protection or cover of their husbands.
coverture was based on the english medieval feudal system in which lords and vassals owed allegiance to the king and commoners to lords and vassals.
under the common law of england husband and wife were referred to as baron and feme william blackstone the english jurist professor of common law and author of commentaries on the law of england explained the word baron or lord attributes to the husband not a very courteous superiority.
if the baron kills his feme it is the same as if he had killed a stranger or any other person but if the feme kills her baron it is regarded by the laws as a much more atrocious crime as she not only breaks through the restraints of humanity and conjugal affection but throws off all subjection to the authority of her husband.
and therefore the law denominates her crime a species of treason and condemns her to the same punishment as if she had killed the king as blackstone explained by marriage the husband and wife are one person in the law coverture denied married women their rights to own and manage property to form contracts to sue and be sued and to exercise legal control over children.
upon marriage all of a wifes personal property became her the legal rights of married women reforming the law of coverture husbands which he could give or will to someone else if he chose.
the husband could not sell his wifes real estate but he could control and manage it and any profits derived from the property belonged to him.
coverture had a few benefits for women.
husbands took legal responsibility for any crimes their wives committed and sometimes wives could avoid responsibility for unwise financial transactions because they had had no legal right to enter into them.
a widow had a right to onethird of her husbands property her dower if he died without a will.
and a husband had a limited obligation to provide for his wifes necessaries blackstone concluded his chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 sustained the new deal fdr announced that dr.
new deal had given way to dr.
win the war congress already controlled by a conservative coalition of southern democrats and northern republicans had almost slipped into gop hands in 1942 with a very low voter turnout due in part to the large numbers of men in service and uprooted workers who failed to meet residency requirements for voting the republicans won forty four new seats in the house and nine in the senate and elected governors in new york and california as well.
in 1944 roosevelt responded to the democratic slippage by dropping henry wallace his liberal and visionary vice president for harry truman a moderate and down to earth missouri senator who was acceptable to all factions of the democratic party.
equally important fdr received increased political support from organized labor which had grown in membership during the war from ten to fifteen million.
the newly organized political action committee pac of the cio headed by sidney hillman conducted massive door to door drives to register millions of workers and their families.
the election of 1944 candidate roosevelt dewey party democrat republican popular vote 25 602 504 22 006 285 electoral vote the republicans nominated thomas e dewey who had been elected governor of new york after gaining fame as a prosecutor of organized crime.
dewey moderate in his views played down opposition to the new deal and instead tried to make roosevelts age and health the primary issues along with the charge that the democrats were soft on communism.
despite his abrasive campaign style dewey did not advocate a return to isolationism.
the republican party was trying hard to shake the obstructionist image it had gained during the league of nations fight in 1919 it went on record in 1943 as favoring american postwar cooperation for world peace.
indeed dewey pioneered a bipartisan approach to foreign policy.
he accepted wartime planning for the future united nations and kept the issue of an international organization out of the campaign.
reacting to the issues of his age and health especially after a long bout with influenza in the spring fdr disregarded the advice of his doctors and took a five hour drive in an open car through the rain soaked streets of new york city just before the election.
his vitality impressed the voters and in november 1944 he swept back into office for a fourth term.
the campaign however had taken its toll.
the president suffering from high blood pressure and congestive heart failure had only a few months left to lead the nation.
victory how did the war end and what were its consequences.
world war ii ended with surprising swiftness.
by 1943 the axis tide had been turned in europe and asia and it did not take long for russia the united states and england to mount the offensives that drove germany and japan back across the vast areas they had conquered and set the stage for their final defeat.
the long awaited second front finally came on june 6 1944 for two years the united states and england concentrated on building up an invasion force of nearly three million troops and a vast armada of ships and landing craft to carry them across the english channel.
hoping to catch hitler by surprise eisenhower chose the normandy peninsula where the absence of good harbors had led to lighter german fortifications.
allied aircraft bombed northern france for six weeks preceding the assault in order to block the movement of german reinforcements once the invasion began.
d day was originally set for june 5 but bad weather forced a delay.
relying on a forecasted break in the storm eisenhower gambled on going ahead on june 6 during the night three divisions parachuted down behind the german defenses at dawn the british and american troops fought their way ashore at five points along a sixty mile stretch of beach encountering stiff german resistance at several points.
by the end of the day however eisenhower had won his beachhead a week later more than one third of a million men were slowly pushing back the german forces through the hedgerows of normandy.
the breakthrough came on july 25 when general omar bradley decimated the enemy with a massive artillery and aerial bombardment at saint l opening a gap for general george pattons third army.
american tanks raced across the french countryside trapping thousands of germans and liberating paris by august 25 allied troops reached the rhine river by september but a shortage of supplies especially gasoline forced a three month halt.
hitler took advantage of this breathing spell to deliver a daring counterattack.
in mid december the remaining german armored divisions burst through a weak point in the allied lines in the ardennes forest planning a breakout to the coast that would have cut off nearly one third of eisenhowers forces.
a combination of tactical surprise and bad weather which prevented allied air support led to a huge bulge in the american lines.
but an airborne division dug in at the key crossroads of bastogne in belgium and held off a much larger german force.
allied reinforcements and clearing weather then combined to end the attack.
by committing nearly all his reserves to the battle of the bulge hitler had delayed eisenhowers advance into germany but he also had fatally weakened german resistance in the west.
the end came quickly.
a massive russian offensive began in mid january and swept across the oder river toward berlin.
general bradleys troops finding a bridge left virtually intact by the retreating germans crossed the rhine on march 7 eisenhower overruled the british who favored one concentrated drive on berlin.
instead the allied forces advanced on a broad front capturing the industrial ruhr basin and breaking the nazi death grip on prisoner populations.
see the feature essay the face of the holocaust pp.
the americans and british met the russians at the elbe in late april.
with the red army already in the suburbs of berlin adolf hitler committed suicide on april 30 a week later on may 7 1945 eisenhower accepted the unconditional surrender of all german forces.
just eleven months and a day after the landings victory view the closer look d day landing june 6 1944 the d day landing by american and british forces on june 6 1944 actually represented two landings an airborne assault of 24 000 allied paratroopers shortly after midnight and an allied amphibious landing by allied armored and infantry divisions at 6 30 am off the coast of france in normandy.
in normandy the allied forces had brought the war in europe to a successful conclusion.
war aims and wartime diplomacy the american contribution to hitlers defeat was relatively minor compared to the damage inflicted by the soviet union.
at the height of the german invasion of russia more than 300 soviet divisions had been locked in battle with 250 german ones a striking contrast to the 58 divisions the united states and britain used in the normandy invasion.
as his armies overran poland and the balkan countries joseph stalin was determined to retain control over this region which had been the historic pathway for western invasion into russia.
delay in opening the second front and an innate distrust of the west convinced the soviets that they should maximize their territorial gains by imposing communist regimes on eastern europe.
american postwar goals were quite different.
now believing the failure to join the league of nations in 1919 had led to the coming of world war ii the american people and their leaders vowed to put their faith in a new attempt at collective security.
at moscow in 1943 secretary of state cordell hull had won russian agreement to participate in a future world organization at the wars end.
the first wartime big three conference brought together roosevelt churchill and stalin at teheran iran in late 1943 stalin reaffirmed this commitment and also indicated to president roosevelt that russia would enter the war against japan once germany was defeated.
by the time the big three met again in february 1945 at the yalta conference the military situation favored the russians.
while british and american forces were still recovering from the battle of the bulge the red army was advancing to within fifty miles of berlin.
stalin drove a series of hard bargains.
he refused to give up his plans for communist domination of poland and the balkans although he did agree to roosevelts request for a declaration of liberated europe which called for free elections without providing for any method of enforcement or supervision.
more important for the united states stalin promised to enter the pacific war three months after germany surrendered.
in return roosevelt offered extensive concessions in asia chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 axis powers before world war ii 400 miles extent of axis control early nov 1942 400 kilometers finland allies norway neutral nations est.
northern ireland sweden warsaw be o mar.
de r austria switz.
s ov ie t uni o n poland g stalingrad aug 21 1942 jan 31 1943 ukraine hungary caucasus romania aug a east prussia ger.
el france vichy france.
19 apr lith.
rr germany.
battle of cze c h the bulge oslo vakia dec 16 1944 jan 31 1945 danu be r normandy paris liberated aug 1944 ic au rhine r at l a n t i c ocean lt ba berlin surrendered may 2 1945 neth.
moscow aug 1944 denmark g reat bri tai n d day june 6 1944 volg a r a north sea london t 1 sep lat.
se major battles ireland leningrad besieged sept 1941 june 19 1944 ju ly allied troop movements r danube dec 1944 yugo.
italy port.
spain black sea bulgaria rome liberated june 4 1944 a turkey greece nov sp.
morocco july 1943 sicily syria rhodes it.
kasserine pass feb 14 22 1943 morocco tunisia cyprus br.
mediterranean sea palestine f r e n c h n or t h af r ic a br.
19 el alamein oct 23 nov.
5 1942 algeria libya it.
egypt transjordan suez canal nile r vichy france joined allies nov 1942 world war ii in europe and north africa the tide of battle shifted in this theater during the winter of 1942 1943.
the massive german assault on the eastern front was turned back by the russians at stalingrad and the allied forces recaptured north africa.
including russian control over manchuria.
while neither a sellout nor a betrayal as some critics have charged yalta was a significant diplomatic victory for the soviets one that reflected russias major contribution to a victory in europe.
for the president the long journey to yalta proved to be too much.
his health continued to fail after his return to washington.
in early april fdr left the capital for warm springs georgia where he had always been able to relax.
he was sitting for his portrait at midday on april 12 1945 when he suddenly complained of a terrific headache then slumped forward and died.
the nation mourned a man who had gallantly met the challenge of depression and global war.
unfortunately fdr had taken no steps to prepare his successor for the difficult problems that lay ahead.
the defeat of nazi germany dissolved the one strong bond between the united states and the soviet union.
with very different histories cultures and ideologies the two nations were bound to drift apart.
it was now up to the inexperienced harry truman to manage the growing rivalry that was destined to develop into the future cold war.
triumph and tragedy in the pacific the total defeat of germany in may 1945 turned all eyes toward japan.
although the combined chiefs of staff had originally estimated it would take eighteen months after germanys surrender to conquer japan american forces moved with surprising speed.
victory watch the video the big three yalta conference british prime minister winston churchill left and soviet foreign minister vyacheslav molotov right meet prior to the start of the yalta conference february 4 11 1945 the wartime conference also attended by president franklin roosevelt and soviet premier joseph stalin was organized mainly to discuss the postwar reorganization of european nations and soviet entrance into the war against japan.
admiral nimitz swept through the gilbert caroline and marshall islands in 1944 securing bases for further advances and building airfields for american b 29s to begin a deadly bombardment of the japanese home islands.
general macarthur cleared new guinea of the last japanese defender in early 1944 and began planning his long heralded return to the philippines.
american troops landed on the island of leyte on october 20 1944 and manila fell in early february 1945 the japanese navy in a pacific version of the battle of the bulge launched a daring three pronged attack on the american invasion fleet in leyte gulf.
the u s navy rallied to blunt all three japanese thrusts sinking four carriers and ending any further japanese naval threat.
the defeat of japan was now only a matter of time.
the united states had three possible ways to proceed.
the military favored a full scale invasion beginning on the southernmost island of kyushu in november 1945 and culminating with an assault on honshu the main island of japan and a climactic battle for tokyo in 1946 casualties were expected to run into the hundreds of thousands.
diplomats suggested a negotiated peace urging the united states to modify the unconditional surrender formula to permit japan to retain the institution of the emperor.
the third possibility involved the highly secret manhattan project.
since 1939 the united states had spent 2 billion to develop an atomic bomb based on the fission of radioactive uranium and plutonium.
scientists many of them refugees from europe worked to perfect this deadly new weapon at the university of chicago oak ridge tennessee hanford washington and a remote laboratory in los alamos new mexico.
in the new mexico desert on july 16 1945 they successfully tested the first atomic bomb creating a fireball brighter than several suns and a telltale mushroom cloud that rose some 40 000 feet above an enormous crater in the desert floor.
truman had been unaware of the existence of the manhattan project before he became president on april 12 now he simply followed the recommendation of a committee headed by secretary of war henry l stimson to drop the bomb on a japanese city.
the committee discussed but rejected the possibility of inviting the complete the assignment the face of the holocaust on myhistorylab feature essay the face of the holocaust thousands of piled shoes formerly belonging to jewish and other european men women and children murdered at an unidentified nazi death camp during world war ii.
t he liberation of the nazi death camps near the end of world war ii was not a priority objective nor was it a planned operation.
since 1942 the u s government had known that the nazis were murdering jews en masse but officials of the roosevelt administration were divided on what to do about it.
some argued for air raids on the death camps even if such raids were likely to kill large numbers of the jewish inmates.
others contended that air raids alone would not stop the killing that they would divert resources from the broader offensive against germany and that military victory was the surest path to the liberation of the camps.
in part because no one in the united states comprehended the full enormity of hitlers final solution roosevelt sided with the latter group and no special action was taken against the death camps.
as a result it was by chance that allied forces first stumbled upon the camps and the gis who threw open the gates to that living hell were totally unprepared for what they found.
in november 1944 the u s army discovered its first camp natzwillerstruthof which had been abandoned by the germans months before.
viewing natzwiller from a distance milton bracker of the new york times noted its deceptive similarity to an american civilian conservation corps camp the sturdy green barracks buildings looked exactly like those that housed forestry trainees in the u s during the early new deal as he toured the grounds however he faced a starker reality and slowly came to think the unthinkable.
in the crematorium he reported i cranked the elevator tray a few times and slid the furnace tray a few times and even at that moment i did not believe what i was doing was real there were no prisoners he wrote no screams no burly guards no taint of death in the air as on a battlefield bracker had to stretch his imagination to its limits to comprehend the camps silent testimony to the nazi attempt to exterminate the jews of europe.
u s military personnel who toured natzwiller shared this sense of the surreal.
in their report to headquarters they carefully qualified every observation.
they described what appeared to be a disinfection unit a room allegedly used as a lethal gas chamber a cellar room with a special type elevator and an incinerator room with equipment obviously intended for the burning of human bodies they saw before them the evidence of german atrocities but the truth was so horrible they could not quite bring themselves to draw the obvious conclusions.
inside the vicious heart robert abzugs study of the liberation of the concentration camps refers to this phenomenon as double vision faced with a revelation so terrible witnesses could not fully comprehend the evidence of the systematic murder of more than six million men women and children.
but as the allied armies advanced into germany the shocking evidence mounted.
on april 4 1945 the fourth armored division of the third army unexpectedly discovered ohrdruf a relatively small concentration camp.
ohrdrufs liberation had a tremendous impact on american forces.
it was the first camp discovered intact with its grisly array of the dead and dying.
inside the compound corpses were piled in heaps in the barracks.
an infantryman recalled i guess the most vivid recollection of the whole camp is the pyre that was located on the edge of the camp.
it was a big pit where they stacked bodies stacked bodies and wood and burned them on april 12 generals eisenhower bradley and patton toured ohrdruf.
the generals professional soldiers familiar with the devastation of battle had never seen its like.
years later bradley recalled the smell of death overwhelmed us even before we passed through the stockade.
more than 3200 naked emaciated bodies had been flung into shallow graves.
others lay in the street where they had fallen eisenhower ordered every available armed forces unit in the area to visit ohrdruf.
we are told that the american soldier does not know what he is fighting for said eisenhower.
now at least he will know what he is fighting against he urged government officials and journalists to visit the camps and tell the world.
in an official message eisenhower summed it up we are constantly finding german camps in which they have placed political prisoners where unspeakable conditions exist.
from my own personal observation i can state unequivocally that all written statements up to now do not paint the full horrors.
on april 11 the timberwolf division of the third army uncovered nordhausen.
they found three thousand dead and only seven hundred survivors.
the scene sickened battlehardened veterans the odors well there is no way to describe the odors.
many of the boys i am talking about now these were tough soldiers there were combat men who had been all the way through the invasion were ill and vomiting throwing up just at the sight of this.
for some the liberation of nordhausen changed the meaning of the war.
i must also say that my fellow gis most thought that any stories they had read in the paper.
were either not true or at least exaggerated.
and it did not sink in what this was all about until we got into nordhausen.
if the experience at nordhausen gave many gis a new sense of mission in battle it also forced them to distance themselves from the realities of the camps.
only by closing off their emotions could they go about the grim task of sorting out the living from the dead and tending to the survivors.
margaret bourke white whose life magazine photographs brought the horrors of the death camps to millions on the home front recalled working with a veil over my mind people often ask me how it is possible to photograph such atrocities.
in photographing the murder camps the protective veil was so tightly drawn that i hardly knew what i had taken until i saw prints of my own photographs.
by the end of 1945 most of the liberators had come home and returned to civilian life.
once home their experiences produced no common moral responses.
no particular pattern emerged in their occupational political and religious behavior beyond a fear of the rise of postwar totalitarianism shared by most americans.
few spoke publicly about their role in the liberation of the camps most found that after a short period of grim fascination their friends and families preferred to forget.
some had nightmares but few reported being tormented by memories.
for the liberators the ordeal was over.
for the survivors of the holocaust liberation was but the first step in the tortuous process of rebuilding broken bodies and shattered lives.
questions for discussion 1 why did american leaders during the war have such difficulty comprehending the scope of the holocaust.
2 how did the discovery of the holocaust confirm americans belief that the war was necessary and just.
chapter 16.
while segregation and disfranchisement began as informal arrangements in the immediate aftermath of the civil war they soon culminated in a legal regime of separation and exclusion that took firm hold in the 1890s.
throughout the south the new measures lent the sanction of law to a racial ostracism that included voting booths churches schools housing and jobs.
touching virtually all parts of life they affected public transportation hospitals prisons and asylums even funeral homes and cemeteries.
a number of influences lay behind their rapid growth.
by the 1870s many northerners had lost interest in guarding the rights of blacks.
weariness with civil war issues played a role in this trend as did beliefs in anglo saxon superiority and after the spanishamerican war of 1898 the acquisition of colonial subjects called revealingly the white mans burden in hawaii guam puerto rico and the philippines.
as a result the north and the federal government did little to stem the tide.
supreme court decisions between 1878 and 1898 gutted the reconstruction amendments and the legislation passed to enforce them leaving blacks virtually defenseless against political and social discrimination.
see table 19 1.
most visible in areas like voting jim crow laws soon penetrated nearly every aspect of southern life.
in 1915 a south carolina code banned textile factories from allowing laborers of different races to work together in the same room or to use the same entrances exits toilets and drinking water.
that year oklahoma required telephone companies to maintain separate phone booths for whites and blacks.
north carolina and florida ordered separate textbooks for black and white children.
florida even required that the books be segregated while they were in storage.
a new orleans ordinance placed black and white prostitutes in separate districts of the city.
there were jim crow bibles for african american witnesses in atlanta courts and jim crow elevators in atlanta buildings.
perhaps no event better expresses the cruel and barbaric nature of the racism and white supremacy that swept the south after reconstruction than lynching.
although lynchings were not confined to the south most occurred there and african american men were the most frequent victims.
here two men lean out of a barn window above a black man who is about to be hanged.
others below prepare to set on fire the pile of hay at the victims feet.
lynchings were often public events drawing huge crowds to watch the victims agonizing death.
jim crow laws expanded during the 1920s and 1930s.
mississippi segregated white and black patients in hospitals and mandated that nurses could tend only the sick of their own race.
city ordinances required jim crow taxis in jacksonville florida in 1929 birmingham alabama in 1930 and atlanta georgia in 1940 in 1930 a birmingham ordinance forbade blacks and whites from playing each other at dominoes or checkers.
lynchings also spread.
between 1889 and 1899 an average of 187 blacks were lynched every year for alleged offenses against white supremacy.
many blacks and whites convicted of petty crimes were leased out to private contractors whose brutality rivaled that of the most sadistic slaveholders.
the convict lease system enabled entrepreneurs such as mine owners and lumber companies to rent prisoners the stirrings of reform supreme court decisions affecting black civil rights 1875 1900 case hall v decuir 1878 effects of courts decisions struck down louisiana law prohibiting racial discrimination by common carriers railroads steamboats buses.
declared the law a burden on interstate commerce over which states had no authority.
united states v declared federal laws to punish crimes harris 1882 such as murder and assault unconstitutional.
declared such crimes to be the sole concern of local government.
ignored the frequent racial motivation behind such crimes in the south.
civil rights struck down civil rights act of 1875 cases 1883 declared that congress may not legislate on civil rights unless a state passes a discriminatory law.
declared the fourteenth amendment silent on racial discrimination by private citizens.
plessy v upheld louisiana statute requiring ferguson separate but equal accommodations on 1896 railroads.
declared that segregation is not necessarily discrimination.
williams v upheld state law requiring a literacy test mississippi to qualify for voting.
refused to find any 1898 implication of racial discrimination in the law although it permitted illiterate whites to vote if they understood the constitution.
using such laws southern states rapidly disfranchised blacks.
from the state and treat them as they saw fit.
unlike slaveowners they suffered no loss when a forced laborer died from overwork.
racism of course was not limited to the south as race riots in east st louis illinois 1917 and chicago 1919 among other events attested.
in 1903 the new york public school system banned uncle toms cabin from its reading lists saying that harriet beecher stowes depiction of antebellum slavery does not belong to today but to an unhappy period of our countrys history the memory of which it is not well to revive in our children encountering the racism of the north far less brutal but racism nonetheless blacks who had migrated there called it james crow.
the stirrings of reform how did life in the growing cities lead to ideas of reform.
when henry george one of the eras leading reformers asked a friend what could be done about the problem of political corruption in american cities his friend replied nothing.
you and i can do nothing at all.
we can only wait for evolution.
perhaps in four or five thousand years evolution may have carried men beyond this state of things this emphasis on the slow pace of change reflected the doctrine of social darwinism based on the writings of english social philosopher herbert spencer.
in several influential books spencer took the evolutionary theories of charles darwin and applied darwinian principles of natural selection to society combining biology and sociology in a theory of social selection that tried to explain human progress.
like animals society evolved slowly by adapting to the environment.
the survival of the fittest a term that spencer not darwin invented preserved the strong and weeded out the weak.
if they are sufficiently complete to live they do live and it is well they should live.
if they are not sufficiently complete to live they die and it is best they should die social darwinism had a number of influential followers in the united states including william graham sumner a professor of political and social science at yale university.
one of the countrys best known academic figures sumner was forceful and eloquent.
in writings such as what social classes owe to each other 1883 and the absurd effort to make the world over 1894 he argued that government action on behalf of the poor or weak interfered with evolution and sapped the species.
reform tampered with the laws of nature.
it is the greatest folly of which a man can be capable to sit down with a slate and pencil to plan out a new social world sumner said.
the influence of social darwinism on american thinking has been exaggerated but in the powerful hands of sumner and others it did influence some journalists ministers and policy makers.
between 1877 and the 1890s however it came under increasing attack.
in fields such as religion economics politics literature and law thoughtful people raised questions about established conditions and suggested the need for reform.
progress and poverty read and reread passed from hand to hand henry georges nationwide best seller progress and poverty 1879 led the way to a more critical appraisal of american society in the 1880s and beyond.
the book jolted traditional thought.
it was responsible one historian has said for starting along new lines of thinking an amazing number of the men and women who became leaders of reform.
born in 1839 the child of a poor philadelphia family george had little formal schooling.
as a boy he went to sea he also worked as a prospector printer and journalist.
self educated as an economist he moved to san francisco in the late 1850s and began to study the fierce struggle of our civilized life disturbed by the depression of the 1870s and labor upheavals such as the great railroad strikes of 1877 george saw modern society rich complex with material goods hitherto unknown as sadly flawed.
the present century he wrote has been marked by a prodigious increase in wealth producing power.
it was natural to expect and it was expected that.
real poverty would become a thing of the past instead he argued it becomes no easier for the masses of our people to make a living.
on the contrary it is becoming harder.
the wealthy class is becoming more wealthy but the poorer class is becoming more dependent.
the gulf between the employed and the employer is growing wider social contrasts are becoming sharper as liveried carriages appear so do barefooted children.
chapter review retreat reversal and rivalry turning the tide against the axis why were the united states and japan on a collision course in the years following world war i.
how did america and its allies halt the advances of germany and japan.
to sustain its developing industrial economy after world war i japan sought to dominate china and exploit its resources.
in response the united states either had to abandon china or forcefully oppose japans expansion there.
p 639 the united states formed an alliance with britain and the soviet union against germany and japan.
american and british forces fought the germans in north africa and italy while soviet forces beat back the germans in russia.
american ships and planes defeated japanese forces at the coral sea and midway.
p 647 isolationism the home front what were isolationism and why was it so appealing to americans in the 1920s and 1930s.
mongolia manchuku manchuria a how did american domestic life change during world war ii.
ug 1 disillusionment with the outcome of world war i led to a policy of isolationism by which americans hoped to avoid responsibility for the peace of europe and asia and to spare themselves the agony of war if peace failed.
isolationism had traditionally served americans well and many americans expected that it would continue to do so.
p 641 during the war american industry churned out equipment at a rate unimagined before 1941 record numbers of women and minorities entered the workforce.
but 120 000 japanese americans were forced into concentration camps.
p 649 china kore nanking nagasak aug 9 1945 victory the road to war how did the united states go from neutrality in the 1930s to war in 1941.
fdr gradually led the united states from neutrality in the 1930s to war in 1941 responding to german and japanese aggression with careful political and diplomatic steps including aid to britain an undeclared naval war against germany and economic pressure on japan which lashed out by attacking pearl harbor.
p 644 how did the war end and what were its consequences.
the war in europe ended in may 1945 after allied and soviet forces overran germany.
the war in the pacific ended after the atomic bombing of hiroshima and nagasaki and left the united states in undisputed control of japan.
p 654 study resources key terms and definitions kellogg briand pact also called the pact of paris this 1928 agreement was the brainchild of u s secretary of state frank b kellogg and french premier aristide briand.
its signatories eventually including nearly all nations pledged to shun war as an instrument of policy.
it had little effect on the conduct of world affairs.
p 638 axis powers during world war ii the alliance between italy germany and japan was known as the rome berlin tokyo axis and the three members were called the axis powers.
they fought against the allied powers led by the united states britain and the soviet union.
p 642 neutrality acts laws in the 1930s that forbade selling munitions or lending money to belligerents.
the 1937 act required that all other trade with countries at war be conducted on a cash and carry basis.
p 642 lend lease in 1941 congress gave president franklin d roosevelt the authority to sell lend lease or transfer war materials to any country whose defense he declared vital to that of the united states.
p 644 pearl harbor on december 7 1941 japanese warplanes attacked the u s fleet at pearl harbor hawaii.
the attack marked americas entrance into world war ii.
p 647 d day june 6 1944 the day allied troops crossed the english channel and opened a second front in western europe during world war ii.
the d stands for disembarkation to leave a ship and go ashore.
p 654 yalta conference a wartime conference in february 1945 in which the allies agreed to final plans for the defeat of germany and the terms of its occupation.
the soviets agreed to allow free elections in poland but they were never held.
p 655 manhattan project the top secret world war ii program that produced the first atomic weapons.
p 657 holocaust the slaughter of six million jews and other persons by hitlers regime.
p 659 critical thinking questions 1 how did the memory of world war i affect the american approach to world war ii.
4 what happened to the civil rights movement during the war.
5 was the atom bomb necessary to end the war.
why or why not.
2 how did franklin roosevelt aid britain prior to american entry into world war ii.
why did he have to be so careful in doing so.
3 what were some causes of tension within the american alliance during the war.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 20 political realignments in the 1890s read the document proceedings of grange session 1879 the alliance movement grew quickly in the late 1800s among discontented farmers.
this photograph shows southern alliance members meeting at the cabin that was the site of their first formal meeting in 1877 in lampasas county texas.
the cabin was later uprooted and exhibited at the worlds columbian exposition in chicago in 1893 the president of the national farmers alliance polk believed in scientific farming and cooperative action.
jeremiah simpson of kansas probably the most able of the western leaders was reflective and well read.
a follower of reformer henry george he pushed for major social and economic change.
also from kansas mary e lease helped head a movement remarkably open to female leadership.
a captivating speaker she made 160 speeches during the summer of 1890 calling on farmers to rise against wall street and the industrial east.
meeting in ocala florida in 1890 the alliance adopted the ocala demands the platform the organization pushed as long as it existed.
first and foremost the demands called for the creation of a sub treasury system which would allow farmers to store their crops in government warehouses.
in return they could claim treasury notes for up to 80 percent of the local market value of the crop a loan to be repaid when the crops were sold.
farmers could thus hold their crops for the best price.
the ocala demands also urged the free coinage of silver an end to protective tariffs and national banks a federal income tax the direct election of senators by voters instead of state legislatures and tighter regulation of railroad companies.
the alliance strategy worked well in the elections of 1890 in kansas the alliance related peoples party organized just a few months before elected four congressmen and a u s senator.
across the south the alliance won victories based on the alliance yardstick a demand that democratic party candidates pledge support for alliance measures.
alliance leaders claimed thirty eight alliance supporters elected to congress with at least a dozen more pledged to alliance principles.
the peoples party after the 1890 elections northern alliance leaders urged the formation of a national third party to promote reform although the southerners remained reluctant still hopeful of capturing control of the democratic party.
plans for a new party were discussed at alliance conventions in 1891 and the following year.
in july 1892 a convention in omaha nebraska formed the new peoples or populist party.
southern alliance leaders joined in convinced now that there was no reason to cooperate with the rise of the populist movement read the document mary e lease the populist crusader 1892 to attract more than a million.
he carried kansas idaho nevada and colorado along with portions of north dakota and oregon for a total of twenty two electoral votes a measure of agrarian unrest.
the populists elected governors in kansas and north dakota ten congressmen five senators and about fifteen hundred members of state legislatures.
despite the populists victories the election brought disappointment.
southern democrats used intimidation fraud and manipulation to hold down populist votes.
weaver was held to less than a quarter of the vote in every southern state except alabama.
in most of the country he lost heavily in urban areas with the exception of some mining towns in the far west.
he also failed to win over most farmers.
in no midwestern state except kansas and north dakota did he win as much as 5 percent of the vote.
in the election of 1892 many voters switched parties but they tended to realign with the democrats rather than the populists whose platform on silver and other issues had relatively little appeal among city dwellers or factory workers.
although the populists did run candidates in the next three presidential elections they had reached their peak in 1892 that year farmers alliance membership dropped for the second year in a row and the organization which was once the breeding ground of the peoples party was broken.
while it lived the alliance was one of the most powerful protest movements in american history.
catalyzing the feelings of hundreds of thousands of farmers it attempted to solve specific economic problems while at the same time advancing a larger read the document populist mary e lease advised farmers to raise less corn and more hell she also said if one man has not enough to eat three times a day and another man has 25 million that last man has something that belongs to the first ocala platform 1890 election of 1892 electoral vote by state popular vote democratic grover cleveland 5 556 918 republican benjamin harrison 5 176 108 people s populist james b weaver 1 027 329 source kansas state historical society.
the democrats who exploited alliance popularity but failed to adopt its reforms.
in the south some populists had worked to unite black and white farmers.
they are in the ditch just like we are a white texas populist said.
blacks and whites served on populist election committees they spoke from the same platforms and they ran on the same tickets.
populist sheriffs called blacks for jury duty an unheard of practice in the close of the century south.
in 1892 a black populist was threatened with lynching he took refuge with tom watson and two thousand white farmers some of whom rode all night to get there guarded watsons house until the threat passed.
many of the delegates at the omaha convention had planned to nominate leonidas l polk for president but he died suddenly in june and the convention turned instead to james b weaver of iowa a former congressman union army general and third party candidate for president in 1880 on the greenback labor party ticket.
as its platform the peoples party adopted many of the ocala demands.
weaver waged an active campaign but with mixed results.
he won 1 027 329 votes the first third party presidential candidate ever 264 133 minor parties 12 024 488 electors classed as democratic were in many states elected on joint democratic and people s party tickets.
1 1 utah terr.
new ariz terr.
mexico terr.
indian terr.
chapter 20 political realignments in the 1890s on myhistorylab time line 1876 mark twain publishes the adventures of tom sawyer 1877 disputed election of 1876 results in awarding of presidency to republican rutherford b hayes republican james a garfield elected president garfield assassinated vice president chester a arthur becomes president democrat grover cleveland elected president defeating republican james g blaine cleveland calls for lowering of tariff duties republican benjamin harrison wins presidential election national farmers alliance and industrial union formed to address problems of farmers republican dominated billion dollar congress enacts mckinley tariff act sherman antitrust act and sherman silver purchase act farmers alliance adopts the ocala demands 1892 democrat cleveland defeats republican harrison for presidency peoples party formed financial panic touches off depression lasting until 1897 sherman silver purchase act repealed world columbian exposition opens in chicago coxeys army marches on washington pullman employees strike republican mckinley defeats william jennings bryan democratic and populist candidate in battle of the standards gold discovered in alaska dingley tariff act raises tariff duties mckinley reelected again defeating bryan gold standard act establishes gold as standard of currency mckinley assassinated vice president theodore roosevelt assumes presidency naturalist writer theodore dreiser publishes sister carrie chapter 29 affluence and anxiety listen to the audio file events abroad added to the feeling of anxiety in the postwar years.
nuclear war became a frighteningly real possibility.
the rivalry with the soviet union had led to the second red scare with charges of treason and disloyalty being leveled at loyal americans.
many americans joined senator joseph mccarthy in searching for the communist enemy at home rather than abroad.
loyalty oaths and book burning revealed how insecure americans had become in the era of the cold war.
the 1950s also witnessed a growing demand by african americans for equal opportunity in an age of abundance.
the civil rights movement along with strident criticism of the consumer culture revealed that beneath the bland surface of suburban affluence forces for change were at work.
little boxes the postwar boom how did the american economy evolve after world war ii.
a photograph for a levittown house.
the levittown builders applied the principles of mass production used in auto manufacturing to house construction.
one important difference was the fact that the product stood stationary while workers came to the site to perform their specialized tasks.
of the 1930s.
the obsession with material goods took on an almost desperate quality as if a profusion of houses cars and home appliances could guarantee that the nightmare of depression would never return.
critics were quick to disparage the quality of life in suburban society.
they condemned the conformity charging the newly affluent with forsaking traditional american individualism to live in identical houses drive look alike cars and accumulate the same material possessions.
folksinger malvina reynolds caught the essence of postwar suburbia in a 1962 song little boxes on the hillside little boxes made of ticky tacky little boxes on the hillside little boxes all the same.
theres a green one and a pink one and a blue one and a yellow one and theyre all made out of ticky tacky and they all look just the same 1 little boxes words and music by malvina reynolds.
copyright 1962 schroder music co ascap.
used by permission.
all rights reserved.
for fifteen years following world war ii the nation witnessed a period of unparalleled economic growth.
a pent up demand for consumer goods fueled a steady industrial expansion.
heavy government spending during the cold war added an extra stimulus to the economy offsetting brief recessions in 1949 and 1953 and moderating a steeper one in 1957 1958.
by the end of the 1950s the american people had achieved an affluence that finally erased the lingering fears of the great depression.
postwar prosperity the economy began its upward surge as the result of two longterm factors.
first american consumers after being held in check by depression and then by wartime scarcities finally had a chance to indulge their suppressed appetites for material goods.
at the wars end personal savings in the united states stood at more than 37 billion providing a powerful stimulus to consumption.
initially american factories could not turn out enough automobiles and appliances to satisfy the horde of buyers.
by 1950 however production lines had finally caught up with the demand.
in that year americans bought more than six million cars and the gross national product gnp reached 318 billion 50 percent higher than in 1940.
the cold war provided the additional stimulus the economy needed when postwar expansion slowed.
the marshall plan and other foreign aid programs financed a heavy export trade.
the korean war helped overturn a brief recession and ensured continued prosperity as the government spent massive amounts on guns planes and munitions.
in 1952 the nation spent 44 billion two thirds of the federal budget on national defense.
the postwar boom although eisenhower managed to bring about some modest reductions defense spending continued at a level of 40 billion throughout the decade.
the nation achieved an affluence in the 1950s that made the persisting fear of another great depression seem irrational.
the baby boom and the spectacular growth of suburbia served as great stimulants to the consumer goods industries.
manufacturers turned out an ever increasing number of refrigerators washing machines and dishwashers to equip the kitchens of levittown and its many imitators across the country.
the automobile industry thrived with suburban expansion as two car families became more and more common.
in 1955 in an era when oil was abundant and gasoline sold for less than 30 cents a gallon detroit sold a record eight million cars.
the electronics industry boomed.
consumers were eager to acquire the latest marvel of home entertainment the television set.
commercial enterprises snapped up office machines and the first generation of computers industry installed electronic sensors and processors as it underwent extensive automation and the military displayed an insatiable appetite for electronic devices for its planes and ships.
as a result american industry averaged more than 10 billion a year in capital investment and the number of persons employed rose above the long sought goal of sixty million nationwide.
yet the economic abundance of the 1950s was not without its problems.
while some sections of the nation notably the emerging sunbelt areas of the south and west benefited enormously from the growth of the aircraft and electronics industries older manufacturing regions such as new england did not fare as well.
the steel industry increased its capacity during the decade but it began to fall behind the rate of national growth.
agriculture continued to experience bumper crops and low prices so rural regions like the vast areas of the plains states failed to share in the general affluence.
unemployment persisted despite the boom rising to more than 7 percent in a sharp recession that hit the country in the fall of 1957 and lasted through the summer of 1958 the rate of economic growth slowed in the second half of the decade causing concern about the continuing vitality of the american economy.
none of these flaws however could disguise the fact that the nation was prospering to an extent no one dreamed possible in the 1930s.
the gnp grew to 440 billion by 1960 more than double the 1940 level.
more important workers now labored fewer than forty hours a week they rarely worked on saturdays and nearly all enjoyed a two week paid vacation each year.
by the mid 1950s the average american family had twice as much real income to spend as its counterpart had possessed in the boom years of the 1920s.
from 1945 to 1960 per capita disposable income rose by 500 to 1 845 for every man woman and child in the country.
the american people in one generation had moved from poverty and depression to the highest standard of living the world had ever known.
life in the suburbs sociologists had difficulty describing the nature of suburban society in the 1950s.
some saw it as classless while others noted the absence of both the very rich and the very poor and consequently labeled it middle class rather than forming a homogeneous social group though the suburbs contained a surprising variety of people whether classified as upper lower lower middle and upper middle or simply as blue collar white collar and professional.
doctors and lawyers often lived in the same developments as salesclerks and master plumbers.
the traditional distinctions of ancestry education and size of residence no longer differentiated people as easily as they had in the past.
yet suburbs could vary widely from working class communities clustered near factories built in the countryside to old elitist areas such as scarsdale new york and shaker heights ohio.
most were almost exclusively white and christian but suburbs such as great neck on long island and richmond heights outside miami enabled jews and blacks to take part in the flight from the inner city.
life in all the suburban communities depended on the automobile.
highways and expressways allowed fathers to commute to jobs in the cities often an hour or more away.
children might ride buses to and from school but mothers had to drive them to piano lessons and little league ballgames.
two cars became a necessity for almost every suburban family thus helping spur the boom in automobile production.
in 1948 only 59 percent of american families owned a car just a few years later nearly every suburban family had at least one vehicle and many had several.
in the new drive in culture people shopped at the stores that grew up first in miracle miles along the highways and later at the shopping centers that spread across the countryside in the 1950s.
there were only eight shopping centers in the entire country in 1946 hundreds appeared over the next fifteen years including poplar plaza in memphis with one large department store thirty retail shops and parking for more than five hundred cars.
in 1956 the first enclosed air conditioned mall the southdale shopping center opened outside minneapolis.
despite the increased mobility provided by the car the home became the focus for activities and aspirations.
the postwar shortage of housing that often forced young couples to live with their parents or in laws created an intense demand for new homes in the suburbs.
when questioned prospective buyers expressed a desire for more space for comfort and roominess and for privacy and freedom of action in their new residences.
men and women who moved to the suburbs prized the new kitchens with their built in dishwashers electric ovens and gleaming counters the extra bedrooms that ensured privacy from and for the children the large garages that could be converted into recreation rooms and the small neat lawns that gave them an area for outdoor activities as well as a new way to compete with their neighbors.
togetherness became the code word of the 1950s.
families did things together whether gathering around the tv sets that dominated living rooms attending community activities or taking vacations in the huge station wagons of the era.
but there were some less attractive consequences of the new suburban lifestyle.
the extended family in which several generations had lived in close proximity was a casualty of the boom in small detached homes.
as historian kenneth jackson noted suburban life ordained that most children would grow up in intimate contact only with their parents and siblings for many families grandparents aunts and uncles cousins and more distant relatives would become remote figures seen only on special occasions.
the nuclear family typical of the suburb did little to encourage the development of feminism.
the end of the war saw many women who had entered the workforce return to the home where chapter 6 the republican experiment compromising on slavery read the document the new jersey plan 1787 william paterson 1745 1806 was a distinguished lawyer statesman and associate justice of the u s supreme court from new jersey.
while serving as a delegate to the constitutional convention in philadelphia in 1787 paterson proposed the new jersey plan for a unicameral legislative body with equal representation from each state.
patersons legislative proposal was rejected in favor of the great compromise which provided for two legislative bodies a senate with equal representation for each state and a house of representatives with representation based on population.
the committee recommended that the states be equally represented in the upper house of congress while representation was to be proportionate in the lower house.
only the lower house could initiate money bills.
franklins committee also decided that one member of the lower house should be selected for every thirty thousand inhabitants of a state.
southern delegates insisted that this number include slaves.
in the so called three fifths rule the committee agreed that for the purpose of determining representation in the lower house slaves would be counted but not as much as free persons.
for every five slaves a congressional district received credit for three free voters a deal that gave the south much greater power in the new government than it would have otherwise received.
as with most compromise solutions the one negotiated by franklins committee fully satisfied no one.
it did however overcome a major impasse and after the small states gained an assured voice in the upper house the senate they cooperated enthusiastically in creating a strong central government.
during the final days of august a deeply disturbing issue came before the convention.
it was a harbinger of the great sectional crisis of the nineteenth century.
many northern representatives detested the slave trade and wanted it to end immediately.
they despised the three fifths ruling that seemed to award slaveholders extra power in government simply because they owned slaves.
it seemed now to be pretty well understood madison jotted in his private notes that the real difference of interest lay not between the large and small but between the n and southn.
the institution of slavery and its consequences formed a line of discrimination whenever northern delegates and on this point they were by no means united pushed too aggressively southerners threatened to bolt the convention thereby destroying any hope of establishing a strong national government.
curiously even recalcitrant southerners avoided using the word slavery.
they seemed embarrassed to call the institution by its true name and in the constitution itself slaves were described as other persons such persons persons held to service or labour in other words as everything but slaves.
a few northern delegates such as roger sherman of connecticut sought at every turn to mollify the southerners especially the south carolinians who spoke so passionately about preserving slavery.
gouverneur morris a pennsylvania representative would have none of it.
he regularly reminded the convention that the inhabitant of georgia and s c who goes to the coast of africa and in defiance of the most sacred laws of humanity tears away his fellow creatures from their dearest connections and damns them to the most cruel bondage shall have more votes in a government instituted for the protection of the rights of mankind than the citizen of pa or n jersey largely ignoring morriss stinging attacks the delegates reached an uneasy compromise on the continuation of the slave trade.
southerners feared that the new congress would pass commercial regulations adversely affecting the planters taxes on the watch the video slavery and the constitution many scholars consider the original u s constitution to be a pro slavery document since its articles protected the international slave trade and through the 3 5s clause awarded states extra representation based on the number of slaves that they held.
have we fought for this revolution or reform.
the articles of confederation and the constitution compared political challenge mode of ratification or amendment number of houses in legislature mode of representation articles of confederation require confirmation by every state legislature one two to seven delegates represent each state each state holds only one vote in congress mode of election and term of office delegates appointed annually by state legislatures executive no separate executive delegates annually elect one of their number as president who possesses no veto no power to appoint officers or to conduct policy.
administrative functions of government theoretically carried out by committee of states practically by various single headed departments most adjudication left to state and local courts congress is final court of appeal in disputes between states states alone can levy taxes congress funds the common treasury by making requisitions for state contributions congress regulates foreign commerce by treaty but holds no check on conflicting state regulations judiciary taxation regulation of commerce export of rice and tobacco for example.
they demanded therefore that no trade laws be passed without a two thirds majority of the federal legislature.
they backed down on this point however in exchange for guarantees that congress would not interfere with the slave trade until 1808 see chapter 14 the sectional crisis the election of 1852 candidate pierce scott hale popular vote 1 601 117 1 385 453 155 825 party democratic whig free soil pierce received 254 electoral votes from 27 states while scott carried only 4 states with 42 electoral votes.
this outcome revealed that the whig party was in deep trouble because it lacked a program that would distinguish it from the democrats and would appeal to voters in both sections of the country.
despite their overwhelming victory in 1852 the democrats had reasons for anxiety about the loyalty of their supporters.
because the major parties had ceased to offer clear cut alternatives to the electorate voter apathy or alienation was a growing trend in the early 1850s.
electoral vote daughters were being raised as catholics was publicized to demonstrate his good intentions toward immigrant communities.
this strategy backfired.
for the most part catholic immigrants retained their democratic allegiance and some nativist whigs apparently sat out the election to protest their partys disregard of their cultural prejudices.
but the main cause for scotts crushing defeat was the support he lost in the south when he allied himself with the dominant northern antislavery wing of the party led by senator william seward of new york.
the democratic candidate franklin pierce of new hampshire was a colorless nonentity compared to his rival but he ran up huge majorities in the deep south where whigs stayed home in massive numbers.
he also edged out scott in most of the free states.
in the most one sided election since 1820 view the map the kansas nebraska act raises a storm in january 1854 senator stephen a douglas of illinois proposed a bill to organize the territory west of missouri and iowa.
since this region fell within the area where slavery had been banned by the missouri compromise douglas anticipated objections from southerners concerned about the creation of more free states.
to head off this opposition and keep the democratic party united douglas disregarded the compromise line and sought to set up the territorial government in kansas and nebraska on the basis of popular sovereignty relying on the alleged precedent set in the compromise of 1850 the compromise of 1850 and the kansas nebraska act british north america canada w lak mich la ke ie er iowa ohio ill utah territory pacific ocean vt n h ind.
pa n and maso ine l dixon r i conn n j del.
va kansas territory mo.
ky missouri compromise line 363 california indian territory new mexico territory n c 0 tenn s c ark.
ala ga atlantic ocean la.
texas fla free state or territory gulf of mexico slave state or territory opened to slavery by principle of popular sovereignty compromise of 1850 mass.
n y ron nebraska territory wis lake ontario hu minnesota territory oregon territory me.
uperior e r er nt to ng hi as s ke la lake michigan mexico opened to slavery by principle of popular sovereignty kansas nebraska act of 1854 the kansas nebraska act of 1854 500 miles 500 kilometers the kansas nebraska act applied the principle of popular sovereignty to voters in the kansas and nebraska territories allowing them to decide for themselves whether to permit slavery in their territories.
the act repudiated the missouri compromise of 1820 which had prohibited slavery in the territory of the louisiana purchase north of 3630 latitude.
political upheaval 1852 1856 douglas wanted to organize the kansas nebraska area quickly.
along with other midwestern promoters of the economic development of the frontier he hoped a railroad would soon be built from chicago to the pacific and did not want controversy over the status of slavery in the new territory to slow down the building of the railroad.
douglas also hoped his kansas nebraska bill would revive the spirit of manifest destiny that had given the democratic party cohesion and electoral success in the mid1840s see chapter 8.
the south even came away with a clause assuring the return of fugitive slaves.
we have obtained charles cotesworth pinckney told the planters of south carolina a right to recover our slaves in whatever part of america they may take refuge which is a right we had not before although these deals disappointed many northerners they conceded that establishing a strong national government was of greater immediate importance than ending the slave trade.
great as the evil is madison wrote a dismemberment of the union would be worse the last details on july 26 the convention formed a committee of detail a group that prepared a rough draft of the constitution.
after the committee completed its work writing a document that still after so constitution requires confirmation by three fourths of state conventions or legislatures two two senators represent each state in upper house each senator holds one vote.
one representative to lower house represents every thirty thousand people in 1788 in a state each representative holds one vote senators chosen by state legislatures for six year term direct election after 1913 representatives chosen by vote of citizens for two year term separate executive branch president elected by electoral college to four year term granted veto power to conduct policy and to appoint ambassadors judges and officers of executive departments established by legislation separate branch consisting of supreme court and inferior courts established by congress to enforce federal law federal government granted powers of taxation congress regulates foreign commerce by treaty all state regulations must obtain congressional consent many hours of debate preserved the fundamental points of the virginia plan the delegates reconsidered each article.
the task required the better part of a month.
during these sessions the members of the convention concluded that the president as they now called the executive should be selected by an electoral college a body of prominent men in each state chosen by local voters.
the number of electoral votes held by each state equaled its number of representatives and senators.
this awkward device guaranteed that the president would not be indebted to the congress for his office.
whoever received the second largest number of votes in the electoral college automatically became vice president.
in the event that no person received a majority of the votes the election would be decided by the lower house the house of representatives with each state casting a single vote.
delegates also armed the chief executive with veto power over legislation as well as the right to nominate judges.
both privileges of course would have been unthinkable a decade earlier but the state experiments revealed the importance of having an independent executive to maintain a balanced system of republican government.
complete the assignment the elusive constitution search for original intent on myhistorylab feature essay the elusive constitution search for original intent this nineteenth century engraving shows how the pennsylvania state house would have looked in 1776 after the revolution and the drafting of the constitution the building became known as independence hall.
during the hot summer of 1787 delegates kept the windows closed so that no one on the street could hear the debates.
m any prominent national leaders alarmed at a perceived judicial imperialism in recent activist courts have urged that judges interpret the constitution strictly according to the intent of the framers arguing that a jurisprudence of original intent is the only legitimate basis for constitutional decision making intentionalists demand that judges measure decisions against a demonstrable consensus among the framers and ratifiers as to principles stated or implied in the constitution yet when one considers circumstances surrounding the constitutions framing demonstration of the founders intent proves elusive indeed.
delegates to the constitutional convention in philadelphia in 1787 deliberately veiled the purpose of the convention in secrecy to avoid pressure by local constituencies who harbored deep suspicions concerning strong central government.
newspapers barred from access to the convention printed only occasional rumors.
delegates refused to speak or correspond with outsiders concerning the proceedings.
the strictness with which delegates observed the rule of secrecy not only restricted contemporary knowledge of what transpired but has also limited the number of sources in which subsequent generations may search for original intent.
only three members preserved complete accounts of convention debates.
these records remained unpublished for more than thirty years forcing the first generation of lawyers and federal judges to rely on the words of the constitution alone for clues to the framers intent.
the publication of the three accounts did not necessarily make the delegates intent more accessible.
the journal acts and proceedings of the convention assemblies in philadelphia recorded by the convention secretary william jackson provided only a chronological listing of motions resolutions and vote tallies.
his unpublished manuscript of convention debates which could have fleshed out the published journals mere skeleton of the proceedings was lost.
the notes of new york delegate robert yates appeared in 1821 as secret proceedings and debates of the convention assembled at philadelphia but the circumstances of their publication rendered them thoroughly unreliable.
their editor the former french minister citizen edmond gent attained notoriety in the 1790s when he violated american neutrality in the anglo french war by commissioning american privateers against british shipping.
gent supported states rights and popular government and manipulated yatess notes to support his views.
a comparison of secret proceedings with the two surviving pages of yatess manuscript reveals that gent altered or deleted more than half the original text.
if the intent of the delegates survives anywhere madisons notes of debates in the federal convention of 1787 provides its likeliest repository.
the father of the constitution as contemporaries called him carefully preserved notes on convention proceedings and took every measure to ensure their accuracy.
recognizing his own limitations as a stenographer madison did not try to record everything said but sought manuscript copies of delegates speeches that he incorporated into his notes at the end of each day.
madison also waited until the end of each day to record his own speeches every one of which was extemporaneous from memory.
at the conventions end he obtained a manuscript copy of secretary jacksons notes which he used to supplement and correct his own.
though madison tinkered at times with his notes over the next thirty years recent analysis has demonstrated that none of these minor corrections impaired the faithfulness of the text.
yet in spite of the meticulous care that madison lavished on his notes they remain at best incomplete repositories of the framers original intent.
each days notes contain only a few minutes of oral discourse whereas actual delivery occupied between five and seven hours.
furthermore written manuscripts of speeches may have approximated only roughly what the debaters actually said.
madisons speech on the benefits of a large republic for example occupies two closely reasoned pages in his notes.
yet others who took notes seem to have recorded a much shorter and far less impressive oral version.
such discrepancies raise important questions.
how did the framers understand the actual speeches on the convention floor.
how did their understanding shape their intentions.
how much of their intent is lost in the vast omissions.
these questions take on even greater significance when one considers that the constitution was forged through a series of compromises among representatives whose interests and intentions differed widely.
no delegate was completely satisfied and the finished document permitted some functions none had intended.
madison himself complained for example that the principle of judicial review was never intended and can never be proper moreover he thought it would be a mistake to search for the original intent of convention delegates.
the delegates intent could never possibly determine constitutional interpretation he argued for the only authoritative intentions were those of the people of the states as expressed thro the conventions which ratified the constitution yet the works most commonly cited from the time of state ratification raise problems with the application of this principle as well.
stenographers who recorded the debates of the several state conventions on the adoption of the federal constitution did not possess skills adequate to their task and federalist partisans edited the speeches with abandon in order to promote their own views.
evidence also suggests that jonathan eliot the journalist who published the debates in 1836 altered them further.
given the limitations of sources most often cited by modern judges and lawyers the original intent of most framers remains as elusive today as it was for the first generation who had no access to those documents.
the constitutions often ambiguous wording which furnished the sole guide to the framers intent in their day remains the best recourse in our own.
questions for discussion 1 why do some lawyers and politicians still emphasize the constitutions original meaning despite how the country has changed since 1787.
2 how could one try to determine the original meaning of the constitutions framers.
3 why did james madison believe that it would be a mistake to try to search for the original intent of the delegates to the constitutional convention.
chapter 14 the sectional crisis democrats out of office.
in some states these anti democratic coalitions would evolve directly into a new and stronger free soil party the republicans.
in the deep south however the democrats routed the remaining whigs and came close to ending two party competition on the state level.
the furor over kansas nebraska also doomed the efforts of the pierce administration to revive an expansionist foreign policy by acquiring cuba from spain.
in october 1854 the american ministers to england france and spain met in ostend belgium and drew up a memorandum for the administration urging acquisition of cuba by any means necessary including force if spain refused to sell the island.
the ostend manifesto became public in the midst of the controversy resulting from the kansas nebraska act.
northerners who were convinced that the administration was trying to extend slavery to the great plains were enraged to discover it was also scheming to fulfill the southern expansionist dream of a caribbean slave empire the resulting storm of protest forced pierce and his cohorts to abandon their scheme.
native born and even some immigrant protestants looked with suspicion on the mostly catholic irish and germans see chapter 29 affluence and anxiety seattle portland butte billings fargo boston minneapolis detroit new york sioux falls chicago pittsburgh columbus omaha cheyenne salt lake city kansas city denver san francisco washington d c cincinnati indianapolis st louis louisville nashville oklahoma city los angeles albuquerque birmingham san diego tucson el paso fort worth charlotte little rock atlanta dallas mobile san antonio alaska no interstate highways charleston savannah montgomery jacksonville new orleans houston tampa honolulu miami hawaii 500 miles 500 kilometers 100 miles 100 kilometers 500 miles major interstate highways 500 kilometers the interstate highway system the 1956 plan to create an interstate highway system drastically changed americas landscape and culture.
today the system covers about forty five thousand miles only a few thousand more miles than called for in the original plan.
developed in 1953 and again in 1957 after his landslide reelection victory over adlai stevenson he quickly abandoned his goal of a balanced budget in favor of a policy advocating government spending to restore prosperity.
these steps along with modest increases in new deal welfare programs led to a steady growth in the federal budget from 29 5 billion in 1950 to 76 5 billion in 1960 eisenhower was able to balance the budget in only three of his eight years in office and the 12 billion deficit in 1959 was larger than any ever before recorded in peacetime.
in this manner eisenhower was able to maintain the new deal legacy of federal responsibility for social welfare and the state of the economy while at the same time successfully resisting demands for more extensive government involvement in american life.
the struggle over civil rights how did the civil rights movement develop in the 1940s and 1950s.
despite president eisenhowers reluctance to champion the cause of reform powerful pressures for change forced long overdue action in one area of american life the denial of basic rights to the nations black minority.
in the midst of the cold war the contradiction between the denunciation of the soviet union for its human rights violations and the second class status of african americans began to arouse the national conscience.
fighting for freedom against communist tyranny abroad americans had to face the reality of the continued denial of freedom to a submerged minority at home.
african americans had benefited economically from world war ii but they were still a seriously disadvantaged group.
those who had left the south for better opportunities in northern and western cities were concentrated in blighted and segregated neighborhoods working at low paying jobs suffering economic and social discrimination and failing to share fully in the postwar prosperity.
the rising expectations of african americans in the postwar years led them to challenge the older patterns of racial segregation and inequality.
in the south conditions were much worse.
state laws forced blacks to live almost totally segregated from white society.
not only did african americans attend separate and almost always inferior schools but they also were rigidly segregated in all public facilities.
they were forced to use separate waiting rooms in train stations separate seats on all forms of transportation separate drinking the struggle over civil rights watch the video justice for all civil protest and civil rights the firebombing of a greyhound bus carrying white and black civil rights activists challenging illegal segregation on interstate bus routes in the south during 1961 was undertaken by a mob outside of anniston alabama.
these civil rights activists barely escaped with their lives from this violent attack on their passive resistance efforts.
fountains and even separate telephone booths.
segregation was enforced at all places of public entertainment including libraries auditoriums and circuses chief justice earl warren noted.
there was segregation in the hospitals prisons mental institutions and nursing homes.
even ambulance service was segregated civil rights as a political issue truman was the first president to attempt to alter the historic pattern of racial discrimination in the united states.
in 1946 he appointed a presidential commission on civil rights.
a year later in a sweeping report titled to secure these rights the commission recommended the reinstatement of the wartime fair employment practices committee fepc the establishment of a permanent civil rights commission and the denial of federal aid to any state that condoned segregation in schools and public facilities.
the presidents ten point legislative program proposed in 1948 included some of these measures notably the establishment of a permanent fepc and a civil rights commission.
but southern resistance had blocked any action by congress and the inclusion of a strong civil rights plank in the 1948 democratic platform had led to the walkout of some southern delegations and a separate states rights dixiecrat ticket in several states of the south that fall.
african american voters in the north overwhelmingly backed truman over dewey in the 1948 election.
the african american vote in key cities los angeles cleveland and chicago ensured the democratic victory in california ohio and illinois.
truman responded by including civil rights legislation in his fair deal program in 1949 once again however determined southern opposition blocked congressional action on both a permanent fepc and an antilynching measure.
even though president truman was unable to secure any significant legislation he did succeed in adding civil rights to the chapter 21 chapter 30 the turbulent sixties their war.
they are the ones who have to win it or lose it but at the same time kennedy was not prepared to accept the possible loss of all southeast asia.
saying it would be a great mistake to withdraw from south vietnam he told reporters strongly on our mind is what happened in the case of china at the end of world war ii where china was lost.
we dont want that although aides later claimed he planned to pull out after the 1964 election kennedy raised the stakes by tacitly approving a coup that led to diems overthrow and death on november 1 1963 the resulting power vacuum in saigon made further american involvement in vietnam almost certain.
containing castro the bay of pigs fiasco kennedys determination to check global communist expansion reached a peak of intensity in cuba.
in the 1960 campaign pointing to the growing ties between the soviet union and fidel castros regime he had accused the republicans of permitting flames engulf buddhist monk the reverend quang duc who set himself afire at an intersection in a communist satellite to arise on our very saigon vietnam to protest persecution of buddhists by vietnam president ngo dinh diem and his doorstep kennedy had even issued a stategovernment.
other monks placed themselves in front of the wheels of nearby fire trucks to prevent ment backing anti castro forces in exile them from reaching duc.
calling them fighters for freedom who held out hope for overthrowing castro elections throughout vietnam in 1956 as called for in the geneva in reality the eisenhower administration had been training accords.
instead diem sought to establish a separate government in a group of cuban exiles in guatemala since march 1960 as part the south with large scale american economic and military assisof a cia plan to topple the castro regime.
many of the new presitance.
by the time kennedy entered the white house however the dents advisers had doubts about the proposed invasion.
some saw communist government in north vietnam led by ho chi minh was little chance for success because the operation depended heavily directing the efforts of vietcong rebels in the south.
as the guerrilla on a broad uprising of the cuban people.
others notably senator war intensified in the fall of 1961 the president sent two trusted adviswilliam fulbright of arkansas chairman of the foreign relations ers walt rostow and general maxwell taylor to south vietnam.
committee viewed it as an immoral act that would discredit the they returned favoring the dispatch of eight thousand american united states.
the castro regime is a thorn in the flesh fulbright combat troops.
as an area for the operation of u s troops reported argued but it is not a dagger in the heart the president however general taylor svn south vietnam is not an excessively difficult committed by his own campaign rhetoric and assured of success or unpleasant place to operate.
the risks of backing into a major by the military decided to proceed.
asian war by way of svn are present but are not impressive on april 17 1961 fourteen hundred cuban exiles moved the president decided against sending in combat troops in 1961 ashore at the bay of pigs on the southern coast of cuba.
even but he authorized substantial increases in economic aid to diem and though the united states had masterminded the entire operation in the size of the military mission in saigon.
the number of american kennedy insisted on covert action even canceling at the last minute advisers in vietnam grew from fewer than one thousand in 1961 to a planned american air strike on the beachhead.
with air superimore than sixteen thousand by late 1963 the flow of supplies and the ority castros well trained forces had no difficulty in quashing the creation of strategic hamlets fortified villages designed to protect invasion.
they killed nearly five hundred exiles and forced the rest the peasantry from the vietcong slowed the communist momentum.
to surrender within forty eight hours.
american helicopters gave government forces mobility against the aghast at the swiftness of the defeat president kennedy took vietcong but by 1963 the situation had again become critical.
diem personal responsibility for the bay of pigs.
in his address to the had failed to win the support of his own people buddhist monks set american people however he showed no remorse for arranging themselves aflame in public protests against him and even diems the violation of a neighboring countrys sovereignty only regret own generals plotted his overthrow.
at the outcome.
above all he expressed renewed defiance warning president kennedy was in a quandary.
he realized that the fate the soviets that our restraint is not inexhaustible he went on to of south vietnam would be determined not by america but by the assert that the united states would resist communist penetration vietnamese.
in the final analysis he said in september 1963 it is in the western hemisphere terming it part of the primary kennedy intensifies the cold war obligations.
to the security of our nation for the remainder of his presidency kennedy continued to harass the castro regime imposing an economic blockade on cuba supporting a continuing series of raids by exile groups operating out of florida and failing to stop the cia from experimenting with bizarre plots to assassinate fidel castro.
containing castro the cuban missile crisis the climax of kennedys crusade came in october 1962 with the cuban missile crisis.
throughout the summer and early fall the soviets engaged in a massive arms buildup in cuba ostensibly to protect castro from an american invasion.
in the united states republican candidates in the 1962 congressional elections called for a firm american response kennedy contented himself with a stern warning against the introduction of any offensive weapons believing their presence would directly threaten american security.
khrushchev publicly denied any such intent but secretly he took a daring gamble building sites for twenty four medium range 1 000 mile and eighteen intermediate range 2 000 mile missiles in cuba.
later he claimed his purpose was purely defensive but most likely he was responding to the pressures from his own military to close the enormous strategic gap in nuclear striking power that kennedy had opened.
unfortunately the kennedy administration had stopped direct u 2 overflights of cuba in august.
fearful that recently installed soviet surface to air missiles could bring down the american spy plane and create an international incident similar to the 1960 u 2 episode see p 712 the white house over the objections of cia director john mccone limited u 2 flights to the air space bordering the island.
mccone finally prevailed on the president to resume direct overflights and on october 14 the first such mission brought back indisputable photographic evidence of the missile sites which were nearing completion.
as soon as president kennedy was informed of this development he decided to keep it secret while he consulted with a hand picked group of advisers to consider how to respond.
in the excomm as this group became known the initial preference for an immediate air strike gradually gave way to discussion of either a full scale invasion of cuba or a naval blockade of the island.
the president and his advisers ruled out diplomacy rejecting a proposal to offer the withdrawal of obsolete american jupiter missiles from turkey in return for a similar russian pullout in cuba.
kennedy finally agreed to a two step procedure.
he would proclaim a quarantine of cuba to prevent the arrival of new missiles and threaten a nuclear confrontation to force the removal of those already there.
if the russians did not cooperate then the united states would invade cuba and dismantle the missiles by force.
on the evening of october 22 the president informed the nation of the existence of the soviet missiles and his plans to remove them.
he blamed khrushchev for this clandestine reckless and provocative threat to world peace and he made it clear that any missile attack from cuba would lead to a full retaliatory response upon the soviet union for the next six days the world hovered on the brink of nuclear catastrophe.
khrushchev replied defiantly accusing kennedy of pushing mankind to the abyss of a world nuclear missile war in the atlantic some sixteen soviet ships continued on course toward cuba while the american navy was deployed to intercept them five hundred miles from the island.
in florida nearly a quarter million men were being concentrated in the largest invasion force ever assembled in the continental united states.
the first break came at midweek when the soviet ships suddenly halted to avert a confrontation at sea.
were eyeball to eyeball commented secretary of state dean rusk and i think the other fellow just blinked on friday khrushchev sent kennedy a long rambling letter offering a face saving way out russia would remove the missiles in return for an american promise never to invade cuba.
the president was ready to accept when a second russian message raised the stakes by insisting that american jupiter missiles be withdrawn from turkey.
heeding the advice of his brother attorney general robert kennedy the president refused to bargain khrushchev had endangered world peace by putting the missiles in cuba secretly and he must take them out immediately.
nevertheless while the military went ahead with plans for the invasion of cuba the president heeding his brothers advice decided to make one last appeal for peace.
ignoring the second russian message he sent a cable to khrushchev accepting his original offer.
on saturday night october 27 robert kennedy met with soviet ambassador anatoly dobrynin to make clear it was the last chance to avert nuclear confrontation.
we had to have a commitment by tomorrow that those bases would be removed robert kennedy recalled telling him.
he should understand that if they did not remove those bases we would remove them then the presidents brother calmly remarked that if khrushchev did not back down there would be not only dead americans but dead russians as well in reality john f kennedy was not quite so ready to risk nuclear war.
he instructed his brother to assure dobrynin that the jupiter missiles would soon be removed from turkey.
the president preferred that the missile swap be done privately but twenty five years later secretary of state dean rusk revealed that jfk had instructed him to arrange a deal through the united nations involving the removal of both the jupiters and the missiles in cuba in recently released transcripts of his meetings with his advisers the president reaffirmed his intention of making a missile trade with khrushchev publicly as a last resort to avoid nuclear war.
we cant very well invade cuba with all its toil he commented when we could have gotten them out by making a deal on the same missiles in turkey president kennedy never had to make this final concession.
at nine the next morning khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in return only for kennedys promise not to invade cuba.
the crisis was over.
the world however had come perilously close to a nuclear conflict.
we now know the soviets had nuclear warheads in cuba not only for twenty of the medium range missiles but also for short range tactical launchers designed to be used against an american invading force.
if kennedy had approved the militarys recommendations for an invasion of cuba the consequences might have been disastrous.
the peaceful resolution of the cuban missile crisis became a personal and political triumph for john f kennedy.
his party successfully overcame the republican challenge in the november elections and his own popularity reached new heights.
chapter review america looks outward alaska russia canad hina why did americans look outward in the last half of the nineteenth century.
acquisition of empire alaska a north aleutian is.
americ un st pacific ocean japan in the late nineteenth century americans increasingly looked overseas influenced by the example of other nations and confidence in what their country could offer other peoples including christianity commerce and american values.
policy makers were sure that the nation needed a navy colonial outposts foreign markets and a new foreign policy.
p 492 hawaiian islands pacific ocean equator australia what were the various viewpoints about the acquisition of empire after the war with spain.
united s samoan islands war with spain what were the causes and results of the war with spain.
in 1898 the united states fought a war with spain which resulted in a quick victory and enormous changes for american society including a larger military an increased role for the federal government in american life the acquisition of colonies and increased power for the presidency.
p 497 in the peace treaty ending the war with spain the united states acquired a new empire including puerto rico guam and the philippines.
for the first time the united states owned territories overseas to which it did not intend to grant statehood.
that together with historical racial and other arguments caused an angry debate between those in favor and those opposing the new colonies.
adding to the furor was the outbreak of warfare between american troops and filipino insurgents in the philippines.
p 503 midway is.
philippine is.
guam hawaiian is.
johnston is.
1858 kingman reef 1858 palmyra is.
1898 howland is.
equato jarvis is.
american samoa australia study resources key terms and definitions isolationism a belief that the united states should avoid entanglements with other nations.
p 492 imperialism the policy of extending a nations power over other areas through military conquest economic domination or annexation.
p 492 yellow journalism to sell newspapers before and during the spanishamerican war publishers william randolph hearst and joseph pulitzer engaged in blatant sensationalization of the news which became known as yellow journalism although it did not cause the war it helped turn u s public opinion against spain.
p 498 teller amendment in this amendment to the declaration of war on spain in 1898 the united states pledged that it did not intend to annex cuba and that it would recognize cuban independence after the spanishamerican war.
p 499 anti imperialist league an organization formed in 1898 to fight the treaty of paris ending the spanish american war.
members opposed acquiring overseas colonies believing it would subvert american ideals and institutions.
membership centered in new england the cause was less popular in the south and west.
p 504 philippine american war a war fought from 1899 to 1903 to quell filipino resistance to u s control of the philippine islands.
p 505 open door policy this policy established free trade between the united states and china in 1900 and attempted to induce european nations and japan to recognize the territorial integrity of china.
it marked a departure from the american tradition of isolationism and signaled the countrys growing involvement in the world.
p 507 treaty of paris treaty in december 1898 ending the spanish american war.
under its terms spain recognized cubas independence assumed the cuban debt and ceded puerto rico guam and the philippines to the united states.
p 504 critical thinking questions 1 what were the key developments in leading the united states to look abroad between the 1870s and the 1890s and how did these developments ultimately lead to the war with spain in 1898.
3 what were the most important effects of the end of the war and the acquisition of empire.
2 why did the important causes and events of the spanish american war lead to the crucial decision to acquire and overseas empire.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 15 secession and the civil war wis mich mo.
o ohi pa n j gettysburg del.
washington d c drive north to demoralize and pressure on divert union forces richmond and virginia richmond va iowa ir mississipp another challenge faced by both sides was how to finance an enormously costly struggle.
although special war taxes were imposed neither side was willing to resort to the heavy taxation that was needed to maintain fiscal integrity.
besides floating loans and selling bonds both treasuries deliberately inflated the currency by printing large quantities of paper money that could not be redeemed in gold and silver known as greenbacks because of their color.
the presses rolled throughout the war and runaway inflation was the inevitable result.
the problem was much less severe in the north because of the overall strength of its economy.
war taxes on income were more readily collectable than in the south and bond issues were more successful.
in the south by contrast the confederate government fell deeper and deeper into debt and printed more and more paper money until it could be said with little exaggeration that it took a wheelbarrow full of money to buy a purse full of goods.
r ky advance along the mississippi to isolate arkansas louisiana and texas e ns fe de e iv an ns by fe uth se s c of so defen te the ve atlanta ra end ssi e e miss.
ed def gr g ga nf to a o ala tenn ark.
n c atlantic ocean c vicksburg la.
union naval blockade to restrict shipping texas new orleans fla political leadership northern success and southern failure gulf of mexico both the union and the confederacy exercised unprecedented government authority during the war.
presidents lincoln and davis took actions that would have been regarded as arbitrary or even tyrannical in peacetime.
nevertheless politics as usual in the form of free elections public political controversy and the maneuverings of parties factions and interest groups persisted to a surprising degree.
lincoln was especially bold in assuming new executive powers even interfering with civil liberties to an extent that may have been unconstitutional.
he expanded the regular army and advanced public money to private individuals without authorization by congress.
on april 27 1861 he declared martial law which enabled the military to arrest civilians suspected of aiding the enemy and suspended the writ of habeas corpus in the area between philadelphia and washington an action deemed necessary because of mob attacks on union troops passing through baltimore.
suspension of the writ enabled the government to arrest confederate sympathizers and hold them without trial and in september 1862 lincoln extended this authority to all parts of the united states where disloyal elements were active.
lincoln argued that necessity justified a flexible interpretation of his war powers.
for critics of suspension he had a question are all the laws but one to go unexecuted and the government itself to go to pieces lest that one be violated in fact however most of the thousands of civilians arrested by military authorities were not exercising their right to criticize the government but were suspected deserters and draft dodgers refugees smugglers or people who were simply found wandering in areas under military control.
for the most part the lincoln administration showed restraint and tolerated a broad spectrum of political dissent.
although the government closed down a few newspapers for brief periods when they allegedly published false information or military secrets antiadministration journals were allowed to criticize the president and his party.
a few politicians including an ohio congressman were arrested for pro confederate activity but a large number of peace democrats who called for restoration of the union by negotiation 250 miles 250 kilometers the union the confederacy border states overview of civil war strategy confederate military leaders were convinced the south could not be defended unless they took the initiative to determine where critical battles would be fought.
rather than force ran for office and sat in congress and in state legislatures where they were able to present their views to the public.
in fact the persistence of vigorous two party competition in the north during the civil war strengthened lincolns hand.
since his war policies were also the platform of his party he could usually rely on unified partisan backing for the most controversial of his decisions.
lincoln was singularly adept at the art of party leadership accommodating disagreement and encouraging unity and dedication to the cause.
when a majority of the republican party came around to the view that freeing the slaves was necessary to the war effort lincoln found a way to comply with their wishes while minimizing the disenchantment of the conservative minority.
republican cohesiveness was essential to lincolns success in unifying the nation by force.
jefferson davis most historians agree was a less effective war leader than lincoln.
he assumed personal direction of the armed forces but left policy making for the mobilization and control of the civilian population primarily to the confederate congress.
he stumbled as commander in chief when he passed over able generals in favor of the incompetent but personal favorite braxton e bragg.
davis also ignored the problems of the homefront especially the deteriorating economic situation that was sapping confederate morale.
although the south had a much more serious problem of adjusting to total war internal division and disloyalty than the north he refrained from declaring martial law on his own authority and the confederate congress allowed it to be applied only in limited areas and for short periods.
as the war dragged on daviss political and popular support eroded.
he was opposed and obstructed by state governors who resisted conscription and other confederate policies that violated the tradition of states rights.
the confederate congress served as a forum for bitter attacks on the administrations conduct of the war and by 1863 a majority of southern newspapers were taking an anti davis stand.
even if he had been a more able and inspiring leader davis would have had difficulty maintaining his authority because he did not have an organized party behind him to mobilize popular support for his policies.
early campaigns and battles the wars first major battle was a disaster for northern arms.
against his better judgment general winfield scott ordered poorly trained union troops to advance against the confederate forces gathered at manassas junction virginia.
they attacked the enemy position near bull run creek on july 21 1861 and seemed on their way to victory until nine thousand confederate reinforcements arrived.
after confederate general thomas j jackson had earned the nickname stonewall for holding the line against the northern assault the augmented southern army counterattacked and routed the invading force.
as they retreated toward washington the raw union troops gave in to panic and broke ranks in their stampede to safety.
the humiliating defeat at bull run led to a shake up of the northern high command.
the man of the hour was george mcclellan who first became commander of troops in the washington area and then became general in chief when scott retired.
a cautious disciplinarian mcclellan spent the fall and winter drilling his troops and whipping them into shape.
president lincoln who could not understand why mcclellan was taking so long to go into the field became increasingly impatient and finally tried to order the army into action.
before mcclellan made his move union forces in the west won important victories.
in february 1862 a joint military naval operation commanded by general ulysses s grant captured fort henry on the tennessee river and fort donelson on the cumberland.
fourteen thousand prisoners were taken at donelson and the confederate army was forced to withdraw from kentucky and middle tennessee.
southern forces in the west then massed at corinth mississippi just across the border from tennessee.
when a slow moving union army arrived just north of the mississippi state line the south launched a surprise attack on april 6 in the battle of shiloh one of the bloodiest of the war only the timely arrival of reinforcements prevented the annihilation of union troops backed up against the tennessee river.
after a second day of fierce fighting the confederates retreated to corinth leaving the enemy forces battered and exhausted.
although the unions military effort to seize control of the mississippi valley was temporarily halted at shiloh the union navy soon contributed dramatically to the pursuit of that objective.
on april 26 a fleet under flag officer david farragut coming up from the gulf captured the port of new orleans after boldly running past the forts below the city.
the occupation of new orleans besides securing the mouth of the mississippi climaxed a series of naval and amphibious operations around the edges of the confederacy that had already succeeded in capturing south carolinas sea islands and north carolinas roanoke island.
strategically located bases were thus available to enforce a blockade of the southern coast.
the last serious challenge to the norths naval supremacy ended on march 9 1862 when the confederate ironclad vessel virginia originally the uss merrimac which had demolished wooden hulled northern ships in the vicinity of hampton roads virginia was repulsed by the monitor an armored and turreted union gunship.
successes around the edges of the confederacy did not relieve northern frustration at the inactivity or failure of union forces on the eastern front.
only after lincoln had relieved him of supreme command and ordered him to take the offensive at the head of the army of the potomac did mcclellan start campaigning.
he moved his forces by water to the peninsula southeast of richmond and began moving up the peninsula in early april 1862 for a month he was bogged down before yorktown which he chose to besiege rather than assault directly.
after yorktown fell on may 4 he pushed ahead to a point twenty miles from richmond where he awaited the additional troops that he expected lincoln to send.
the reinforcements were not forthcoming.
while mcclellan was inching his way up the peninsula a relatively small southern force under stonewall jackson was on the rampage in the shenandoah valley where it succeeded in pinning down a much larger union army and defeating its detached units in a series of lightning moves.
when it appeared by late may that jackson might be poised to march east and attack the union capital lincoln decided to withhold troops from mcclellan so they would be available to defend washington.
if mcclellan had moved more boldly and decisively he probably could have captured richmond with the forces he had.
but a combination of faulty intelligence reports and his own natural caution led him to falter in the face of what he wrongly believed to be superior numbers.
at the end of may the confederates under joseph e johnston took the offensive.
during the battle general johnston was severely wounded succeeding him in command of the confederate army of northern virginia was native virginian and west point graduate robert e lee.
toward the end of june lee began an all out effort to expel mcclellan from the outskirts of richmond.
in a series of battles that lasted for seven days the two armies clawed at each other indecisively.
although mcclellan repulsed lees final assaults at malvern hill the union general decided to retreat down the peninsula to a more secure base.
this backward step convinced lincoln that the peninsula campaign was an exercise in futility.
on july 11 lincoln appointed general henry w halleck who had been in overall command in the western theater to be the new general in chief and through halleck ordered mcclellan to withdraw his troops from the peninsula and send reinforcements to an army under general john pope that was preparing to move on richmond by the overland route.
at the end of august in the second battle fought near bull run lee established his reputation for brilliant generalship he sent stonewall jackson to popes rear provoked complete the assignment soldiering in the civil war on myhistorylab feature essay soldiering in the civil war youthful idealism is still evident on the faces of these young civil war soldiers who had not yet learned general shermans message that war is hell e arly in the civil war william tecumseh sherman told an audience of fresh faced recruits theres many a boy here today who looks on war as all glory but boys it is all hell letters from civil war soldiers reveal that shermans lesson was painfully learned by young men in both armies over the four years of conflict.
at the outset the firing on fort sumter infected both north and south with war fever.
what later became a national nightmare began as a glorious defense of home and country.
young men rushed to join up in great numbers taxing the ability of the authorities to process enlistments.
in contrast to the typical soldier of modern warfare many of the early civil war volunteers had well developed ideas of what the war was about.
on both sides such troops formed a core of stalwart soldiers who were committed to the ideological and political implications of the struggle.
in the democratic atmosphere of the nineteenth century when governments had little power to coerce citizen soldiers neither army could have sustained four years of brutal fighting if significant numbers of their troops did not genuinely believe in their sides cause.
the ideologically motivated troops may have accounted for about half of the fighting force.
the other half was another matter.
as with any large military force the union and confederate armies struggled to motivate and discipline men who cared little for the principles at the root of the conflict.
such soldiers who were typically drafted cajoled or bribed into service found numerous ways to avoid the dangers of combat.
known as skulkers and sneaks these reluctant troops could avoid combat by feigning sickness hiding hanging back asking for bomb proof assignments or simply deserting in droves.
the bad blood between such soldiers and those who fervently believed in the war effort could be intense.
but the skulker and the ideologue shared one thing in common neither was fully prepared for the rigors of war.
early union defeats and a strategic stalemate not only ended talk in both the north and the south of a short engagement filled with glory but also revealed how undisciplined the troops were.
of the more than three million civil war servicemen two thirds were younger than twenty three years of age and came from rural areas.
they were not accustomed to the regimentation necessary to military life as a young recruit from illinois put it it comes rather hard at first to be deprived of liberty inadequate leadership as well as the beginnings of war weariness and the arrival of letters from home pleading for help with the harvest led to a degree of military anarchy.
the early battles were contests among armed mobs that might break and run with little provocation.
moreover the long casualty lists from the early battles discouraged new waves of enlistments.
both governments hit on similar methods of recruiting and disciplining troops.
enlistment and reenlistment bounties were instituted and the nations first conscription laws were passed.
the dual aim was to maintain the ranks of the original volunteers while at the same time stimulating more enlistments.
terms of service were lengthened in most cases to three years and all nonenlisted men of military age were registered and called on to either volunteer or be faced with the disgrace of being drafted.
although some southerners were exempted to oversee their large numbers of slaves and northerners could escape military duty by paying a 300 fee the laws did spur enlistments.
between 1861 and 1865 more than half of the nations 5 5 million men of military age were mustered into service.
the solution to the problem of training the troops was the army training camp.
with its 50 000 pup tents and wigwams the camp was the volunteers way station between home and battlefield.
it was the place the raw recruit received his first bitter taste of the tedium hardship and deprivation of soldiering.
a soldier is not his own man a louisiana recruit wrote astonished at how markedly camp routines differed from civilian life.
he has given up all claim on himself.
i will give you a little information concerning every day business.
consider yourself a private soldier and in camp.
the drum beats for drill.
you fall in and start.
you here feel youre inferirority.
even the sargeants is hollering at you close up ketch step.
dress to the right and sutch like professional noncommissioned officers from the peacetime army were used more effectively by the union to turn men into soldiers who could fire a rifle and understand simple commands.
the liberal use of the court martial and the board of review enabled the professional soldiers to rid the army of its most incompetent officer politicians and instill discipline in the ranks.
many recruits spent their entire terms of service within the tent cities forming a reserve on which field commanders could call to replace casualties.
the camps were themselves the sites of hundreds of thousands of civil war casualties.
fewer men died of battle wounds than of dysentery typhoid fever and other waterborne diseases contracted in the camps which were often located on swampy land without adequate fresh water.
the army food was always the butt of soldier humor one soldier complained the beef issued to him must have been carved from a bull too old for the conscript law but it was also the source of its own set of diseases particularly scurvy.
men in the field were condemned to a diet of hardtack and half cooked beans and no soldier could expect to receive fresh fruit or vegetables.
but food became steadily more plentiful in the union camps and doctors officers and agents of the u s sanitary commission teamed up to improve camp cleanliness.
johnny reb however had to survive under steadily worsening conditions.
the confederate supply system did not improve significantly during the course of the war and grew worse wherever the north invaded or blockaded.
nevertheless the battlefield performance of fighting men on the two sides remained roughly on a par throughout the war.
camp lessons were often forgotten in the heat of battle particularly by green troops who saw the elephant went into battle for the first time and ran from it like the youth in stephen cranes the red badge of courage.
a mississippian anxiously admitted after his first fight that though i did not run i mite have if i had thought of it in time the unions ability to call more new men into service may have guaranteed ultimate victory but it meant that battle hardened confederate veterans faced large numbers of raw northern recruits in every major battle.
since experience often counted for more than basic training and equipment southern troops could expect to engage the enemy on fairly equal terms.
the civil war was the most costly and brutal struggle in which american soldiers have ever been engaged.
more american servicemen died in that war 618 000 than in the two world wars and korea combined and was not surpassed until well into the vietnam war.
contests were decided by deadly charges in which muskets were exploded at such close range as to sear the faces of the contestants.
the survivors in their letters home attempted to describe the inhuman events but as a maine soldier wrote to his parents after the battle of gettysburg you can form no idea of a battlefield.
no pen can describe it.
no tongue can tell its horror.
i hope none of my brothers will ever have to go into a fight questions for discussion 1 what did the stalwart soldiers on each side believe they were fighting for.
2 how did the experience of war change how the typical soldier thought and acted after the war was over.
chapter 30 the turbulent sixties humphrey a classic cold war liberal who had worked equally hard for social reform at home and american expansion abroad was totally unacceptable to the antiwar movement.
accordingly he decided to avoid the primaries and work for the nomination within the framework of the party.
kennedy and mccarthy the two antiwar candidates were thus left to compete in the spring primaries requiring agonizing choices among those who desired change.
kennedy won everywhere except in oregon but his narrow victory in california ended in tragedy when a palestinian immigrant sirhan sirhan assassinated him in a los angeles hotel.
with his strongest opponent struck down hubert humphrey had little difficulty at the chicago convention.
backed by that citys political boss mayor richard daley the vice president relied on party leaders to defeat an antiwar resolution and win the nomination on the first ballot by a margin of more than two to one.
humphreys triumph was marred by violence outside the heavily guarded convention hall.
radical groups had urged their members to come to chicago to agitate the turnout was relatively small but included many who were ready to provoke the authorities in their despair over the conventions outcome.
epithets and cries of pigs brought on a savage response from daleys police.
the cops had one thing on their mind commented journalist jimmy breslin.
club and then gas club and then gas club and then gas the bitter fumes of tear gas hung in the streets for days afterward the battered heads and bodies of demonstrators and innocent bystanders alike flooded the citys hospital emergency rooms.
what an official investigation later termed a police riot marred humphreys nomination and made a sad mockery out of his call for the politics of joy the democratic party itself had become the next victim of the vietnam war.
the republican resurgence the primary beneficiary of the democratic debacle was richard nixon.
written off as politically dead after his unsuccessful race for governor of california in 1962 nixon had slowly rebuilt his place within the party by working loyally for barry goldwater in 1964 and for gop congressional candidates two years later.
positioning himself squarely in the middle he quickly became the front runner for the republican nomination.
at the gop convention in miami beach nixon won an easy first ballot nomination and chose maryland governor spiro agnew as his running mate.
agnew little known on the national scene had won the support of conservatives by taking a strong stand against african american rioters.
in the fall campaign nixon opened up a wide lead by avoiding controversy and reaping the benefit of discontent with the vietnam war.
he played the peace issue shrewdly appearing to advocate an end to the conflict without ever taking a definite stand.
the united states should end the war and win the peace he declared hinting he had a secret formula for peace but never revealing what it was.
above all he chose the role of reconciler for a nation torn by emotion a leader who promised to bring a divided country together again.
election of 1968 electoral vote by state popular vote republican richard m nixon 31 770 237 democratic hubert h humphrey 31 270 533 american independent george c wallace 9 906 141 239 908 minor parties 73 186 819 hawaii wash d c alaska humphrey in contrast found himself hounded by antiwar demonstrators who heckled him constantly.
he walked a tightwire desperate for the continued support of president johnson but handicapped by lbjs stubborn refusal to end all bombing of north vietnam.
only when he broke with johnson in late september by announcing that if elected he would stop the bombing of north vietnam as an acceptable risk for peace did his campaign begin to gain momentum.
unfortunately for humphrey a third party candidate cut deeply into the normal democratic majority.
george c wallace had first gained national attention as the racist governor of alabama whose motto was segregation now.
segregation tomorrow segregation forever in 1964 he had shown surprising strength in democratic primaries in northern states.
by attacking both black leaders and their liberal white allies wallace appealed to the sense of powerlessness among the urban working classes.
liberals intellectuals and longhairs have run the country for too long wallace told his followers.
when i get to washington he promised ill throw all these phonies and their briefcases into the potomac running on the ticket of the american independent party wallace was a close third in the september polls gaining support from more than 20 percent of the electorate.
but as the election neared his following declined.
humphrey continued to gain especially after johnson agreed in late october to end all bombing of north vietnam.
by the first week in november the outcome was too close for the experts to call.
conclusion the end of an era nixon won the election with the smallest share of the popular vote of any winning candidate since 1916 but he swept a broad band of states from virginia and the carolinas through the midwest to the pacific for a clear cut victory in the electoral college.
humphrey held on to the urban northeast wallace took just five states in the deep south but his heavy inroads into blue collar districts in the north shattered the new deal coalition.
conclusion the end of an era the election of 1968 was a repudiation of the politics of protest and the cultural insurgency of the mid 1960s.
the combined popular vote for nixon and wallace 56 5 percent of the electorate signified there was a silent majority that was fed up with violence and confrontation.
a growing concern over psychedelic drugs rock music long hair and sexual permissiveness had offset the usual democratic advantage on economic issues and led to the election of a republican president.
richard nixons victory marked the end of an era with the passing of two concepts that had guided american life since the 1930s.
first the liberal reform impulse which reached its zenith with the great society legislation in 1965 had clearly run its course.
civil rights medicare and federal aid to education would continue in place but nixons election signaled a strong reaction against the growth of federal power.
at the same time the vietnam fiasco spelled the end of an activist foreign policy that had begun with american entry into world war ii.
containment so successful in protecting western europe against the soviet threat had proved a disastrous failure when applied on a global scale.
the last three decades of the twentieth century would witness a struggle to replace outmoded liberal internationalism with new policies at home and abroad.
chapter 22 the progressive era another musical innovation came north from new orleans.
charles buddy bolden a cornetist ferdinand jelly roll morton a pianist and a youngster named louis armstrong played an improvisational music that had no formal name.
reaching chicago it became jas then jass and finally jazz jazz jumped and jazz musicians relied on feeling and mood.
a restaurant owner once asked jelly roll morton to play a waltz.
waltz morton exclaimed.
man these people want to dance.
and you talking about waltz.
this is the roll youre talking to popular fiction reflected changing interests.
kate douglas wigginss rebecca of sunnybrook farm 1903 and lucy m montgomerys anne of green gables 1908 showed the continuing popularity of rural themes.
westerns also sold well but readers turned more and more to detective thrillers with hard bitten city detectives and science fiction featuring the latest dream in technology.
the tom swift series begun in 1910 looked ahead to spaceships ray guns and gravity nullifiers.
edward l stratemeyer the mind behind tom swift brought the techniques of mass production to book writing.
in 1906 he formed the stratemeyer literary syndicate which employed a stable of writers to turn consisting of a wide variety vaudeville was probably the most popular mass entertainment in the out hundreds of tom swift rover boys and early 1900s.
with the addition of jugglers pantomimists magicians and others the number of bobbsey twins stories for young readers.
burt vaudeville theaters increased exponentially.
standish another prolific author took the pen name gilbert patten and created the character of frank merriwell animal names the fox trot bunny hop turkey trot snake and wholesome college athlete.
as patten said i took the three qualikangaroo dip.
partners were not permitted to dance too close ties i most wanted him to represent frank and merry in nature bouncers tapped them on the shoulder if they got closer than nine well in body and mind and made the name frank merriwell the inches.
the aging john d rockefeller hired a private instructor to merriwell books sold twenty five million copies.
teach him the tango yale university however banned that dance at its 1914 junior prom.
vaudeville increasingly popular after 1900 reached matuexperimentation in the arts rity around 1915 drawing on the immigrant experience it voiced there is a state of unrest all over the world in art as in all other the variety of city life and included skits songs comics acrobats things the director of new yorks metropolitan museum said in and magicians.
dances and jokes showed an earthiness new to 1908.
it is the same in literature as in music in painting and mass audiences.
by 1914 stage runways extended into the crowd in sculpture women performers had bared their legs and were beginning to isadora duncan and ruth st denis transformed the dance.
show glimpses of the midriff.
fanny brice ann pennington the departing from traditional ballet steps both women emphasized shimmy queen and eva tanguay who sang its all been done improvisation emotion and the human form.
listen to the music before but not the way i do it starred in florenz ziegfelds follies with your soul duncan told her students.
unless your dancing the peak of vaudeville.
springs from an inner emotion and expresses an idea it will be in such songs as st.
louis blues 1914 w c handy took meaningless draped in flowing robes she revealed more of her legs the black southern folk music of the blues to northern cities.
than some thought tasteful and she proclaimed that the noblest art gertrude ma rainey the daughter of minstrels sang in black is the nude after a triumphant performance with the new york vaudeville for nearly thirty five years.
performing in chattanooga symphony in 1908 her ideas and techniques swept the country.
tennessee about 1910 she came across a twelve year old orphan duncan died tragically in 1927 her neck broken when her long red bessie smith who became the empress of the blues smiths scarf caught in the wheel of a racing car.
voice was huge and sweeping.
recording for the race division the lofts and apartments of new yorks greenwich village of columbia records she made more than eighty records that attracted artists writers and poets interested in experimentation together sold nearly ten million copies.
watch the video a vaudeville act conclusion a ferment of discovery and reform and change.
to these artists the city was the focus of national life and the sign of a new culture.
robert henri and the realist painters known to their critics as the ashcan school relished the citys excitement.
they wanted a friend said to paint truth and to paint it with strength and fearlessness and individuality to the realists a painting carried into the future the look of life as it happened.
their paintings depicted street scenes colorful crowds and slum children swimming in the river.
in paintings such as the cliff dwellers george w bellows captured the color and excitement of the tenements john sloan one of henris most talented students painted the vitality of ordinary people and familiar scenes.
in 1913 a show at the new york armory presented sixteen hundred modernist paintings prints and sculptures.
the work of picasso czanne matisse brancusi van gogh and gauguin dazed and dazzled american observers.
critics attacked the show as worthless and depraved a chicago official wanted it banned from the city because the idea that people can gaze at this sort of thing without it hurting them is all bosh the postimpressionists changed the direction of twentiethcentury art and influenced adventuresome american painters.
john marin max weber georgia okeeffe arthur dove and other modernists experimented in ways foreign to henris realists.
defiantly avant garde they shook off convention and experimented with new forms.
using bold colors and abstract patterns they worked to capture the energy of urban life.
i see great forces at work great movements marin said the large buildings and the small buildings the warring of the great and the small.
i can hear the sound of their strife and there is a great music being played there was an extraordinary outburst of poetry.
in 1912 harriet monroe started the magazine poetry in chicago the hotbed of the new poetry ezra pound and vachel lindsay both daring experimenters with ideas and verse published in the first issue.
t s eliot published the classic love song of j alfred prufrock in poetry in 1915 attacked bitterly by conservative critics the poem established eliots leadership among a group of poets many of them living and writing in london who rejected traditional meter and rhyme as artificial constraints.
eliot pound and amy lowell among others believed the poets task was to capture fleeting images in verse.
others experimenting with new techniques in poetry included robert frost north of boston 1914 edgar lee masters spoon river anthology 1915 and carl sandburg chicago poems 1916.
sandburgs poem chicago celebrated the vitality of the city come and show me another city with lifted head singing so proud to be alive and coarse and strong and cunning.
fierce as a dog with tongue lapping for action cunning as a savage pitted against the wilderness bareheaded shoveling wrecking planning building breaking rebuilding bragging and laughing that under his wrist is the pulse and under his ribs the heart of the people laughing.
laughing the stormy husky brawling laughter of youth half naked sweating proud to be hog butcher tool maker stacker of wheat player with railroads and freight handler to the nation.
conclusion a ferment of discovery and reform manners and morals change slowly and many americans overlooked the importance of the first two decades of the twentieth century.
yet sweeping change was under way anyone who doubted it could visit a gallery see a film listen to music or read one of the new literary magazines.
garrets and galleries were filled with a breathtaking sense of change.
there was life in all these new things marsden hartley a modernist painter recalled.
there was excitement there was healthy revolt investigation discovery and an utterly new world out of it all the ferment of progressivism in city state and nation reshaped the country.
in a burst of reform people built playgrounds restructured taxes regulated business won the vote for women shortened working hours altered political systems opened kindergartens and improved factory safety.
they tried to fulfill the national promise of dignity and liberty.
marsden hartley it turned out had voiced a mood that went well beyond painters and poets.
across society people in many walks of life were experiencing a similar sense of excitement and discovery.
racism repression and labor conflict were present to be sure but there was also talk of hope progress and change.
in politics science journalism education and a host of other fields people believed for a time that they could make a difference and in trying to do so they became part of the progressive generation.
chapter 15 secession and the civil war read the document william t sherman the march through georgia this illustration depicts general william tecumseh sherman s successful union army march through georgia from may 1864 to december 1864 sherman s destruction of almost all valuable military and economic assets in georgia and later in the carolinas during this period broke the will of continued resistance by southern forces.
accomplices one of whom attempted to murder secretary of state seward popular theories that the assassination was the result of a vast conspiracy involving confederate leaders or according to another version radical republicans have never been substantiated.
the man who had advocated sacrifice for the union cause at gettysburg had himself given the last full measure of devotion to the cause of government of the people by the people for the people four days after lincolns death the only remaining confederate force of any significance the troops under joseph e johnston who had been opposing sherman in north carolina laid down its arms.
the union was saved.
effects of the war how did the outcome of the war affect america socially and politically.
the nation that emerged from four years of total war was not the same america that had split apart in 1861 over 618 000 young men were in their graves victims of enemy fire or the diseases that spread rapidly in military encampments in this era before modern medicine and sanitation.
the widows and sweethearts they left behind temporarily increased the proportion of unmarried women in the population and some members of this generation of involuntary spinsters sought new opportunities for making a living or serving the community that went beyond the purely domestic roles previously prescribed for women.
during the war northern women pushed the boundaries of their traditional roles by participating on the homefront as fund raisers and in the rear lines as army nurses and members of the sanitary commission.
the sanitary commission promoted health in the northern armys camps through attention to cleanliness nutrition and medical care.
however women were not limited to playing roles as nurses and angels of mercy throughout the war they also filled key positions in the administration and organization of patriotic organizations.
women in the north simultaneously utilized their traditional position as nurturers to participate in the war effort while they advanced new ideas about their role in society.
the large number who had served as nurses or volunteer workers during the war were especially responsive to effects of the war watch the video the meaning of the civil war for americans over the past 150 years americans have given many different meanings to the civil war.
for some in the south it was the lost cause a romantic contest of fallen heroes.
even some northerners came to accept this view of the conflict in the decades afterward.
today we celebrate the end of slavery but mourn the terrible loss of life in that bloody war.
calls for broadening the womans sphere some of the northern women who were prominent in wartime service organizations such as louise lee schuyler josephine shaw lowell and mary livermore became leaders of postwar philanthropic and reform movements.
the war did not destroy the barriers to sexual equality that had long existed in american society but the efforts of women during the civil war broadened beliefs about what women could accomplish outside of the home.
the effect on white women in the confederacy was different from the effect of the war on women in the victorious north.
southern women had always been intimately involved in the administration of the farms and plantations of the south but the coming of the war forced them to shoulder even greater burdens.
this was true for wealthy plantation mistresses who took over the administration and maintenance of huge plantations without the benefit of extensive training or the assistance of male relatives.
the wives of small farmers found it hard to survive at all especially at harvest time when they often had to do all the work themselves.
the loss of fathers and brothers the constant advance of union troops and the difficulty of controlling a slave labor force destroyed many southern womens allegiance to the confederate cause.
at the close of the conflict southern women faced the challenge of rebuilding a society that had been chapter 8 republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision just beneath the surface of political maneuvering.
indeed the acquisition of the louisiana territory and the war of 1812 fanned fundamental disagreement about the spread of slavery to the western territories.
in other areas the jeffersonians did not fulfill even their own high expectations.
as members of an opposition party during the presidency of john adams they insisted on a strict interpretation of the constitution peaceful foreign relations and a reduction of the role of the federal government in the lives of the average citizens.
but following the election of 1800 jefferson and his supporters discovered that unanticipated pressures foreign and domestic forced them to moderate these goals.
before he retired from public office jefferson interpreted the constitution in a way that permitted the government to purchase the louisiana territory when the opportunity arose he regulated the national economy with a rigor that would have surprised alexander hamilton and he led the country to the brink of war.
some americans praised the presidents pragmatism others felt betrayed.
for a man who played a leading role in the revolt against george iii it must have been shocking in 1807 to find himself labeled a despot in a popular new england newspaper.
give ear no longer to the siren voice of democracy and jeffersonian liberty the editor shrieked.
it is a cursed delusion adopted by traitors and recommended by sycophants regional identities in a new republic how did the republics growth shape the market economy and relations with native americans.
during the early decades of the nineteenth century the population of the united states experienced substantial growth.
the 1810 census counted 7 240 000 americans a jump of almost two million in just ten years.
of this total approximately 20 percent were black slaves the majority of whom lived in the south.
the large population increase in the nation was the result primarily of natural reproduction since during jeffersons presidency few immigrants moved to the new world.
the largest single group in this society was children under the age of sixteen boys and girls who were born after washingtons election and who defined their own futures at a time when the nations boundaries were rapidly expanding.
for north america in 1800 st l lo aw w re er nc c e r.
an a da in the 1790s diplomatic agreements with britain and spain and defeat of the native americans at the battle of fallen timbers opened the way to u s settlement of the land beyond the appalachian mountains.
british north america canada c ol um b ia r br i ti sh n h r i conn pittsburgh ohio terr.
or o hi mass.
n y cincinnati st louis mass.
pa indiana terr.
louisiana maine vt battle of fallen timbers.
ceded by spain to france d c va ky do united states n c tenn e mi s siss n ippi r a lor co w s c ga mississippi terr.
s p a in pacific ocean ca na da es m iss ou ri r e e nc k la oregon country claimed by great britain spain and united states es pr up pe r gre at florida o ri de an gr mexico gulf of mexico 500 miles 500 kilometers atlantic ocean regional identities in a new republic white americans it was a time of heightened optimism and many people possessing entrepreneurial skills or engineering capabilities aggressively made their way in a society that seemed to rate personal merit higher than family background.
even as americans defended the rights of individual states they were forming strong regional identifications.
in commerce and politics they perceived themselves as representatives of distinct subcultures as southerners new englanders or westerners.
no doubt the broadening geographic horizons reflected improved transportation links that enabled people to travel more easily within the various sections.
but the growing regional mentality was also the product of defensiveness.
while local writers celebrated new englands cultural distinctiveness for example they were clearly uneasy about the regions rejection of the democratic values that were sweeping the rest of the nation.
moreover during this period people living south of the potomac river began describing themselves as southerners not as citizens of the chesapeake or the carolinas as they had done in colonial times.
this shifting focus of attention resulted not only from an awareness of shared economic interests but also from a sensitivity to outside attacks on slavery.
several times during the first fifteen years of the nineteenth century conspirators actually advocated secession and though the schemes failed they revealed the powerful sectional loyalties that threatened national unity.
westward the course of empire the most striking changes occurred in the west.
before the end of the american revolution only indian traders and a few hardy settlers had ventured across the appalachians.
after 1790 however a flood of people rushed west to stake out farms on the rich soil.
many settlers followed the so called northern route across pennsylvania or new york into the old northwest territory.
pittsburgh and cincinnati both strategically located on the ohio river became important commercial ports.
in 1803 ohio joined the union and territorial governments were formed in indiana 1800 louisiana 1805 michigan 1805 illinois 1809 and missouri 1812.
southerners poured into the new states of kentucky 1792 and tennessee 1796.
wherever they located westerners depended on water transportation.
because of the extraordinarily high cost of hauling goods overland riverboats represented the only economical means of carrying agricultural products to distant markets.
the mississippi river was the crucial commercial link for the entire region and westerners did not feel secure so long as new orleans the southern gate to the mississippi remained under spanish control.
families that moved west attempted to transplant familiar eastern customs to the frontier.
in some areas such as the western reserve a narrow strip of land along lake erie in northern ohio the influence of new england remained strong.
in general however a creative mixing of peoples of different backgrounds in a strange environment generated distinctive folkways.
westerners developed their own heroes such as mike fink the legendary keelboatman of the mississippi river daniel boone the famed trapper and indian fighter and the eye gouging alligatormen of kentucky and tennessee.
americans who crossed the mountains were ambitious and self confident excited by the challenge of almost unlimited geographic mobility.
a french traveler observed in 1802 that throughout the region he visited there was not a single farm where one cannot with confidence ask the owner from whence he had emigrated or according to the light manners of the americans what part of the world do you come from these rootless people he explained incline perpetually toward the most distant fringes of american settlement native american resistance at the beginning of the nineteenth century a substantial number of native americans lived in the greater ohio valley the land belonged to them.
the tragedy was that the indians many dependent on trade with the white people and ravaged by disease lacked unity.
small groups of native americans allegedly representing the interests of an entire tribe sold off huge pieces of land often for whiskey and trinkets.
such fraudulent transactions disgusted the shawnee leaders tenskwatawa known as the prophet and his brother tecumseh.
tecumseh rejected classification as a shawnee and may have been the first native leader to identify himself self consciously as indian these men desperately attempted to revitalize native cultures and against overwhelming odds they briefly persuaded native americans living in the indiana territory to avoid contact with whites to resist alcohol and most important to hold on to their land.
white intruders saw tecumseh as a threat to progress and during the war of 1812 they shattered the indians dream of cultural renaissance.
the populous creek nation located in the modern states of alabama and mississippi also resisted the settlers advance but its warriors were crushed by andrew jacksons tennessee militia at the battle of horseshoe bend march 1814.
well meaning jeffersonians disclaimed any intention to destroy the indians.
the president talked of creating a vast reservation beyond the mississippi river just as the british had talked before the revolution of a sanctuary beyond the appalachian mountains.
he sent federal agents to civilize the indians to transform them into yeoman farmers.
but even the most enlightened white thinkers of the day did not believe the indians possessed cultures worth preserving.
in fact in 1835 the democratic national convention selected a vice presidential candidate whose major qualification for high office seemed to be that he had killed tecumseh.
and as early as 1780 jefferson himself then serving as the governor of virginia instructed a military leader on the frontier if we are to wage a campaign against these indians the end proposed should be their extermination or their removal beyond the lakes of the illinois river.
the same world will scarcely do for them and us commercial life in the cities before 1820 the prosperity of the united states depended primarily on its agriculture and trade.
jeffersonian america was by no stretch of the imagination an industrial economy.
the overwhelming majority of the population 84 percent in 1810 was directly involved in agriculture.
southerners concentrated on the staple crops of tobacco rice and cotton which they sold on the european market.
in the north people generally produced livestock and cereal crops.
regardless of location however the nations chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 combat role renewed bombing and a hard line in negotiations with hanoi.
the number of american soldiers in vietnam fell from 540 000 in early 1969 to less than 30 000 by 1972 domestic opposition to the war declined sharply with the accompanying drop in casualties and reductions in the draft call.
renewed bombing proved the most controversial part of the plan.
as early as the spring of 1969 nixon secretly ordered raids on communist supply lines in neutral cambodia.
then in april 1970 he ordered both air and ground strikes into cambodia causing a massive outburst of antiwar protests at home.
students demonstrated against the invasion of cambodia on campuses across the nation.
tragedy struck at kent state university in ohio in early may.
after rioters had firebombed an rotc building the governor sent in national guard troops who were taunted and harassed by irate students.
the guardsmen then opened fire killing four students and wounding eleven more.
the victims were innocent bystanders two were young women caught in the fusillade on their way between classes.
a week later two african american student demonstrators were killed at jackson state college in mississippi soon riots and protests raged on more than four hundred campuses across the country.
nixon had little sympathy for the demonstrators calling the students bums who were intent on blowing up the campuses the silent majority to whom he appealed seemed to agree one poll showed that most americans blamed the students not the national guard for the deaths at kent state.
an honor america day program held in washington d c on july 4 attracted 250 000 people who heard billy graham and bob hope endorse the presidents policies.
nixons cambodian invasion did little to shorten the vietnam war but the public reaction reinforced the presidents resolve not to surrender.
the third tactic negotiation with hanoi finally proved successful.
beginning in the summer of 1969 kissinger held a series of secret meetings with north vietnams foreign minister le duc tho.
in the summer and fall of 1972 the two sides neared agreement but south vietnamese objections blocked a settlement before the 1972 election.
when the north vietnamese tried to make last minute changes nixon ordered a series of heavy the photograph depicts the horror of the kent state university shooting of thirteen unarmed college students by ohio national guardsmen on may 4 1970 some of the students who were shot were protesting president nixons invasion of cambodia.
in response to the kent state tragedy hundreds of high schools colleges and universities across america closed due to a student strike.
the tempting of richard nixon b 52 raids on hanoi that finally led to the signing of a truce on january 27 1973 in return for the release of all american prisoners of war the united states agreed to remove its troops from south vietnam within sixty days.
the political clauses allowed the north vietnamese to keep their troops in the south thus virtually guaranteeing future control of all vietnam by the communists.
for two years after the accords the communists waited weighing among other things the willingness of americans to continue to support south vietnam.
as nixon became enmeshed in the watergate scandal his grip on foreign policy weakened and by the time he was forced from office in august 1974 most americans simply wanted to forget vietnam.
the following spring the communists mounted a major offensive and in just weeks completed their takeover of vietnam.
ten years after the american escalation of the war and after the loss of sixty thousand american lives the american effort to preserve south vietnam from communism had proved a tragic failure.
election of 1972 electoral vote by state republican richard m nixon 46 740 323 democratic george s mcgovern 28 901 598 minor parties john hospers 1 983 231 77 625 152 hawaii wash d c 1 11 alaska the watergate scandal nixons vietnam problems and especially his formulation of dtente made him sensitive to the unauthorized release of information about american foreign policy.
he had good reason for fearing leaks since they might tip the administrations hand in sensitive negotiations with the communists.
when leaks did occur nixon grew outraged and demanded that they be stopped.
the white house established an informal office of covert surveillance the plumbers its operatives were called which began by investigating the national security breaches but during the presidential campaign of 1972 branched out into spying on nixons democratic opponents and engaging in political dirty tricks.
five of the plumbers were arrested in june 1972 during a break in at the headquarters of the democratic national committee at the watergate office complex in washington.
the nixon white house took pains to conceal its connection to what its spokesman dismissed as a third rate burglary attempt nixon personally ordered the cover up.
i want you to stonewall it let them plead the fifth amendment cover up or anything else nixon told john mitchell his former attorney general and then campaign director.
the cover up succeeded long enough to ensure nixons landslide reelection victory over democrat george s mcgovern of south dakota but in the months after the election the cover up began to unravel.
james mccord one of the watergate burglars was the first to break the silence.
sentenced to a long jail term by judge john sirica mccord asked for leniency informing sirica he had received money from the white house and had been promised a presidential pardon in return for his silence.
by april 1973 nixon was compelled to fire aide john dean who had directed the cover up but who now refused to become a scapegoat.
two other aides h r haldeman and john ehrlichman were forced to resign.
the senate then appointed a special committee to investigate the unfolding watergate scandal.
in a week of dramatic testimony dean revealed the presidents personal involvement in the cover up.
still it was basically a matter of whose word was to be believed the presidents or a discredited aides and nixon hoped to weather the storm.
popular vote the committees discovery of the existence of tape recordings of conversations in the oval office made regularly since 1970 proved the beginning of the end for nixon.
at first the president tried to invoke executive privilege to withhold the tapes.
when archibald cox appointed as watergate special prosecutor demanded the release of the tapes nixon fired him.
yet the new watergate prosecutor leon jaworski continued to press for the tapes.
nixon tried to release only a few of the less damaging ones but the supreme court ruled unanimously in june 1974 that the tapes had to be turned over to judge sirica.
by this time the house judiciary committee acting on evidence compiled by the staff of the senate committee had voted three articles of impeachment charging nixon with obstruction of justice abuse of power and contempt of congress.
faced with the release of tapes that directly implicated him in the cover up the president chose to resign on august 9 1974 nixons resignation proved to be the culmination of the watergate scandal.
the entire episode revealed both the weaknesses and strengths of the american political system.
most regrettable was the abuse of presidential authority a reflection both of the growing power of the modern presidency and of fatal flaws in richard nixons character.
unlike previous executive branch scandals such as the whiskey ring and teapot dome watergate involved a lust for power rather than for money.
realizing he had reached the white house almost by accident nixon did everything possible to retain his hold on his office.
he used the plumbers to maintain executive secrecy and he directed the internal revenue service and the justice department to punish his enemies and reward his friends.
chapter 8 republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision jefferson therefore recommended to congress a transitional government consisting entirely of appointed officials.
in march 1804 the louisiana government bill narrowly passed the house of representatives.
members of the presidents own party attacked the plan.
after all it imposed taxes on the citizens of louisiana without their consent.
according to one outspoken tennessee congressman the bill establishes a complete despotism most troubling perhaps was the fact that the legislation ran counter to jeffersons well known republican principles.
the lewis and clark expedition in the midst of the louisiana controversy jefferson dispatched a secret message to congress requesting 2 500 for the exploration of the far west january 1803.
how closely this decision was connected to the paris negotiations is not clear.
whatever the case may have been the president asked his talented private secretary meriwether lewis to discover whether the missouri river may offer the most direct practicable water communication across watch the video this continent for the purposes of commerce the president also regarded the expedition as a wonderful opportunity to collect precise data about flora and fauna.
he personally instructed lewis in the latest techniques of scientific observation.
while preparing for this great adventure lewiss second in command william clark assumed such a prominent role that the effort became known as the lewis and clark expedition.
the effort owed much of its success to a young shoshoni woman known as sacagawea.
she served as a translator and helped persuade suspicious native americans that the explorers meant no harm.
as clark explained a woman with a party of men is a token of peace the exploring party set out from st louis in may 1804 and after barely surviving crossing the snow covered rocky mountains with their food supply running dangerously low the americans reached the pacific ocean in november 1805 the group returned safely the following september.
the results of the expedition not only fulfilled jeffersons scientific expectations but also reaffirmed his faith in the future economic prosperity of the united states.
lewis clark what were they trying to accomplish.
when thomas jefferson purchased louisiana from the french in 1803 americans knew very little about their vast new territory.
the president chose naturalist meriwether lewis and william clark a soldier and cartographer to lead a voyage of discovery to explore these new lands.
this stamp commemorates the expeditions 1804 departure up the missouri river and into the unknown west.
jeffersons critics conflict with the barbary states during this period jefferson dealt with another problem.
for several decades the north african states of tangier algiers tripoli and tunis the barbary states had preyed on commercial shipping.
see the feature essay barbary pirates and american captives the nations first hostage crisis pp.
most european nations paid the pirates tribute hoping thereby to protect merchants trading in the mediterranean.
in 1801 jefferson responding to tripolis increased demand for tribute decided the extortion had become intolerable and dispatched a small fleet to the barbary coast where according to one commander the americans intended to negotiate through the mouth of a cannon tripoli put up stiff resistance however and in one mismanaged engagement it captured the u s frigate philadelphia.
ransoming the crew cost jeffersons government another 60 000.
an american land assault across the libyan desert provided inspiration for the words of the marines hymn to the shores of tripoli but no smashing victory.
despite a generally unimpressive american military record a vigorous naval blockade brought hostilities to a conclusion.
in 1805 the president signed a treaty formally ending the barbary war.
one diplomat crowed it must be mortifying to some of the neighboring european powers to see that the barbary states have been taught their fi rst lessons of humiliation from the western world jefferson concluded his first term on a wave of popularity.
he had maintained the peace reduced taxes and expanded the boundaries of the united states.
not surprisingly he overwhelmed his federalist opponent in the presidential election of 1804 in the electoral college jefferson received 162 votes to charles cotesworth pinckneys 14 republicans controlled congress.
john randolph the most articulate member of the house of representatives exclaimed never was there an administration more brilliant than that of mr jefferson up to this period.
we were indeed in the full tide of successful experiment the election of 1804 candidate jefferson c pinckney party republican federalist electoral vote jeffersons critics how did jeffersonians deal with the difficult problems of party politics and slavery.
at the moment of jeffersons greatest electoral victory a perceptive person might have seen signs of serious division within the republican party and within the country.
the presidents heavyhanded attempts to reform the federal courts stirred deep animosities.
republicans had begun sniping at other republicans and one leading member of the party aaron burr became involved in a bizarre plot to separate the west from the rest of the nation.
congressional debates over the future of the slave trade revealed the existence of powerful sectional loyalties and profound disagreement on the issue.
the barbary states in 1801 president jefferson refused to continue paying the tribute that pirates of the barbary states had received for decades.
atlantic ocean kingdom of italy france black sea ottoman empire portugal spain kingdom of naples barbary raids strait of gibraltar tangier algiers morocco tunis u s s.
philadelphia captured oct 31 1803 burned by u s feb 16 1804 algeria mediterranean sea derna april 27 1805 tunisia tripoli bombarded summer 1804 barbary states egypt tripoli cairo chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism spurred in part as so many were by the depression of the 1890s.
in 1901 he became governor of wisconsin.
then forty five years old la follette was talented aggressive and a superb stump speaker.
in the following six years he put together the wisconsin idea one of the most important reform programs in the history of state government.
he established an industrial commission the first in the country to regulate factory safety and sanitation.
he improved education workers compensation public utility controls and resource conservation.
he lowered railroad rates and raised railroad taxes.
under la follettes prodding wisconsin became the first state to adopt a direct primary for all political nominations.
it also became the first to adopt a state income tax.
like other progressives la follette drew on expert advice and relied on academic figures such as richard ely and edward ross at the university of wisconsin.
la follette supporters established the first legislative reference bureau in the universitys library the bureau stocked the governor and his allies with facts and figures to support the measures they wanted.
theodore roosevelt called la follettes wisconsin the laboratory of democracy and the wisconsin idea soon spread to many other states including new york california michigan iowa and texas.
after 1905 the progressives looked more and more to washington.
for one thing teddy roosevelt was there with his zest for publicity and his alluring grin.
progressives also had a growing sense that many concerns corporations and conservation factory safety and child labor crossed state lines.
federal action seemed desirable specific reforms fit into a larger plan perhaps best seen from the nations center.
within a few years la follette and hiram johnson became senators and while reform went on back home the focus of progressivism shifted to washington.
read the document theodore roosevelt from the strenuous life 1900 the republican roosevelt how would you describe the personality and programs of theodore roosevelt.
when president william mckinley died of gunshot wounds in september 1901 vice president theodore roosevelt succeeded him in the white house.
the new president initially vowed to carry on mckinleys policies.
he continued some developed others of his own and in the end brought to them all the particular exuberance of his own personality.
at age forty two roosevelt was then the youngest president in american history.
in contrast to the dignified mckinley he was open aggressive and high spirited.
at his desk by 8 30 every morning he worked through the day usually with visitors for breakfast lunch and dinner.
politicians labor leaders industrialists poets artists and writers paraded through the white house.
if mckinley cut down on presidential isolation roosevelt virtually ended it.
the presidency he thought was the bully pulpit a forum of ideas and leadership for the nation.
the president was a steward of the people bound actively and affirmatively to do all he could for the people self confident roosevelt enlisted talented associates including elihu root secretary of war and later secretary of state william howard taft secretary of war gifford pinchot the nations chief forester and leading conservationist and oliver wendell holmes jr whom he named to the supreme court.
this photograph of tr theodore roosevelt captures key parts of his personality exuberant jovial expansive self confident personally warm outgoing aggressive spirited and friendly.
these characteristics among others are important because they shaped his presidency between 1901 and 1909 in 1901 roosevelt invited booker t washington the prominent african american educator to dinner at the white house.
many southerners protested a crime equal to treason a newspaper said and they protested again when roosevelt appointed several african americans to important federal offices in south carolina and mississippi.
at first roosevelt considered building a biracial black and tan southern republican party thinking it would foster racial progress and his own renomination in 1904 he denounced lynching and ordered the justice department to act against peonage.
but roosevelt soon retreated.
in some areas of the south he supported lily white republican organizations and his policies often reflected his own belief in african american inferiority.
he said nothing when a race riot broke out in atlanta in 1906 although twelve persons died.
he joined others in blaming african american soldiers stationed near brownsville texas after a night of violence there in august 1906 acting quickly and on little evidence he discharged without honor three companies of african american troops.
six of the soldiers who were discharged held the congressional medal of honor.
the republican roosevelt busting the trusts there is a widespread conviction in the minds of the american people that the great corporations known as trusts are in certain of their features and tendencies hurtful to the general welfare roosevelt reported to congress in 1901 like most people however the president wavered on the trusts.
large scale production and industrial growth he believed were natural and beneficial they needed only to be controlled.
still he distrusted the trusts impact on local enterprise and individual opportunity.
distinguishing between good and bad trusts he pledged to protect the former while controlling the latter.
at first roosevelt hoped the combination of investigative journalism and public opinion would be enough to uncover and correct business evils and in public he both praised and attacked the trusts.
mr dooley poked fun at his wavering th trusts says he are heejous monsthers built up be th enlightened intherprise iv th men that have done so much to advance progress in our beloved country he says.
on wan hand i wud stamp thim undher fut on th other hand not so fast in 1903 roosevelt asked congress to create a department of commerce and labor with a bureau of corporations empowered to investigate corporations engaged in interstate commerce.
congress balked roosevelt called in reporters and in an offthe record interview charged that john d rockefeller had organized the opposition to the measure.
the press spread the word and in the outcry that followed the proposal passed easily in a matter of weeks.
roosevelt was delighted.
with the new bureau of corporations publicizing its findings he thought the glare of publicity would eliminate most corporate abuses.
roosevelt also undertook direct legal action.
on february 18 1902 he instructed the justice department to bring suit against the northern securities company for violation of the sherman antitrust act.
it was a shrewd move.
a mammoth holding company northern securities controlled the massive rail networks of the northern pacific great northern and chicago burlington quincy railroads.
some of the most prominent names in business were behind the giant company j.
p morgan and company the rockefeller interests kuhn loeb and company and railroad operators james j hill and edward h harriman.
shocked by roosevelts action morgan charged that the president had not acted like a gentleman and hill talked glumly of having to fight for our lives against the political adventurers who have never done anything but pose and draw a salary morgan rushed to washington to complain and to ask whether there were plans to attack my other interests notably u s steel.
no roosevelt replied unless we find out they have done something that we regard as wrong in 1904 the supreme court in a 5 to 4 decision upheld the suit against northern securities and ordered the company dissolved.
roosevelt was jubilant and he followed up the victory with several other antitrust suits.
in 1902 he had moved against the beef trust an action applauded by western farmers and urban consumers alike.
after a lull he initiated suits in 1906 and 1907 against the american tobacco company the du pont corporation the new haven railroad and standard oil.
but roosevelts policies were not always clear nor his actions always consistent.
he invited morgan to the white house to confer with him and allowed the president of national city bank to preview a draft of the presidents third annual message to congress.
roosevelt also asked for and received business support in his bid for reelection in 1904 large donations came in from industrial leaders and morgan himself later testified that he gave 150 000 to roosevelts campaign.
in 1907 acting in part to avert a threatened financial panic the president permitted morgans u s steel to absorb the tennessee coal and iron company an important competitor.
roosevelt in truth was not a trustbuster although he was frequently called that.
william howard taft his successor in the white house initiated forty three antitrust indictments in four years nearly twice as many as the twenty five roosevelt initiated in the seven years of his presidency.
instead roosevelt used antitrust threats to keep businesses within bounds.
regulation he believed was a better way to control large scale enterprise.
square deal in the coalfields a few months after announcing the northern securities suit roosevelt intervened in a major labor dispute involving the anthracite coal miners of northeastern pennsylvania.
led by john mitchell a moderate labor leader the united mine workers demanded wage increases an eight hour workday and company recognition of the union.
the coal companies refused and in may 1902 one hundred forty thousand miners walked off the job.
the mines closed.
as the months passed and the strike continued coal prices rose.
with winter coming on schools hospitals and factories ran short of coal.
public opinion turned against the companies.
morgan and other industrial leaders privately urged them to settle but george f baer head of one of the largest companies refused the rights and interests of the laboring man baer said will be protected and cared for not by the labor agitators but by the christian men to whom god in his infinite wisdom has given the control of the property interests of this country roosevelt was furious.
complaining of the companies arrogance he invited both sides in the dispute to an october 1902 conference at the white house.
there mitchell took a moderate tone and offered to submit the issues to arbitration but the companies again refused to budge.
roosevelt ordered the army to prepare to seize the mines and then leaked word of his intent to wall street leaders.
alarmed morgan and others again urged settlement of the dispute and at last the companies retreated.
they agreed to accept the recommendations of an independent commission the president would appoint.
in late october the strikers returned to work and in march 1903 the commission awarded them a 10 percent wage increase and a cut in working hours.
it recommended however against union recognition.
the coal companies in turn were encouraged to raise prices to offset the wage increase.
more and more roosevelt saw the federal government as an honest and impartial broker between powerful elements in society.
rather than leaning toward labor he pursued a middle way to curb corporate and labor abuses abolish privilege and enlarge individual opportunity.
conservative by temperament he sometimes backed reforms in part to head off more radical measures.
during the 1904 campaign roosevelt called his actions in the coal miners strike a square deal for both labor and capital a term that stuck to his administration.
roosevelt was not the first president to take a stand for labor but he was the first to bring opposing sides in a labor dispute to the white house to settle it.
chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism now roosevelt listened to anti taft republicans who urged him by organizing a nationwide network of anti taft progressive to run for president in 1912 in february 1912 he announced republican clubs.
my hat is in the ring the 1910 election results were a major setback for taft and the republicans especially conservative republicans.
a key issue in the election the high cost of living gave an edge to differing philosophies in the the progressive wings in both major parties lending support election of 1912 to their attack on the tariff and the trusts.
in party primaries progressive republicans overwhelmed most taft candidates delighted democrats looked on as taft and roosevelt fought for the and in the general election they tended to fare better than the republican nomination.
as the incumbent president taft controlled conservatives which increased progressive influence in the the party machinery and when the republican convention met in republican party.
june 1912 he took the nomination.
in early july the democrats for republicans of all persuasions however it was a difficult met in baltimore and confident of victory for the first time in two election.
the democrats swept the urban industrial states from decades struggled through forty six ballots before finally nominatnew york to illinois.
new york new jersey indiana and even ing woodrow wilson the reform minded governor of new jersey.
tafts ohio elected democratic governors.
for the first time since a month later some of the anti taft and progressive 1894 republicans lost control of both the house and the senate.
republicans now calling themselves the progressive party in all they lost fifty eight seats in the house and ten in the senate.
whooped it up in chicago.
roosevelt was there to give a stirring disappointed taft called it not only a landslide but a tidal wave confession of faith and listen to the delegates sing and holocaust all rolled into one general cataclysm despite the defeat taft pushed through several importhou wilt not cower in the dust tant measures before his term ended.
with the help of the new roosevelt o roosevelt.
democratic house he backed laws to regulate safety in mines and thy gleaming sword shall never rust on railroads create a childrens bureau in the federal government roosevelt o roosevelt.
establish employers liability for all work done on government contracts and mandate an eight hour workday for government workers.
watch the video bull moose campaign speech in 1909 congress initiated a constitutional amendment authorizing an income tax which along with woman suffrage was one of the most significant legislative measures of the twentieth century.
the sixteenth amendment took effect early in 1913 a few months later an important progressive goal was realized when the direct election of senators was ratified as the seventeenth amendment to the constitution.
an ardent supporter of competition taft relentlessly pressed a campaign against trusts.
the sherman antitrust act he said in 1911 is a good law that ought to be enforced and i propose to enforce it that year the supreme court in cases against standard oil and american tobacco established the rule of reason which allowed the court to determine whether a business presented reasonable restraint on trade.
taft thought the decisions gave the court too much discretion and he pushed ahead with the antitrust effort.
in october 1911 he sued u s steel for its acquisition of the tennessee coal and iron company in 1907 roosevelt had approved the acquisition see p 547 and the suit seemed designed to impugn his action.
enraged he attacked taft and taft for once fought theodore roosevelt campaigns for president in 1912 roosevelt champions national health back.
he accused roosevelt of undermin insurance and tries to ride his progressive bull moose party back to the white house.
its an idea ing the conservative tradition in the country ahead of its time health insurance is a rarity and medical fees are relatively low because doctors and began working to undercut the influence cannot do much for most patients.
but medical breakthroughs are beginning to revolutionize of the progressive republicans.
increasingly hospitals and drive up costs.
woodrow wilsons new freedom naming roosevelt for president at its convention the progressive party soon known as the bull moose party set the stage for the first important three cornered presidential contest since 1860 taft was out of the running before the campaign even began.
i think i might as well give up so far as being a candidate is concerned he said in july.
there are so many people in the country who dont like me taft stayed at home and made no speeches before the election.
roosevelt campaigned strenuously even completing one speech after being shot in the chest by an anti third term fanatic.
i have a message to deliver he said and will deliver it as long as there is life in my body roosevelts message involved a program he called the new nationalism.
an important phase in the shaping of twentiethcentury american political thought it demanded a national approach to the countrys affairs and a strong president to deal with them.
the new nationalism called for efficiency in government and society.
it exalted the executive and the expert urged social justice reforms to protect workers women and children and accepted good trusts.
the new nationalism encouraged large concentrations of labor and capital serving the nations interests under a forceful federal executive.
for the first time in the history of a major political party the progressive campaign enlisted women in its organization.
jane addams the well known settlement worker seconded read the document woodrow wilson from the new freedom 1913 roosevelts nomination at chicago and she and other women played a leading role in his campaign.
some labor leaders who saw potential for union growth and some business leaders who saw relief from destructive competition and labor strife supported the new party.
wilson in contrast set forth a program called the new freedom that emphasized business competition and small government.
a states rights democrat he wanted to rein in federal authority using it only to sweep away special privilege release individual energies and restore competition.
drawing on the thinking of louis d brandeis the brilliant shaper of reform minded law he echoed the progressive partys social justice objectives while continuing to attack roosevelts planned state.
for wilson the vital issue was not a planned economy but a free one.
the history of liberty is the history of the limitation of governmental power he said in october 1912.
if america is not to have free enterprise then she can have freedom of no sort whatever in the new nationalism and new freedom the election of 1912 offered competing philosophies of government.
both roosevelt and wilson saw the central problem of the american nation as economic growth and its effect on individuals and society.
both focused on the governments relation to business both believed in bureaucratic reform and both wanted to use government to protect the ordinary citizen.
but roosevelt welcomed federal power national planning and business growth wilson distrusted them all.
on election day wilson won 6 3 million votes to 4 1 million for roosevelt who had recovered quickly from his wound and 900 000 for eugene v debs the socialist party candidate.
taft the incumbent president finished third with 3 5 million votes he carried only vermont and utah for 8 electoral votes.
the democrats also won outright control of both houses.
election of 1912 woodrow wilsons new freedom popular vote electoral vote by state democratic woodrow wilson 6 293 454 progressive bull moose theodore roosevelt 4 119 538 republican william h taft what were the central principles of woodrow wilsons new freedom.
3 484 980 1 135 697 minor parties 15 033 939 if under roosevelt social reform took on the excitement of a circus under wilson it acquired the dedication of a sunrise service born in virginia in 1856 and raised in the south wilson was the son of a presbyterian minister.
as a young man he wanted a career in public service and he trained himself carefully in history and oratory.
a moralist he reached judgments easily.
once reached almost nothing shook them.
opponents called him stubborn and smug.
he gives me the creeps a maryland ward boss said.
the time i met him he said something to me and i didnt know whether god or him was talking after graduating from princeton university and the university of virginia law school wilson found that practicing law bored him.
shifting to history from 1890 to 1902 he served as professor of jurisprudence and political economy at princeton.
in 1902 he became president of the university.
eight years later he was governor of new jersey where he led a campaign to reform election procedures abolish corrupt practices and strengthen railroad regulation.
wilsons rise was rapid and he knew relatively little about national issues and personalities.
but he learned fast and in some chapter 11 pp.
commerce and banking as regions specialized in growing commercial crops a new system of marketing emerged.
during the early stages in many areas farmers did their marketing personally even when it required long journeys overland or by flatboat.
with the growth of country towns local merchants took charge of the crops near their sources bartering clothing and other manufactured goods for produce.
these intermediaries shipped the farmers crops to larger local markets such as pittsburgh cincinnati and st louis.
from there the commodities could be sent on to philadelphia new york or new orleans.
cotton growers in the south were more likely to deal directly with factors or agents in the port cities from which their crop was exported.
but even in the south commission merchants in such inland towns as macon atlanta montgomery shreveport and nashville became increasingly important as intermediaries.
credit was a crucial element in the whole system.
farmers borrowed from local merchants who received an advance of their own when they consigned crops to a commission house or factor.
the commission agents relied on credit from merchants or manufacturers at the ultimate destination which might be liverpool or new york city.
the intermediaries all charged fees and interest but the net cost to the farmers was less than when they had handled their own marketing.
the need for credit encouraged the growth of money and banking.
before the revolutions in transportation and marketing small scale local economies could survive to a considerable extent on barter.
under the constitution the u s government is the only agency authorized to coin money and regulate its value.
but in emergence of a market economy listen to the audio file the erie canal illustration of a lock on the erie canal at lockport new york 1838 the successful canal facilitated trade by linking the great lakes regions to the eastern seaports.
the early to mid nineteenth century the government printed no paper money and produced gold and silver coins in such small quantities that it utterly failed to meet the expanding economys need for a circulating currency.
private or state banking institutions filled the void by issuing banknotes promises to redeem their paper in specie gold or silver on the bearers demand.
after congress failed to recharter the bank of the united states in 1811 existing state chartered banks took up the slack.
many of them however lacked adequate reserves and were forced to suspend specie payments during the war of 1812 the demand for money and credit during the immediate postwar boom led to a vast increase in the number of state banks from 88 to 208 within two years.
the resulting flood of state banknotes caused this form of currency to depreciate well below its face value and threatened a runaway inflation.
in an effort to stabilize the currency congress established a second bank of the united states in 1816 the bank was expected to serve as a check on the state banks by forcing them to resume specie payments.
but it did not perform this task well in its early years.
in fact its own free lending policies contributed to the overextension of credit that led to financial panic and depression in 1819 when the economy collapsed as it would do again in 1837 many americans questioned whether the new system of banking and credit was as desirable as it had seemed to be in times of prosperity.
as a result hostility to banks became a prominent feature of american politics.
early industrialism the growth of a market economy also created new opportunities for industrialists.
in 1815 most manufacturing in the united states was carried on in households in the workshops of skilled artisans or in small mills which used waterpower to turn wheat into flour or timber into boards.
the factory form of production in which supervised workers tended or operated machines under one roof was rare.
it was found mainly in southern new england where a number of small spinning mills relying heavily on the labor of women and children accomplished one step in the manufacture of cotton textiles.
but most spinning of thread as well as the weaving cutting and sewing of cloth was still done by women working at home.
chapter 24 the nation at war watch the video american entry into world war i merchant ships armed on his own authority.
three days later he announced the arming and on march 13 the navy instructed all vessels to fire on submarines.
between march 12 and march 21 u boats sank five american ships and wilson decided to wait no longer.
he called congress into special session and at 8 30 in the evening on april 2 1917 asked for a declaration of war.
it is a fearful thing to lead this great peaceful people into war into the most terrible and disastrous of all wars civilization itself seeming to be in the balance.
but the right is more precious than peace and we shall fight for the things which we have always carried nearest our hearts for democracy.
for the rights and liberties of small nations for a universal dominion of right by such a concert of free peoples as shall bring peace and safety to all nations and make the world itself at last free congressmen broke into applause and crowded the aisles to congratulate wilson.
my message today was a message of death for our young men he said afterward.
how strange it seems to applaud that pacifists in congress continued to hold out and for four days they managed to postpone action.
finally on april 6 the declaration of war passed with fifty members of the house and six senators voting against it.
even then the country was divided over entry into the war.
over there in 1914 europe explodes into war and woodrow wilson has to make a decision about what america is going to do.
and his decision is to ask the american public to remain neutral in word as well as deed.
to unleash the submarines and gamble on a quick end to the war.
even as wilson spoke u boats were in the atlantic west of ireland preparing to attack.
on january 31 the german ambassador in washington informed lansing that beginning february 1 u boats would sink on sight all ships passenger or merchant neutral or belligerent armed or unarmed in the waters around england and france.
staking everything on a last effort the germans calculated that if they could sink 600 000 tons of shipping a month they could defeat england in six months.
as he had pledged in 1916 wilson broke off relations with germany although he still hoped for peace.
on february 25 the british government privately gave wilson a telegram intercepted from arthur zimmermann the german foreign minister to the german ambassador in mexico.
a day later wilson asked congress for authority to arm merchant ships to deter u boat attacks.
when la follette and a handful of others threatened to filibuster wilson divulged the contents of the zimmermann telegram.
it proposed an alliance with mexico in case of war with the united states offering financial support and recovery of mexicos lost territory in new mexico texas and arizona.
spurred by a wave of public indignation toward the germans the house passed wilsons measure but la follette and others still blocked action in the senate.
on march 9 1917 wilson ordered how did the united states entry affect the course of world war i.
with a burst of patriotism the united states entered a war its new allies were in danger of losing.
that same month the germans sank 881 000 tons of allied shipping the highest amount for any one month during the war.
there were mutinies in the french army a costly british drive in flanders stalled.
in november the bolsheviks seized power in russia and led by v i lenin they soon signed a separate peace treaty with germany freeing german troops to fight in the west.
german and austrian forces routed the italian army on the southern flank and the allies braced for a spring 1918 offensive.
mobilization the united states was not prepared for war.
some americans hoped the declaration of war itself might daunt the germans there were those who thought that naval escorts of allied shipping would be enough.
others hoped money and arms supplied to the allies would be suffi cient to produce victory without sending troops.
bypassing older generals wilson named john j.
black jack pershing leader of the mexican campaign to head the american expeditionary force aef.
pershing inherited an army unready for war.
in april 1917 it had 200 000 officers and men equipped with 300 000 old rifles 1500 machine guns 55 out of date airplanes and 2 field radio sets.
its most recent battle experience had been chasing pancho villa around northern mexico.
it had not caught him.
over there listen to the audio file over there 500 miles norway 500 kilometers sweden moscow gr eat britain se a north sea lt i c ba denmark russia tannenberg aug 26 31 1914 london atlantic ocean berlin neth.
eastern front brestlitovsk german empire armistice line dec 1917 lux.
paris somme july 1 nov 18 1916 verdun feb 21 dec 18 1916 western front france austria hungary switz.
caporetto oct 24 25 1917 southern flank port.
spain corsica fr.
vienna romania italy mallorca sp.
sardinia it.
bulgaria rome montenegro allied powers ottoman empire alb.
greece mediterranean sea sp.
morocco central powers neutral nations gallipoli apr.
25 1915 jan 9 1916 sicily algeria fr.
tunisia fr.
crete european alliances and battlefronts 1914 1917 allied forces suffered early defeats on the eastern front tannenberg and in the dardanelles gallipoli.
in 1917 the allies were routed on the southern flank caporetto the western front then became the critical theater of the war.
u s losses to the german submarine campaign 1916 1918 tonnage of vessels sunk thousands american declaration of war april 1917 black sea serbia cyprus br.
complete the assignment measuring the mind on myhistorylab feature essay f rom 1870 to 1920 scientists and physicians explored new ideas about the mind.
in europe the viennese psychiatrist sigmund freud studied the unconscious which he thought shaped human behavior.
russias ivan pavlov tested the conditioned reflex in mental activity pavlovs dogs and in the united states william james the psychologist and philosopher examined emotions and linked psychology to everyday problems.
as one way of understanding the mind psychologists studied the mental processes of a great many minds a task to which the relatively new science of statistics lent a hand.
testing large samples of subjects they developed the concept of the normal and average helpful boundaries used to determine an individuals place in the population.
in 1890 the psychologist james mckeen cattell tested one hundred first year students at the university of pennsylvania for vision and hearing sensitivity to pain reaction time and memory.
he called these examinations by a new name mental tests and the idea spread.
in 1895 the american psychological association apa set up a special committee to promote the nationwide collection of mental statistics.
work was under way on both sides of the ocean and in 1905 alfred binet and theodore simon two french psychologists devised a metric intelligence scale.
seizing on the idea that intelligence increases with age until maturity they tested children to find an average level of performance for different ages.
once they had determined the average they could compare any childs test performance to measuring the mind it and thus distinguish between the childs mental age and chronological age.
in 1912 william stein a german psychologist introduced the intelligence quotient found by dividing a persons mental age by the chronological age.
in 1916 lewis m terman of stanford university improved binets test and the term iq became part of the american vocabulary.
employers and educators however remained skeptical of measuring intelligence.
thus when the united states entered world war i psychologists at once saw the opportunity to overcome the doubts and prove their theories.
huge numbers of men needed to be recruited classified and assigned to units quickly.
why not use the new mental tests.
apa leaders formed twelve committees including one on the psychological examination of recruits to explore the military uses of psychology.
preferring to issue promotions on the basis of seniority the army resisted the mental meddlers but the apa persuaded the war department to use the tests.
in early 1918 psychological examiners were posted at all training camps to administer the alpha test to literates and the beta test with instructions given in pantomime to illiterates and recruits who did not understand english.
at the start of each alpha test the examiners put the men at ease by explaining that the army was not looking for crazy people.
the aim is to help find out what we are best fitted to do on the beta test which was made up largely of pictures the examiners were reminded that beta men sometimes sulk and refuse to work on the basis of the tests the examiners classified recruits as superior questions from one portion of the u s army intelligence alpha test.
average or inferior from the superior category they selected men for officer training a helpful winnowing process in an army that expanded quickly from nine thousand officers to two hundred thousand.
they then distributed the remaining superior average and inferior men among each military unit.
in all the examiners tested 1 7 million men by far the largest testing program in human history to that time.
to some degree the tests served their purpose but they also seemed to raise questions about the education and mental ability of many american men.
for one thing there was the extent of illiteracy nearly one quarter of the draft age men in 1918 could neither read nor write.
one third incidentally were physically unfit for service.
there was also the limited schooling of the recruits most of whom had left school between the fifth and seventh grades.
more alarming according to the test results 47 percent of the white draftees and 89 percent of the black draftees had a mental age of twelve years or under which classified them as feebleminded did that mean half or more of the american population was feebleminded.
the tests also turned up racial and national distinctions or so some of the examiners concluded.
men of native backgrounds and old immigrant stock from northern europe and the british isles tended to score well and fell in the superior category new immigrants from central and southern europe tended to score less well and were ranked as inferior among russian polish and italian draftees more than half were classified as inferior such results came as no surprise to those who had long doubted the intelligence of the new immigrants nor did the fact that 80 percent of the african american men taking the alpha test scored in the inferior range.
some observers however wondered what the tests really measured.
the apa examiners claimed they measured native intelligence but questions about edgar allan poes poem the raven or the paintings of rosa bonheur a french artist of the mid nineteenth century required answers that native intelligence alone could not supply.
when blacks and whites scored comparably on the early beta test the examiners decided that something must be wrong with the test so they changed the questions until the scores showed the expected racial differences.
most of those taking the beta test had never taken a written test before many had probably never held a pencil.
still skeptical the army discontinued the tests the moment the war ended but what the army rejected the nation adopted.
businesses government and above all educational institutions found more and more uses for intelligence testing.
in 1926 the college entrance examination board ceeb administered the first scholastic aptitude test sat designed to test intelligence and predict performance in college.
in 1935 it established scoring ranges from 200 to 800 with the average score set at 500 during world war ii sat tests were widely used.
in 1947 the ceeb became part of a new educational testing service that spurred an educational revolution by making intelligence instead of social or economic standing the main criterion of college admissions.
before long intelligence testing the measuring of minds touched every aspect of american life.
shaping lives and careers it pushed some people forward and held others back in the military industry the civil service and higher education.
intelligence tests.
an expert said in 1971 have more and more become societys instrument for the selection of human resources questions for discussion 1 what arguments did advocates and opponents of intelligence testing use to support and attack these tests.
2 why were the intelligence tests the army administered during world war i so problematic.
3 what were the positive and negative results of intelligence tests.
chapter 24 the nation at war protests involved american goods and money whereas germanys submarine policy threatened american lives.
the u boat threat sent an ultimatum to germany stating that unless the germans immediately called off attacks on cargo and passenger ships the united states would sever relations.
the kaiser convinced he did not yet have enough submarines to risk war yielded.
in the sussex pledge of may 4 1916 he agreed to wilsons demands and promised to shoot on sight only ships of the enemys navy.
but he attached the condition that the united states compel the allies to end their blockade and comply with international law.
wilson accepted the pledge but turned down the condition.
the sussex pledge marked the beginning of a short period of friendly relations between germany and the united states.
the agreement applied not only to passenger liners but to all merchant ships belligerent or not.
there was one problem wilson had taken such a strong position that if germany renewed submarine warfare on merchant shipping war was likely.
most americans however viewed the agreement as a diplomatic stroke for peace by wilson and the issues of peace and preparedness dominated the presidential election of 1916 a relatively new weapon the unterseeboot or submarine strained the guidelines of international law.
traditional law required a submarine to surface warn the target to stop send a boarding party to check papers and cargo then allow time for passengers and crew to board lifeboats before sinking the vessel.
flimsy and slow submarines could ill afford to surface while the prey radioed for help.
if they did surface they might be rammed or blown up by deck guns.
when germany announced the submarine campaign in february 1915 wilson protested sharply calling the sinking of merchant ships without checking cargo a wanton act the germans promised not to sink american ships an agreement that lasted until 1917 and thereafter the issue became the right of americans to sail on the ships of belligerent nations.
in march an american citizen aboard the british liner falaba perished when the ship was torpedoed off the irish coast.
bryan urged he kept us out of war wilson to forbid americans to travel in the war zones but the president determined to stand by the principles of international the preparedness issue pitted antiwar groups against those law refused.
who wanted to prepare for war.
bellicose as always teddy wilson reacted more harshly in may and august of 1915 when roosevelt led the preparedness campaign.
he called wilson u boats sank the lusitania and the arabic.
he demanded that the yellow for not pressing germany harder and scoffed at the germans protect passenger vessels and pay for american losses.
at popular song i didnt raise my boy to be a soldier which he odds with wilsons understanding of neutrality bryan resigned as secretary of state and was read the document adolf k g e von spiegel u boat 202 1919 replaced by robert lansing a lawyer and counselor in the state department.
lansing brought a very different spirit to the job.
he favored the allies and believed that democracy was threatened in a world dominated by germany.
he urged strong stands against german violations of american neutrality.
in februar y 1916 germany declared unrestricted submarine warfare against all armed ships.
lansing protested and told germany it would be held strictly accountable for american losses.
a month later a u boat torpedoed the unarmed french channel steamer sussex without warning injuring several americans.
arguing that the sinking violated the arabic pledge lansing urged wilson to break relations with germany.
wilson rejected the advice but on april 18 he adolf k g e.
von spiegel commanded a german u boat during world war i he published his memoirs in 1919 toward war compared to singing i didnt raise my girl to be a mother defending the militarys state of readiness wilson refused to be stampeded just because some amongst us are nervous and excited in fact when government revenue dropped in 1915 he cut military appropriations.
wilsons position was attacked from both sides as preparedness advocates charged cowardice while pacifists denounced any attempt at military readiness.
the difficulty of his situation plus the growing u boat crisis soon changed wilsons mind.
in mid 1915 he asked the war department to increase military planning and he quietly notified congressional leaders of a switch in policy.
later that year wilson approved large increases in the army and navy a move that upset many peace minded progressives.
in january 1916 he toured the country to promote preparedness and in june with an american flag draped over his shoulder he marched in a giant preparedness parade in washington.
for their standard bearer in the presidential election of 1916 the republicans nominated charles evans hughes a moderate justice of the supreme court.
hughes seemed to have all the qualifications for victory.
a former reform governor of new york he could lure back the roosevelt progressives while at the same time appealing to the republican conservatives.
to woo the roosevelt wing hughes called for a tougher line against germany thus allowing the democrats to label him the war candidate.
even so roosevelt and others considered hughes a bearded iceberg a dull campaigner who wavered on important issues.
the democrats renominated wilson in a convention marked by spontaneous demonstrations for peace.
determined to outdo republican patriotism wilson himself had ordered the conventions theme to be americanism the delegates were to sing america and the star spangled banner and to cheer any mention of america and the flag.
they did it all dutifully but then broke into spontaneous applause at the mention of wilsons careful diplomatic moves.
as the keynote speaker reviewed them the delegates shouted what did we do.
what did we do the speaker shouted back we didnt go to war.
we didnt go to war picking up the theme perhaps with reservations wilson said in october i am not expecting this country to get into war the campaign slogan he kept us out of war was repeated again and again and just before the election the democrats took full page ads in leading newspapers and progressive vote.
women who were then allowed to vote in presidential elections in twelve states also voted heavily for wilson.
the final months of peace just before election day great britain further limited neutral trade and there were reports from germany of a renewal of unrestricted submarine warfare.
fresh from his victory wilson redoubled his efforts for peace.
aware that time was running out he hoped to start negotiations to end the bloodshed and create a peaceful postwar world.
in december 1916 he sent messages to both sides asking them to state their war aims.
should they do so he pledged the whole force of the united states to end the war.
the allies refused although they promised privately to negotiate if the german terms were reasonable.
the germans replied evasively and in january 1917 revealed their real objectives.
close to forcing russia out of the war germany sensed victory and wanted territory in eastern europe africa belgium and france.
on january 22 in an eloquent speech before the senate wilson called for a peace without victory outlining his own ambitious aims he urged respect for all nations freedom of the seas arms limitations and a league of nations to keep the peace.
only a peace between equals can last only a peace the very principle of which is equality and a common participation in a common benefit the speech made a great impression on many europeans but it was too late.
the germans had decided a few weeks before read the document president wilsons war message to congress 1917 you are working not fighting.
alive and happy not cannon fodder.
wilson and peace with honor.
or hughes with roosevelt and war.
on election night hughes had swept most of the east and wilson retired at 10 p m thinking he had lost.
during the night the results came in from california new mexico and north dakota all supported wilson california by a mere 3773 votes.
wilson won with 9 1 million votes against 8 5 million for hughes.
holding the democratic south he carried key states in the midwest and west and took large portions of the labor wilsons re election in 1916 owed a great deal to the campaign slogan he kept us out of war but the resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare by germany in 1917 significantly changed the international situation.
several u s merchant ships were sunk in march by german u boats.
that april wilson called congress into extraordinary session to ask for a declaration of war against germany.
chapter 24 the nation at war he supported an eight hour day in war related industries and improved wages and working conditions.
in may 1918 he named felix frankfurter a brilliant young law professor to head a new war labor board wlb.
the agency standardized wages and hours and at wilsons direction it protected the right of labor to organize and bargain collectively.
although it did not forbid strikes it used various tactics to discourage them.
it enforced decisions in well publicized cases when the smith and wesson arms factory in massachusetts and the western union telegraph company disobeyed the wlbs union rules the agency took them over.
the wlb also ordered that women be paid equal wages for equal work in war industries.
in 1914 the flow of european immigrants suddenly stopped because of the war and in 1917 the draft began to take large numbers of american men.
the result was a labor shortage filled by women african americans and mexican americans.
one million women worked in war industries.
some of them took jobs previously held by men but for the most part they moved from one set of womens jobs into another.
from the beginning of the war to the end the number of women in the workforce held steady at about eight million and unlike the experience in world war ii large numbers of housewives did not leave the home for machine shops and arms plants.
still there were some new opportunities and in some cases higher pay.
in food airplane and electrical plants women made up one fifth or more of the workforce.
as their wages increased so did their expectations some became more militant and conflict grew between them and male co workers.
to set standards for female employment a womens bureau was established in the department of labor but the governments influence varied.
in the federally run railroad industry women often made wages equal to those of men in the federally run telephone industry they did not.
looking for more people to fill wartime jobs corporations found another major source among southern blacks.
beginning in 1916 northern labor agents traveled across the south promising jobs high wages and free transportation.
soon the word spread and the movement northward became a flood.
between 1916 and 1918 more than 450 000 african americans left the old south for the booming industrial cities of st louis chicago detroit and cleveland.
in the decade before 1920 detroits black population grew by more than 600 percent clevelands by more than 300 percent and chicagos by 150 percent.
most of the newcomers were young unmarried and skilled or semiskilled.
the men found jobs in factories railroad yards steel mills packinghouses and coal mines black women worked in textile factories department stores and restaurants.
in their new homes african americans found greater racial freedom but also different living conditions.
if the south was often hostile the north could be impersonal and lonely.
accustomed to the pace of the farm ruled by the seasons and the sun those blacks who were able to enter the industrial sector now worked for hourly wages in african american migration northward 1910 1920 the massive migration of african americans from the south to the north during world war i changed the dynamics of race relations in the united states.
canada maine washington north dakota montana vt n h minn new york oregon wis south dakota idaho mich new york detroit wyoming rhode island connecticut philadelphia penn.
nebraska chicago iowa baltimore ohio ind.
ill nevada kansas new jersey maryland w v.
colorado del.
washington d c utah california mass.
st louis virginia ky missouri n c tenn arizona oklahoma new mexico ark.
s c memphis atlanta birmingham ala pacific ocean texas la.
atlantic ocean georgia miss.
new orleans florida states with greatest increase in population states with greatest decrease in population mexico african american migration 400 miles 400 kilometers over here mass production industries where time clocks and line supervisors dictated the daily routine.
racial tensions increased resulting in part from growing competition for housing and jobs.
in mid 1917 a race war in east st louis illinois killed nine whites and about forty blacks.
in july 1919 the month president wilson returned from the peace conference in paris a race riot in washington d c killed six people.
riots in chicago that month killed thirtyeight fifteen whites and twenty three blacks and there were later outbreaks in new york city and omaha.
lynch mobs killed forty eight blacks in 1917 sixty three in 1918 and seventy eight in 1919 ten of the victims in 1919 were war veterans several still in uniform.
blacks were more and more inclined to fight back.
two hundred thousand blacks served in france forty two thousand as combat troops.
returning home they expected better treatment.
im glad i went a black veteran said.
i done my part and im going to fight right here till uncle sam does his roscoe jameson claude mckay and other black poets wrote biting poetry some of it such as fenton johnsons the new day drawn from the war experience watch the video for we have been with thee in no mans land through lake of fire and down to hell itself and now we ask of thee our liberty our freedom in the land of stars and stripes.
lift evry voice and sing composed in 1900 became known as the negro national anthem parents bought black dolls for their children and w e b du bois spoke of a new negro proud and more militant we return.
we return from fighting.
we return fighting eager for cheap labor farmers and ranchers in the southwest persuaded the federal government to relax immigration restrictions and between 1917 and 1920 more than 100 000 mexicans migrated into texas arizona new mexico and california.
the mexican american population grew from 385 000 in 1910 to 740 000 in 1920 tens of thousands of mexican americans moved to chicago st louis omaha and other northern cities to take wartime jobs.
often scorned and insecure they created urban barrios similar to the chinatowns and little italys around them.
like most wars world war i affected patterns at home as much as abroad.
business profits grew factories expanded and industries the great migration the great migration over a series of decades witnessed the relocation of approximately 1 5 million african americans from their southern homes to northern metropolises.
it took a long time for that many people to move.
but it was the single most dramatic most powerful example or evidence of an african american agency in the twentieth century because this was not an organized movement.
chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction the new governments were more economical than those of reconstruction mainly because they cut back drastically on appropriations for schools and other needed public services.
but they were scarcely more honest embezzlement of funds and bribery of officials continued to occur to an alarming extent.
louisiana for example suffered for decades from the flagrant corruption associated with a state chartered lottery.
the redeemer regimes of the late 1870s and 1880s badly neglected the interests of small white farmers.
whites and blacks were suffering from the notorious crop lien system that gave local merchants who advanced credit at high rates of interest during the growing season the right to take possession of the harvested crop on terms that buried farmers deeper and deeper in debt.
as a result increasing numbers of whites lost title to their homesteads and were reduced to tenancy.
when a depression of world cotton prices added to the burden of a ruinous credit system agrarian protesters began to challenge the ruling elite first through the southern farmers alliance of the late 1880s and then by supporting its political descendant the populist party of the 1890s see chapter 10 the triumph of white mens democracy democracy in theory and practice how did the relationship between the government and the people change during this time.
during the 1820s and 1830s the term democracy first became a generally accepted term to describe how american institutions were supposed to work.
the founders had defined democracy as direct rule by the people most of them rejected this concept of a democratic approach to government because it was at odds with their conception of a well balanced republic led by a natural aristocracy for champions of popular government in the jacksonian period however the people were truly sovereign and could do no wrong.
the voice of the people is the voice of god was their clearest expression of this principle.
conservatives were less certain of the wisdom of the common folk.
but even they were coming to recognize that public opinion had to be won over before major policy decisions could be made.
besides evoking a heightened sense of popular sovereignty the democratic impulse seemed to stimulate a process of social leveling.
earlier americans had usually assumed that the rich and wellborn should be treated with special respect and recognized as natural leaders of the community and guardians of its culture and values.
by the 1830s as the hotel culture revealed such habits of deference were in decline.
the decline of deference meant that self made men of lowly origins could now rise more readily to positions of power and influence.
but economic equality the equitable sharing of wealth was not part of the mainstream agenda.
this was after all a competitive capitalist society.
the watchword was equality of opportunity not equality of reward.
life was a race and so long as white males appeared to have an equal start there could be no reason for complaint if some were winners and some were losers.
historians now generally agree that economic inequality the gap between rich and poor americans was actually increasing during this period of political and social democratization.
democracy and society although some types of inequality persisted or even grew during the age of democracy they did so in the face of a growing belief that equality was the governing principle of american society.
the plain folk were now likely to greet claims for special treatment with indifference or scorn and to demand equal treatment whatever their place in society.
white domestic workers refused to be called servants and instead called themselves hired help household workers often refused to wear livery agreed to work for only short periods of time and sometimes insisted on eating at the same table as their employers.
as noted in the maids comments quoted at the beginning of chapter review the new democrats republicans triumphant what were the accomplishments and failures of the clinton administration.
how did george w bush become president and what did he do in the white house.
clinton balanced the federal budget and helped revive the economy which boomed during the 1990s.
the north american free trade agreement eliminated tariff barriers among the united states canada and mexico.
but personal scandals led to clintons impeachment which he survived although not without damage to his own reputation and that of the democrats.
p 778 george w bush became president in an election that turned on a ballot dispute in florida which was resolved only by the supreme court.
as president bush persuaded congress to cut taxes and after the terrorist attacks of september 11 2001 to authorize invasions of afghanistan and iraq.
the war in iraq bogged down amid an insurgency against the american supported government in baghdad.
p 783 clinton and the world barack obamas triumph and trials what challenges faced barack obama and the american people during the first decade of the twenty first century.
how did clinton respond to the balkan wars.
ovenia 991 zagreb croatia 1991 eastern slavonia n io eg ar jin kra the breakup of communist yugoslavia in 1991 led to bloody ethnic fighting.
when serb forces began to commit atrocities first against muslim bosnians and then albanians in kosovo clinton organized military intervention by u s and nato forces that forced the serbs to stop and led to independence for both bosnia and kosovo.
p 781 voj bosnia and herzegovina 1992 sarajevo r in bosnia the culture wars between conservatives and liberals continued into the twenty first century with abortion affirmative action gay rights and evolution provoking controversy.
the great recession shook the economy and americans wondered how to deal with problems of health care retirement illegal immigration and the environment.
p 791 key terms and definitions americans with disabilities act ada passed by congress in 1991 this act banned discrimination against the disabled in employment and mandated easy access to all public and commercial buildings.
p 770 operation desert storm desert storm was the code name used the united states and its coalition partners used in the war against iraq in 1991 to liberate kuwait.
p 773 sunbelt a broad band of states running across the south from florida to texas extending west and north to include california and the pacific northwest.
beginning in the 1970s it experienced rapid economic and population growth.
p 774 undocumented aliens illegal immigrants mainly from mexico and central america.
p 776 contract with america in the 1994 congressional elections congressman newt gingrich had republican candidates sign a document in which they pledged support for such things as a balanced budget amendment term limits for members of congress and a middle class tax cut.
p 780 war on terror initiated by president george w bush after the attacks of september 11 2001 the broadly defined war on terror aimed to weed out terrorist operatives and their supporters throughout the world.
p 788 unilateralism a national policy of acting alone without consulting others.
p 789 affirmative action the use of laws or regulations to achieve racial ethnic gender or other diversity as in hiring or school admissions.
such efforts are often aimed at improving employment or educational opportunities for women and minorities.
p 792 critical thinking questions 1 was the first president bush lucky or skillful in ending the cold war so successfully.
2 what do the internal migration to the sunbelt and the immigration to america from other countries have in common.
3 do you think president clinton should have been convicted on his impeachment charges.
4 many people thought the outcome of the 2000 election was a violation of democracy.
5 are you optimistic about americas future or pessimistic.
study resources myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for.

chapter review 3 some historians argue that the changes brought by industrialization caused americans to become a more secular people.
to what extent do you agree or disagree and why.
use evidence from this chapter 2.
summary native american european and african societies developed independently over thousands of years before they experienced direct contacts with one another.
in the americas residents of mesoamerica and the andes were fully sedentary with individual ownership of land and intensive agriculture but elsewhere societies were semisedentary with central fields and villages that were occupied seasonally or nonsedentary hunter gatherers.
west and central africa also had a mix of sedentary semisedentary and nonsedentary settlements.
western europe by contrast was predominantly sedentary.
all three continents had a complex patchwork of political organization from empires to kingdoms and chiefdoms to principalities duchies and ministates everywhere rulership was imbued with notions of spiritual power.
ruling classes relied on part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 warfare trade and tribute or taxes to dominate those around them and accumulate precious goods that helped to set them apart from ordinary laborers but they also bore responsibility for the well being of their subjects and offered them various forms of protection.
as portuguese and castilian later spanish seafarers pushed into the atlantic they set in motion a chain of events whose consequences they could scarcely imagine.
from a coastal trade with africa that was secondary to their efforts to reach the indian ocean from the miscalculations of columbus and the happy accident of cabral developed a pattern of transatlantic exploration conquest and exploitation that no one could have foretold or planned.
in the tropical zones of the caribbean and coastal brazil invading europeans enslaved native americans and quickly drove them into extinction or exile.
the demands of plantation agriculture soon led europeans to import slaves from africa initiating a transatlantic trade that would destroy african lives on both sides of the ocean.
and two of the greatest empires in the world the aztec and incan empires collapsed in response to unseen biological forces that acted in concert with small invading armies.
european map of brazil c 1519 this lavishly illustrated map of brazil is drawn from the miller atlas made by order of king manuel i of portugal around 1519 it features images of indians harvesting brazilwood macaws and other colorful birds a monkey and improbably a fire breathing dragon.
note too the dense annotations and place names along the coast a reminder that portuguese familiarity with brazil was confined almost entirely to the seaboard.
bibliotheque nationale de france.
chapter 18 was fascinated by urban life.
in this 1911 painting he depicts madison square during a winter rush hour crowded with streetcars horse drawn wagons and pedestrians.
if you could enter the world of this painting what might you hear feel and smell as well as see.
what does bellows suggest about the excitement and challenges of life in the big city.
collection of mr and mrs paul mellon national gallery of art washington d c part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 the new metropolis mark twain arriving in new york in 1867 remarked you cannot accomplish anything in the way of business you cannot even pay a friendly call without devoting a whole day to it.
the distances are too great but new technologies allowed engineers and planners to reorganize urban geographies.
specialized districts began to include not only areas for finance manufacturing wholesaling and warehousing but also immigrant wards shopping districts and business oriented downtowns.
it was an exciting and bewildering world.
the shape of the industrial city before the civil war cities served the needs of commerce and finance not industry.
early manufacturing sprang up mostly in the countryside where mill owners could draw water power from streams find plentiful fuel and raw materials and recruit workers from farms and villages.
the nations largest cities were seaports urban merchants bought and sold goods for distribution into the interior or to global markets.
as industrialization developed though cities became sites for manufacturing as well as finance and trade.
steam engines played a central role in this change.
with them mill operators no longer had to depend on less reliable water power.
steam power also vastly increased the scale of industry.
a factory employing thousands of workers could instantly create a small city such as aliquippa pennsylvania which belonged body and soul to compare and the jones and laughlin steel contrast company.
older commercial cithow were americas ies also industrialized.
warehouse industrial cities different from the typical city before districts converted to small scale 1860.
manufacturing.
port cities that served as immigrant gateways offered abundant cheap labor an essential element in the industrial economy.
mass transit new technologies helped residents and visitors negotiate the industrial city.
steam driven cable cars appeared in the 1870s.
by 1887 engineer frank sprague designed an electric trolley system for richmond virginia.
electricity from a central generating plant was fed to trolleys through overhead power lines which each trolley touched with a pole mounted on its roof.
trolleys soon became the primary mode of transportation in most american cities.
congestion and frequent accidents however led to demands that trolley lines be moved off streets.
the el or elevated railroad which began operation as early as 1871 in new york city became a safer alternative.
other urban planners built down not up.
boston opened a short underground line in 1897 by 1904 a subway running the length of manhattan demonstrated the full potential of high speed underground trains.
even before the civil war the spread of railroads led to growth of outlying residential districts for the well to do.
the high cost of transportation effectively segregated these wealthy districts.
in the late nineteenth century the trend accelerated.
businessmen and professionals built homes on large beautifully landscaped lots in outlying towns such as riverside illinois and tuxedo park new york.
in such places affluent wives and children enjoyed refuge from the pollution and perceived dangers of the city.
los angeles entrepreneur henry huntington nephew of a wealthy southern pacific railroad magnate helped foster an emerging suburban ideal as he pitched the benefits of southern california sunshine.
huntington invested his family fortune in los angeles real estate and transportation.
along his trolley lines he subdivided property into lots and built rows of bungalows planting the tidy yards with lush trees and tropical fruits.
middle class buyers flocked to purchase huntingtons houses.
one exclaimed i have apparently found a paradise on earth anticipating twentieth century americans love for affordable single family homes near large cities huntington had begun to invent southern california sprawl.
skyscrapers by the 1880s invention of steel girders durable plate glass and passenger elevators began to revolutionize urban building methods.
architects invented the skyscraper a building supported by its steel skeleton.
its walls bore little weight serving instead as curtains to enclose the structure.
although expensive to build skyscrapers allowed downtown landowners to profit from small plots of land.
by investing in a skyscraper a landlord could collect rent for ten or even twenty floors of space.
large corporations commissioned these striking designs as symbols of business prowess.
the first skyscraper was william le baron jenneys ten story home insurance building 1885 in chicago.
though unremarkable in appearance it looked just like other downtown buildings jenneys steel girder construction inspired the creativity of american architects.
a chicago school sprang up dedicated to the design of buildings whose form expressed rather than masked their structure and function.
the presiding chapter 19 civilizations inferno the rise and reform of industrial cities 1880 1917 woolworth building new york city under construction in this photograph taken between 1910 and 1913 the headquarters of the nationwide woolworths five anddime chain became a dominant feature of the new york skyline.
manhattan soon had more skyscrapers than any other city in the world.
library of congress.
genius of this school was architect louis sullivan whose vertical aesthetic of set back windows and strong columns gave skyscrapers a proud and soaring presence and offered plentiful natural light for workers inside.
chicago pioneered skyscraper construction but new york with its unrelenting demand for prime downtown space took the lead by the late 1890s.
the fifty five story woolworth building completed in 1913 marked the beginning of manhattans modern skyline.
the electric city one of the most dramatic urban amenities was electric light.
gaslight produced from coal gas had been used for residential light since the early nineteenth century but gas lamps were too dim to brighten streets and public spaces.
in the 1870s as generating technology became commercially viable electricity proved far better.
electric arc lamps installed in wanamakers department store in philadelphia in 1878 astonished viewers with their brilliant illumination.
electric streetlights soon replaced gaslights on city streets.
before it had a significant effect on industry electricity gave the city its modern tempo.
it lifted elevators illuminated department store windows and above all turned night into day.
electric streetlights made residents feel safer as one magazine put it in 1912 a light is as good as a policeman nightlife became less risky and more appealing.
one journalist described broadway in 1894 all the shop fronts are lighted and the entrances to the theaters blaze out on the sidewalk at the end of a long working day city dwellers flocked to this free entertainment.
nothing declared an observer matched the festive panorama of broadway when the lights are on newcomers and neighborhoods explosive population growth made cities a world of new arrivals including many young women and men arriving from the countryside.
traditionally rural daughters had provided essential labor for spinning and weaving cloth but industrialization relocated those tasks from the household to the factory.
finding themselves without a useful household role many farm daughters sought paid employment.
in an age of declining rural prosperity many sons also left the farm and like immigrants arriving from other countries set aside part of their pay to help the folks at home.
explaining why she moved to chicago an african american woman from louisiana declared a child with any respect about herself or hisself wouldnt like to see their mother and father work so hard and earn nothing.
i feel it my duty to help americas cities also became homes for millions of overseas immigrants.
most numerous in boston were the irish in minneapolis swedes in other northern cities germans.
arriving in a great metropolis immigrants confronted many difficulties.
one polish man part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 lighting up minneapolis 1883 like other american cities minneapolis at night had been lit by dim gaslight until the advent of charles f brushs electric arc lamps.
this photograph marks the opening day february 28 1883 of minneapoliss new era the first lighting of a 257 foot tower topped by a ring of electric arc lamps.
the electric poles on the right connecting the tower to a power station would soon proliferate into a blizzard of poles and overhead wires as minneapolis became an electric city.
minnesota historical society corbis.
who had lost the address of his american cousins felt utterly alone after disembarking at new yorks main immigration facility ellis island which opened in 1892 then he heard a kindly voice in polish offering to help.
from sheer joy he recalled tears welled up in my eyes to hear my native tongue such experiences suggest why immigrants stuck together relying on relatives and friends to get oriented and find jobs.
a high degree of ethnic clustering resulted even within a single factory.
at the jones and laughlin steelworks in pittsburgh for example the carpentry shop was german the hammer shop polish and the blooming mill serbian.
stick together observed a son of ukrainian immigrants.
but he added we who are born in this country.
feel this country is our home patterns of settlement varied by ethnic group.
many italians recruited by padroni or labor bosses found work in northeastern and mid atlantic cities.
their urban concentration was especially marked after the america c o m pa r e d the worlds biggest cities 1800 2000 this table lists the ten largest cities in the world by population in millions at the start of the nineteenth twentieth and twenty first centuries.
table 19 1 city population city population beijing china 1 10 million london united kingdom 6 48 million london united kingdom 0 86 new york united states 4 24 guangzhou china 0 80 paris france 3 33 istanbul turkey 0 57 berlin germany 2 42 paris france 0 55 chicago united states 1 72 hangzhou china 0 50 vienna austria 1 66 edo later tokyo japan 0 49 tokyo japan 1 50 naples later part of italy 0 43 st petersburg russia 1 44 suzhou china 0 39 philadelphia united states 1 42 osaka japan 0 38 manchester united kingdom 1 26 city population tokyo japan 34 45 million mexico city mexico 18 02 new york city newark united states 17 85 so paulo brazil 17 10 mumbai bombay india 16 09 delhi india 15 73 shanghai china 13 22 calcutta india 13 06 buenos aires argentina 11 85 los angeles united states 11 81 questions for analysis 1 in each year how many of the worlds ten largest cities were located in the united states.
in what regions of the world were the other cities located.
what does this tell us about the united statess role in the world at each of these historical moments.
2 the figures from 1900 and 2000 show to a large degree the effects of industrialization.
what does the table suggest about its impact.
part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 the san francisco earthquake californias san andreas fault had caused earthquakes for centuries but when a major metropolis arose nearby it created new potential for catastrophe.
the devastating earthquake of april 18 1906 occurred at 5 12 a m when many residents were sleeping.
this photograph of sacramento street shows the resulting devastation and fires.
the quake probably killed over 2 000 people though the exact number will never be known.
a massive 296 mile rupture along the fault felt as far away as los angeles oregon and central nevada the earthquake refuted contemporary geological theories.
it prompted researchers to open new lines of inquiry aimed at predicting tremors and constructing urban buildings that could withstand them.
universal history archive uig the bridgeman art library.
1880s as more and more laborers arrived from southern italy.
the attraction of america was obvious to one young man who had grown up in a poor southern italian farm family.
i had never gotten any wages of any kind before he reported after settling with his uncle in new jersey.
the work here was just as hard as that on the farm but i didnt mind it much because i would receive what seemed to me like a lot amadeo peter giannini who started off as a produce merchant in san francisco soon turned to banking.
after the san francisco earthquake in 1906 his banca ditalia was the first financial institution to reopen in the bay area.
expanding steadily across the west it eventually became bank of america.
like gianninis bank institutions of many kinds sprang up to serve ethnic urban communities.
throughout america italian speakers avidly read the newspaper il progresso italo americano jews the yiddish language jewish daily forward also published in new york.
bohemians gathered in singing societies while new york jews patronized a lively yiddish theater.
by 1903 italians in chicago had sixty six mutual aid societies most composed of people from a particular province or town.
these societies collected dues from members and paid support in case of death or disability on the job.
mutual benefit societies also functioned as fraternal clubs.
we are strangers in a strange country explained one member of a chinese tong or mutual aid society in chicago.
we must have an organization tong to control our country fellows and develop our friendship sharply defined ethnic neighborhoods such as san franciscos chinatown italian north beach and jewish hayes valley grew up in every major city driven by both discrimination and immigrants desire to stick together map 19 1.
in addition to patterns of ethnic and racial segregation residential districts in almost all industrial cities divided along lines of economic class.
around los angeless central plaza mexican neighborhoods diversified incorporating italians and jews.
chapter 19 civilizations inferno the rise and reform of industrial cities 1880 1917 city garbage how to get rid of the garbage was a question that bedeviled every american city.
the difficulties of keeping up are all too clear in this ground level photograph by the great urban investigator jacob riis looking down tammany street in new york city around 1890 museum of the city of new york.
saying the mayor and the aldermen are invited to swim here as cities expanded the limitations of political machines became increasingly clear.
the limits of machine government the scale of urban problems became dramatically evident in the depression of the 1890s when unemployment reached a staggering 25 percent in some cities.
homelessness and hunger were rampant newspapers nationwide reported on cases of starvation desperation and suicide.
to make matters worse most cities had abolished the early nineteenth century system of outdoor relief which provided public support for the indigent.
fearing the system promoted laziness among the poor middle class reformers had insisted on private not public charity.
even cities that continued to provide outdoor relief in the 1890s were overwhelmed by the magnitude of the crisis.
flooded with tramps police stations were forced to end the long standing practice of allowing homeless individuals to sleep inside.
faced with this crisis many urban voters proved none too loyal to the machines when better alternatives arose.
cleveland ohio for example experienced part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 eighty three labor strikes between 1893 and 1898 workers frustration centered on corrupt businesses with close ties to municipal officials.
the citys central labor union dissatisfied with democrats failure to address its concerns worked with middle class allies to build a thriving local branch of the peoples party chapter 19 timeline chapter review ask yourself why this chapter 3 appoint the governor and customs officials gave the vote to all male property owners not just puritan church members and eliminated puritan restrictions on the church of england.
in maryland the uprising had economic as well as religious causes.
since 1660 falling tobacco prices had hurt poorer farmers who were overwhelmingly protestant while taxes and fees paid to mostly catholic proprietary officials continued to rise.
when parliament ousted james ii a protestant association mustered 700 men and forcibly removed the catholic governor.
the lords of trade supported this protestant initiative they suspended lord baltimores proprietorship imposed royal government and made the church of england the legal religion in the colony.
this arrangement lasted until 1715 when benedict calvert the fourth lord baltimore converted to the anglican faith and the king restored the proprietorship to the calvert family.
in new york a dutchman named jacob leisler led the rebellion against the dominion of new england.
king william iii and mary ii rejecting hobbess vision of leviathan and james iis attempts to impose absolutism a group of englands most powerful politicians invited william of orange a prince of the dutch republic to invade england depose james ii and occupy the throne jointly with his wife mary.
williams army quickly overthrew james in the so called glorious revolution of 1688 an event that reverberated across the atlantic in rebellions in massachusetts maryland and new york.
this portrait from the guild book of the barber surgeons of york was probably painted to celebrate the coronation of william and mary in 1689 hip art resource ny.
the british atlantic world 1660 1750 initially he enjoyed broad supexplain port but he soon alienated many consequences english speaking new yorkers how did the glorious and well to do dutch residents.
revolution affect relations leislers heavy handed tactics between england and its made him vulnerable when colonies.
william and mary appointed henry sloughter as governor in 1691 leisler was indicted for treason hanged and decapitated an act of ethnic vengeance that corrupted new york politics for a generation.
the glorious revolution of 1688 1689 began a new era in the politics of both england and its american colonies.
in england william and mary ruled as constitutional monarchs overseas they promoted an empire based on commerce.
they accepted the overthrow of jamess disastrous dominion of new england and allowed massachusetts under its new charter and new york to resume self government.
in 1696 parliament created a new body the board of trade to oversee part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 colonial affairs.
while the board of trade continued to pursue the mercantilist policies that made the colonies economically beneficial otherwise it permitted local elites to maintain a strong hand in colonial affairs.
as england plunged into a new era of european warfare its leaders had little choice but to allow its colonies substantial autonomy.
alliances with neighboring native americans who tried to turn the fighting to their own advantage.
although war brought money to the american colonies in the form of war contracts it also placed new demands on colonial governments to support the increasingly militant british empire.
to win wars in western europe the caribbean and far flung oceans british leaders created a powerful central state that spent three quarters of its revenue on military and naval expenses.
imperial wars and native peoples tribalization the price that england paid for bringing william of orange to the throne was a new commitment to warfare on the continent.
england wanted william because of his unambiguous protestant commitments william wanted england because of the resources it could bring to bear in european wars.
beginning with the war of the league of augsburg in 1689 england embarked on an era sometimes called the second hundred years war which lasted until the defeat of napoleon at waterloo in 1815 in that time england britain after 1707 fought in seven major wars the longest era of peace lasted only twenty six years table 3 3.
imperial wars transformed north america.
prior to 1689 american affairs were distant from those of europe but the recurrent wars of the eighteenth century spilled over repeatedly into the colonies.
governments were forced to arm themselves and create new for native americans the rise of war intersected with a process scholars have called tribalization the adaptation of stateless peoples to the demands imposed on them by neighboring states.
in north america tribalization occurred in catastrophic circumstances.
eurasian diseases rapidly killed off broad swaths of native communities disproportionately victimizing the old and the very young.
in oral cultures old people were irreplaceable repositories of knowledge while the young were quite literally the future.
with populations in free fall many polities disappeared altogether.
by the eighteenth century the groups that survived had all been transformed.
many were polyglot peoples some new tribes like the catawbas had not existed before and were pieced together from remnants of formerly large groups.
other nations like the iroquois declined in numbers but sustained themselves by adopting many table 3 3 english wars 1650 1750 war date purpose result anglo dutch 1652 1654 control markets and african slave trade stalemate anglo dutch markets conquest england takes new amsterdam anglo dutch commercial markets england makes maritime gains king williams 1689 1697 maintain european balance of power stalemate in north america queen annes 1702 1713 maintain european balance of power british acquire hudson bay and nova scotia jenkinss ear 1739 1741 expand markets in spanish america english merchants expand influence king georges 1740 1748 maintain european balance of power capture and return of louisbourg chapter 3 the british atlantic world 1660 1750 succession 1740 1748.
massive french armies battled british subsidized german forces in europe and french naval forces roamed the west indies vainly trying to conquer a british sugar island.
three thousand new england militiamen supported by a british naval squadron in 1745 captured louisbourg the french fort guarding the entrance to the st lawrence river.
to the dismay of new england puritans who feared invasion from catholic quebec the treaty of aix la chapelle 1748 returned louisbourg to france.
the treaty made it clear to colonial leaders that england would act in its own interests not theirs.
mercantilism and the american colonies sir robert walpole the kings minister all eyes are on the secretary of the treasury sir robert walpole left as he offers advice to the speaker of the house of commons.
a brilliant politician walpole used patronage to command a majority in the commons and also won the confidence of george i and george ii the german speaking monarchs from the duchy of hanover.
walpoles personal motto let sleeping dogs lie helps explain his colonial policy of salutary neglect.
clandon park surrey uk national trust photographic library hawksley studios the bridgeman art library.
already angry about the rising tide of smuggled british manufactures in new spain.
to counter britains commercial imperialism spanish naval forces stepped up their seizure of illegal traders in the process mutilating an english sea captain robert jenkins.
yielding to parliamentary pressure walpole declared war on spain in 1739 the so called war of jenkinss ear 1739 1741 was a fiasco for britain.
in 1740 british regulars failed to capture st augustine because south carolina whites still shaken by the stono rebellion refused to commit militia units to the expedition.
a year later an assault on the prosperous seaport of cartagena in present day colombia also failed 20 000 british sailors and soldiers and 2 500 colonial troops died in the attack mostly from tropical diseases.
the war of jenkinss ear quickly became part of a general european conflict the war of the austrian though parliament prohibited americans from manufacturing textiles woolen act 1699 hats hat act 1732 and iron products such as plows axes and skillets iron act 1750 it could not prevent the colonies from maturing economically.
american merchants soon controlled over 75 percent of the transatlantic trade in manufactures and 95 percent of the commerce between the mainland and the british west indies see map 3 4 p 104.
moreover by the 1720s the british sugar islands could not absorb all the flour fish and meat produced by mainland settlers.
so ignoring britains intense rivalry with france colonial merchants sold their produce to the french sugar islands.
when american rum distillers began to buy cheap molasses from the french islands the west indian sugar lobby in london persuaded parliament to pass the molasses act of 1733 the act placed a high tariff on french molasses so high that it would no longer be profitable for american merchants to import it.
colonists protested that the molasses act would cripple the distilling industry cut farm exports and by slashing colonial income reduce the mainlands purchases of british goods.
when parliament ignored these arguments american merchants smuggled in french molasses by bribing customs officials.
the lack of currency in the colonies prompted another conflict with british officials.
to pay for british manufactures american merchants used the bills of exchange and the gold and silver coins earned in the west indian trade.
these payments drained the colonial economy of money making it difficult for americans to borrow funds or to buy and sell goods among themselves.
to remedy the problem ten colonial assemblies established public land banks which lent paper money american voices the rise of colonial self government between 1700 and 1760 members of the representative assemblies in british north america gradually expanded their authority and power.
their success was the result of greater popular participation in politics and their own political skills.
however the shift in power from imperial appointees to colonial legislators occurred in a piecemeal fashion as the almost unconscious product of a series of small seemingly inconsequential struggles.
as you read the following correspondence among legislators governors and british officials look closely at the character of the disputes and how they were resolved.
alexander spotswood confronting the house of burgesses as a reward for his military service fighting the forces of louis xiv of france alexander spotswood became governor of virginia in 1710 a contentious man spotswood was a controversial governor.
he told the house of burgesses to its face that the voters had mistakenly chosen a set of representatives whom heaven has not generally endowed with the ordinary intellectual or social qualifications requisite to legislators spotswood set out to reform the voting system that in his judgment produced such mediocre representatives.
his efforts to oust popular members of the gentry from the house of burgesses created few friends in 1722 his enemies in virginia used their influence in london to have him removed from office.
to ye council of trade virginia october 15 1712 my lords.
the indians continue their incursions in north carolina and the death of colo hyde their govr which happened the beginning of last month increases the misery of that province.
this unhappy state of her majts subjects in my neighbourhood is ye more affecting to me because i have very little hopes of being enabled to relieve them by our assembly which i have called to meet next week for the mob of this country having tried their strength in the late election and finding themselves able to carry whom they please have generally chosen representatives of their own class who as their principal recommendation have declared their resolution to raise no tax on the people let the occasion be what it will.
this is owing to a defect in the constitution which allows to every one tho but just out of the condition of a servant and that can but purchase half an acre of land an equal vote with the man of the best estate in the country.
the militia of this colony is perfectly useless without arms or ammunition and by an unaccountable infatuation no arguments i have used can prevail on these people to make their militia more serviceable or to fall into any other measures for the defence of their country.
from the journal of the virginia council december the 17th 1714 the governor this day laying before the council a letter from the right honorable the lords commissioners for trade dated the 23d of april 1713 directing him to advise with the council to recommend to the generall assembly to pass a law for qualifying the electors the persons elected burgesses to serve in the generall assembly of this colony in a more just equal manner than the laws now in force do direct.
the council declare that they cannot advise the governor to move for any alteration in the present method of electing of burgesses some being of opinion that this is not a proper time others that the present manner of electing of burgesses the qualifications of the elected is sufficiently provided for by the laws now in force.
to mr secretary james stanhope july 15 1715.
i cannot forbear regretting yt i must always have to do with ye representatives of ye vulgar people and mostly with such members as are of their stamp and understanding for so long as half an acre of land which is of small value in this country qualifys a man to be an elector the meaner sort of people will ever carry ye elections and the humour generally runs to choose such men as are their most familiar companions who very eagerly seek to be burgesses merely for the lucre of the salary and who for fear of not being chosen again dare in assembly do nothing that may be disrelished disapproved out of the house by ye common people.
hence it often happens yt what appears prudent and feasible to his majestys governors and council here will not pass with the house of burgesses upon whom they must depend for the means of putting their designs in execution.
to the lords commissioners of trade may 23 1716.
the behaviour of this gentleman philip ludwell jr the colonys auditor in constantly opposing whatever i have offered for ye due collecting the quitt rents annual feudal dues on land and regulating the accts his stirring up ye humours of the people before the last election of burgesses tampering with the most mutinous of that house and betraying to them the measures resolved on in council for his majestys service would have made me likewise suspend him from ye council but i find by the late instructions i have received from his majesty that power is taken from ye governor and transferred upon the majority of that board of councilors and while there are no less than seven of his relations there it is impossible to get a majority to consent to the suspension of him.
sources r a brock ed the official letters of alexander spotswood richmond virginia historical society 1885 2 1 2 124 154 155 h r macilwaine ed executive journals of the council of colonial virginia richmond virginia state library 1928 3 392 george clinton a plea for assistance george clinton served as governor of new york from 1744 to 1752 like many governors during the era of salutary neglect clinton owed his appointment to political connections in england.
as the second son of the seventh earl of lincoln he would inherit neither the familys estate nor his fathers position in the house of lords those went to his elder brother.
to provide an income for clinton his family traded its votes in parliament for patronage appointments.
however once clinton was installed as governor of new york he found himself dependent on the assembly for the payment of his salary and the salaries of all members of his administration.
my lords i have in my former letters informd your lordships what incroachments the assemblys of this province have from time to time made on his majestys prerogative authority in this province in drawing an absolute dependence of all the officers upon them for their saleries reward of their services by their taking in effect the nomination to all officers.
1stly that the assembly refuse to admit of any amendment to any money bill in any part of the bill so that the bill must pass as it comes from the assembly or all the supplies granted for the support of government the most urgent services must be lost.
2ndly it appears that they take the payment of the military forces passing of muster rolls into their own hands by naming the commissaries for those purposes in the act.
3rdly they by granting the saleries to the officers personally by name not to the officer for the time being intimate that if any person be appointed to any office his salery must depend upon their approbation of the appointment.
i must now refer it to your lordships consideration whether it be not high time to put a stop to these usurpations of the assembly on his majestys authority in this province and for that purpose may it not be proper that his majesty signify his disallowance of the act at least for the payment of saleries.
source e b ocallaghan ed documents relative to the colonial history of the state of new york albany 1860 on 2 211 questions for analysis 1 what policies does spotswood wish to pursue.
why cant he persuade the house of burgesses to implement them.
according to spotswood what is wrong with virginias political system.
how does he propose to reform it.
2 unlike the house of burgesses which was elected by qualified voters the members of the governors council in virginia were appointed by the king usually on the governors recommendation.
what is the councils response to the plan to reform the political system.
given spotswoods description of the incident involving philip ludwell where did the political sympathies of the council lie.
3 what were clintons complaints about the actions of the new york assembly.
did these actions represent a more or less serious threat to imperial power than the activities of the virginia burgesses.
based on their correspondence with the board of trade which governor spotswood or clinton was the stronger representative of the interests of the crown.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 the siege and capture of louisbourg 1745 in 1760 as british and colonial troops moved toward victory in the french and indian war 1754 1763 the london artist j stevens sought to bolster imperial pride by celebrating an earlier angloamerican triumph.
in 1745 a british naval squadron led a flotilla of colonial ships and thousands of new england militiamen in an attack on the french fort at louisbourg on cape breton island near the mouth of the st lawrence river.
after a siege of forty days the anglo american force captured the fort long considered impregnable.
the victory was bittersweet because the treaty of aix la chapelle 1748 returned the island to france.
anne s k brown military collection brown university library.
to farmers who pledged their land as collateral for the loans.
farmers used the currency to buy tools or livestock or to pay creditors thereby stimulating trade.
however some assemblies particularly the legislature in rhode island issued huge quantities of paper money which consequently decreased in value and required merchants to accept it as legal tender.
english merchants and other creditors rightly complained about being forced to accept devalued money.
so in 1751 parliament passed the currency act which barred the new england colonies from establishing new land banks and prohibited the use of publicly issued paper money to pay private debts.
these conflicts over trade and paper money angered a new generation of english political leaders.
in 1749 charles townshend of the board of trade charged that the american assemblies had assumed many of the ancient and established prerogatives wisely preserved in the crown and he vowed to replace salutary neglect with more rigorous imperial control.
the wheel of empire had come full circle.
in the 1650s england had set out to create a centrally managed atlantic empire and over the course of a century achieved the military and economic aspects of that goal.
mercantilist legislation maritime warfare commercial expansion and the forced labor of a million african slaves brought prosperity to britain.
however internal unrest the glorious revolution and a policy of salutary neglect had weakened britains political authority over its american colonies.
recognizing the threat self government posed to the empire british officials in the late 1740s vowed to reassert their power in america an initiative with disastrous results.
summary in this chapter 20 whose government.
politics populists and progressives 1880 1917 the republicans resist roosevelt august 7 1912 this cartoon appeared in the political humor journal puck six weeks after the republican convention nominated taft and two days after the new progressive party nominated theodore roosevelt.
the baptismal choir consists of men such as gifford pinchot who helped roosevelt form the new party.
elephant refuses to be baptized in teddyism though preacher roosevelt insists salvation is free president william howard taft dressed in brown with a hat pulls on the elephants tail.
library of congress.
the american exponent of a world wide movement for juster social conditions in a nod to roosevelts combative stance party followers called themselves bull mooses roosevelt was not the only rebel on the ballot the major parties also faced a challenge from charismatic socialist eugene v debs.
in the 1890s debs had founded the american railway union aru a broadbased group that included both skilled and unskilled workers.
in 1894 amid the upheavals of depression and popular protest the aru had boycotted luxury pullman sleeping cars in support of a strike by workers at the pullman company.
railroad managers claiming the strike obstructed the u s mail persuaded grover clevelands administration to intervene against the union.
the strike failed and debs served time in prison along with other aru leaders.
the experience radicalized him and in 1901 he launched the socialist party of america.
debs translated socialism into an american idiom emphasizing the democratic process as a means to defeat capitalism.
by the early 1910s his party had secured a minor but persistent role in politics.
both the progressive and socialist parties drew strength from the west a region with vigorous urban reform movements and a legacy of farmer labor activism.
watching the rise of the progressives and socialists democrats were keen to build on dramatic gains they had made in the 1910 midterm election.
among their younger leaders was virginia born woodrow wilson who as new jerseys governor had compiled an impressive reform record including passage of a direct primary workers compensation and utility regulation.
in 1912 he won the democrats compare and nomination.
wilson possessed to contrast a fault the moral certainty that why did the election of characterized many elite progres 1912 feature four candisives.
he had much in common dates and how did their with roosevelt.
the old time of platforms differ.
individual competition is probably gone by he admitted agreeing for more federal measures to restrict big business.
but his goals were less sweeping than roosevelts and only gradually did he hammer out a reform program calling it the new freedom.
if america is not to have free enterprise wilson warned then she can have freedom of no sort whatever he claimed roosevelts program represented collectivism whereas the new freedom would preserve political and economic liberty.
with four candidates in the field taft roosevelt wilson and debs the 1912 campaign generated intense excitement.
democrats continued to have an enormous blind spot their opposition to african american rights.
but republicans despite plentiful opportunities had also conspicuously failed to end segregation or pass antilynching laws.
though african american leaders had high hopes for the progressive party they were crushed when the new party refused to seat southern black delegates or take a stand for racial equality.
w e b du bois considered voting for debs calling the socialists the only party which openly recognized negro manhood but he ultimately endorsed wilson.
across the north in a startling shift thousands of african american men and women worked and voted for wilson hoping democrats reform american voices theodore roosevelt from anti populist to new nationalist theodore roosevelt published the first piece below in a leading journal in 1897 at the time he was serving as police commissioner of new york city.
the second document is a famous speech he delivered in 1910 when he had retired from the presidency but was planning a bid for the 1912 republican nomination.
how not to help our poorer brother 1897 in the 1890s roosevelt a rising republican star forcefully denounced populism and other radical movements.
the comments below were part of an exchange with populists 1896 vice presidential nominee tom watson of georgia.
there are plenty of ugly things about wealth and its possessors in the present age and i suppose there have been in all ages.
there are many rich people who so utterly lack patriotism or show such sordid and selfish traits of character.
that all right minded men must look upon them with angry contempt but on the whole the thrifty are apt to be better citizens than the thriftless and the worst capitalist cannot harm laboring men as they are harmed by demagogues.
the first lesson to teach the poor man is that as a whole the wealth of the community is distinctly beneficial to him that he is better off in the long run because other men are well off and that the surest way to destroy what measure of prosperity he may have is to paralyze industry and the well being of those men who have achieved success.
it may become necessary to interfere even more than we have done with the right of private contract and to shackle cunning as we have shackled force.
all i insist upon is that we must be sure of our ground before trying to get any legislation and that we must not expect too much from this legislation.
the worst foe of the poor man is the labor leader whether philanthropist or politician who tried to teach him that he is a victim of conspiracy and injustice when in reality he is merely working out his fate with blood and sweat as the immense majority of men who are worthy of the name always have done and always will have to do.
something can be done by good laws more can be done by honest administration of the laws but most of all can be done by frowning resolutely upon the preachers of vague discontent and by upholding the true doctrine of self reliance self help and self mastery.
this doctrine sets forth many things.
among them is that though a man can occasionally be helped when he stumbles yet that it is useless to try to carry him when he will not or cannot walk and worse than useless to try to bring down the work and reward of the thrifty and intelligent to the level of the capacity of the weak the shiftless and the idle.
if an american is to amount to anything he must rely upon himself and not upon the state.
it is both foolish and wicked to teach the average man who is not well off that some wrong or injustice has been done him and that he should hope for redress elsewhere than in his own industry honesty and intelligence.
new nationalism speech august 31 1910 roosevelt delivered this speech to a gathering of union veterans at osawatomie kansas a site associated with abolitionist john brown chapter 18 pure food and drug act 1906 chapters by answering these questions.
across time and place in chapter review making connections recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapter 4 growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 continental assembly to manage trade indian policy and the colonies defense.
though it was attractive to a few reform minded colonists and administrators the plan would have compromised the independence of colonial assemblies and the authority of parliament.
it never received serious consideration but that did not stop the push toward war.
to see a longer excerpt of the albany plan of union along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
hendrick peters theyanoguin chief of the mohawks great britains alliance with the iroquois confederacy the covenant chain was central to its indian policy in the mid eighteenth century and the mohawk warrior and sachem hendrick peters theyanoguin emerged as its most powerful spokesman.
his speech at the albany congress of 1754 in which he urged great britain toward war was reported in newspapers in britain and the colonies and made him a transatlantic celebrity.
this print was advertised for sale in london bookstalls just as his death at the battle of lake george 1755 was being reported in newspapers there.
hendrick wears a rich silk waistcoat an overcoat trimmed with gold lace a ruffled shirt and a tricorn hat gifts from his british allies while he holds a wampum belt in one hand and a tomahawk in the other.
courtesy of the john carter brown library at brown university.
relations with the iroquois the british board of trade called a meeting at albany in june 1754 there a prominent mohawk leader named hendrick peters theyanoguin challenged britain to defend its interests more vigorously while benjamin franklin proposed a plan of union among the colonies to counter french expansion.
the albany plan of union proposed that one general government.
be formed in america including all the said colonies it would have created a the war hawks win in parliament the fight for the ohio prompted a debate over war with france.
henry pelham the british prime minister urged calm there is such a load of debt and such heavy taxes already laid upon the people that nothing but an absolute necessity can justifie our engaging in a new war but two expansionist minded war hawks rising british statesman william pitt and lord halifax the new head of the board of trade persuaded pelham to launch an american war.
in june 1755 british and new england troops captured fort beausjour in the disputed territory of nova scotia which the french called acadia.
soldiers from puritan massachusetts then forced nearly 10 000 french settlers from their lands arguing they were rebels without property rights and deported them to france the west indies and louisiana where acadians became cajuns.
english and scottish protestants took over the farms the french catholics left behind.
this anglo american triumph was quickly offset by a stunning defeat.
in july 1755 general edward braddock advanced on fort duquesne with a force of 1 500 british regulars and virginia militiamen.
braddock alienated potential allies by treating indians including tanaghrisson dismissively and denying the privilege of rank to colonial officers like george washington.
persuaded that british arms could easily triumph in the american backcountry he was instead routed by a french and indian force.
braddock was killed and more than half his troops were killed or wounded.
we have been beaten most shamefully beaten by a handfull of men george washington complained bitterly as he led the survivors back to virginia.
the great war for empire by 1756 the american conflict had spread to europe where it was known as the seven years war and pitted britain and prussia against france spain and austria.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 braddocks defeat and death july 1755 in may 1755 general edward braddock led a force of 1 500 british regulars and virginia militiamen out of fort cumberland in western maryland intending to oust the french from fort duquesne 50 miles to the west.
as braddock neared the fort the french garrison of 200 troops and about 600 indian allies mostly potawatomis ottawas shawnees and delawares set out to ambush his force.
instead they unexpectedly met the british along a narrow roadway.
as the french and indians fanned out to attack from the woods the british troops george washington reported were struck with such a panic that they behaved with more cowardice than it is possible to conceive.
the officers behaved gallantly in order to encourage their men for which they suffered greatly the british casualties 450 killed 500 wounded included general braddock pictured above who later died from his wounds.
chicago history museum usa the bridgeman art library.
when britain mounted major offensives in india west africa and the west indies as well as in north america the conflict became the great war for empire.
william pitt emerged as the architect of the british war effort.
pitt was a committed expansionist with a touch of arrogance.
i know that i can save this country and that i alone can he boasted.
a master strategist he planned to cripple france by seizing its colonies.
in north america he enjoyed a decisive demographic advantage since george iis 2 million subjects outnumbered the french 14 to 1 to mobilize the colonists pitt paid half the cost of their troops and supplied them with arms and equipment at a cost of 1 million a year.
he also committed a fleet of british ships and 30 000 british soldiers to the conflict in america.
beginning in 1758 the powerful anglo american forces moved from one triumph to the next in part because they brought indian allies back into the fold.
they forced the french to abandon fort duquesne renamed fort pitt and then captured fort louisbourg a stronghold at the mouth of the st lawrence.
in 1759 an armada led by british general james wolfe sailed down the st lawrence and took quebec the heart of frances american empire.
the royal navy prevented french reinforcements from crossing the atlantic allowing british forces to complete the conquest of canada in 1760 by capturing montreal map 4 5.
elsewhere the british likewise had great success.
from spain the british won cuba and the philippine islands.
fulfilling pitts dream the east india company chapters 21 22 and 24 world war i had a powerful domestic impact in the united states.
the great migration brought african americans northward and mexicans across the u s border to take up wartime jobs.
a full blown modern consumer culture also emerged by the 1920s as radio cars and hollywood movies transformed leisure pastimes.
while many americans embraced consumer culture others expressed deep fear and antagonism toward a new modern sensibility especially secularism and sexual freedoms.
repressive impulses also came from above during world war i the federal government introduced new laws to police dissent and the country took a sharp right turn.
a red scare rollback of labor and immigrant rights and rising nativism marked the political scene.
a resurgent nationwide klan arose to target catholics and jews as well as african americans.
many cultural conflicts emerged the teaching of evolution in the schools angered religious fundamentalists while wets and drys debated the prohibition of liquor.
later events showed that racism took many forms the u s government deported hundreds of thousands of people of mexican descent during the great depression including american citizens and temporarily imprisoned japanese americans in a mass relocation policy during world war ii.
these too represented battles over what a diverse modern nation would look like.
we explore these conflicts in chapters main ideas.
1 compare colonists pursuits of happiness in new england the middle colonies the backcountry and the south.
how did poorer colonists in each of these regions seek to maintain their autonomy from powerful landlords and institutions and how did this effort shape the formation of regional identities.
2 how did the print and transportation revolutions transform colonial culture and the economy in the eighteenth century.
making connections half of north america into british hands.
how did that massive territorial acquisition affect ordinary colonists.
what impact did it have on native americans strategies for coexisting with their european neighbors.
review the events listed under work exchange and technology and identity for the period 1720 1750 on the thematic timeline on page 79 how did economic developments in the colonies influence the formation of new cultural identities in this era.
thematic understanding recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapter 18.
josiah strong for example predicted that with the globe fully occupied a competition of races would ensue with victory based on survival of the fittest fear of ruthless competition drove the united states like european nations to invest in the latest weapons.
policymakers saw that european powers were amassing steel plated battleships and carving up africa and asia among themselves.
in his book the influence of sea power upon history 1890 u s naval officer alfred mahan urged the united states to enter the fray observing that naval power had been essential to past empires.
as early as 1886 congress ordered construction of two steel hulled battleships the uss texas and uss maine in 1890 it appropriated funds for three more a program that expanded over the next two decades.
during grover clevelands second term 1893 1897 his secretary of state richard olney turned to direct confrontation.
he warned europe to stay away from latin america which he saw as the united statess rightful sphere of influence.
without consulting the nation of venezuela olney suddenly demanded in 1895 that britain resolve a long standing border dispute between venezuela and britains neighboring colony british guiana.
invoking the monroe doctrine which stated that the western hemisphere was offlimits to further european colonization olney warned that the united states would brook no challenge to its interests.
startled britain agreed to arbitrate.
u s power was on the rise.
the war of 1898 events in the caribbean presented the united states with far greater opportunities.
in 1895 cuban patriots mounted a major guerrilla war against spain which had lost most of its other new world territories.
the spanish commander responded by rounding up cuban civilians into concentration camps where as many as 200 000 died of starvation exposure chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
licensing act lapses in england triggering the print revolution 1710s 1730s enlightenment ideas spread from europe to america germans and scots irish settle in middle colonies theodore jacob frelinghuysen preaches pietism to german migrants 1720s 1730s william and gilbert tennent lead presbyterian revivals among scots irish jonathan edwards preaches in new england benjamin franklin founds the pennsylvania gazette george whitefield sparks great awakening 1740s 1760s conflict between old lights and new lights shortage of farmland in new england threatens freehold ideal growing ethnic and religious pluralism in middle atlantic colonies religious denominations establish colleges benjamin franklin founds american philosophical society samuel morris starts presbyterian revivals in virginia ohio company receives grant of 200 000 acres from the crown connecticut farmers form susquehanna company 1750s industrial revolution begins in england british shipping dominates north atlantic consumer purchases increase american imports and debt french and indian war begins iroquois and colonists meet at albany congress franklins plan of union britain begins great war for empire 1759 1760 britain completes conquest of canada 1760s land conflict along new york and new england border baptist revivals win converts in virginia pontiacs rebellion leads to proclamation of 1763 treaty of paris ends great war for empire scots irish paxton boys massacre indians in pennsylvania royal governor puts down regulator revolt in north carolina key turning points the ohio company grant 1748 the formation of the susquehanna company 1749 land conflict along new york and new england border 1760s and the defeat of the north carolina regulators 1771.
how do these events reveal tensions over the question of who would control the development of frontier lands in britains mainland north american colonies.
what were the effects of these conflicts on native american populations.
revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 p a r t chapter 21 an emerging world power 1890 1918 women riveters at the puget sound navy yard 1919 with men at the front women took many new jobs during world war i as mail carriers police officers and farm laborers who joined the womens land army.
african american women generally limited by white prejudice to jobs in domestic service and agriculture found that the war opened up new opportunities and better wages in industry.
when the war ended women usually lost jobs deemed to be mens work.
in 1919 however these women were still hard at work in the puget sound navy yard near seattle.
what clues indicate their attitudes toward their work and toward one another.
national archives.
war created a new comfort level with womens employment outside the home and with womens suffrage.
womens voting rights the national american woman suffrage association nawsa threw the support of its 2 million members wholeheartedly into the war effort.
its president carrie chapman catt declared that women had to prove their patriotism to win the ballot.
nawsa members in thousands of communities promoted food conservation and distributed emergency relief through organizations such as the red cross.
alice paul and the national womans party nwp took a more confrontational approach.
paul was a quaker who had worked in the settlement movement and earned a phd in political science.
finding as a nawsa lobbyist that congressmen dismissed her paul founded the nwp in 1916 inspired by militant british suffragists the group began in july 1917 to picket the white house.
standing silently with their banners paul and other nwp activists faced arrest for obstructing traffic and were sentenced to seven months in jail.
they protested by going on a hunger strike which prison authorities met with forced feeding.
public shock at the explain womens treatment drew attention consequences what were the different to the suffrage cause.
impressed by nawsas patri effects of african ameriotism and worried by the nwps cans mexican americans militancy the antisuffrage wilson and womens civilian reversed his position.
in january mobilization during world 1918 he urged support for woman war i.
suffrage as a war measure the constitutional amendment quickly passed the house of representatives it took eighteen months to get through the senate and another year to win ratification by the states.
on august 26 1920 when tennessee voted for ratification the nineteenth part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 wagon decorated for the labor day parade san diego california 1910 as the woman suffrage movement grew stronger in the years before and during world war i working class women played increasingly prominent and visible roles in its leadership.
this labor day parade float created by the womens union label league of san diego showed that activists championed equal pay for women in the workplace as well as womens voting rights.
union label leagues urged middle class shoppers to purchase only clothing with a union label certifying that the item had been manufactured under safe conditions and the workers who made it had received a fair wage.
san diego historical society title insurance trust collection.
amendment became law.
the state thus joined texas as one of two ex confederate states to ratify it.
in most parts of the south the measure meant that white women began to vote in this jim crow era african american womens voting rights remained restricted along with mens.
in explaining suffragists victory historians have debated the relative effectiveness of catts patriotic strategy and pauls militant protests.
both played a role in persuading wilson and congress to act but neither might have worked without the extraordinary impact of the great war.
across the globe before 1914 the only places where women had full suffrage were new zealand australia finland and norway.
after world war i many nations moved to enfranchise women.
the new soviet union acted first in 1917 with great britain and canada following in 1918 by 1920 the measure had passed in germany austria poland czechoslovakia and hungary as well as the united states.
major exceptions were france and italy where women did not gain voting rights until after world war ii and switzerland which held out until 1971.
thus while world war i introduced modern horrors on the battlefield machine guns and poison gas it brought some positive results at home economic opportunity and womens political participation.
catastrophe at versailles the idealistic wilson argued that no victor should be declared after world war i only peace among equals could last.
having won at an incredible price britain and france showed zero interest in such a plan.
but the devastation wrought by the war created popular pressure for a just and enduring outcome.
wilson scored a diplomatic victory at the peace conference held at versailles near paris in 1919 when the allies chose to base the talks on his fourteen points a blueprint for chapter 5 the problem of empire 1763 1776 the boston tea party led by radical patriots disguised as mohawk indians bostonians dumped the east india companys taxed tea into the harbor.
the rioters made clear their pure political motives by punishing those who sought personal gain one son of liberty who stole some of the tea was stripped of his booty and his clothes together and sent home naked library of congress.
in 1774 parliament also passed the quebec act which allowed the practice of roman catholicism in quebec.
this concession to quebecs predominantly catholic population reignited religious passions in new england where protestants associated catholicism with arbitrary royal government.
because the act extended quebecs boundaries into the ohio river valley it likewise angered influential land speculators in virginia and pennsylvania and ordinary settlers by the thousands map 5 4.
although the ministry did not intend the quebec act as a coercive measure many colonists saw it as further proof of parliaments intention to control american affairs.
the continental congress responds in response to the coercive acts patriot leaders convened a new continent wide body the continental congress.
twelve mainland colonies sent representatives.
four recently acquired colonies florida quebec nova scotia and newfoundland refused to send delegates as did georgia where the royal governor controlled the legislature.
the assemblies of barbados jamaica and the other sugar islands although wary of british domination were even more fearful of revolts by their predominantly african populations and therefore declined to attend.
the delegates who met in philadelphia in september 1774 had different agendas.
southern representatives fearing a british plot to overturn the constitution and introduce a system of arbitrary government advocated a new economic boycott.
independence minded representatives from new england demanded political union and defensive military preparations.
many delegates from the middle atlantic colonies favored compromise.
led by joseph galloway of pennsylvania these men of loyal principles proposed a new political system similar to benjamin franklins proposal at the albany congress of 1754 each colony would retain its assembly to legislate on local matters and a new continent wide body would handle general american affairs.
the king would appoint a president general to preside over a legislative council selected by the colonial assemblies.
galloways plan failed by a single vote a bare majority thought it was too conciliatory american voices p 172.
instead the delegates demanded the repeal of the coercive acts and stipulated that british control part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 50 hudso n s b ay c map 5 4 n british western policy 1763 1774 gulf of st lawrence ny o m pa louisbourg.
aw ke superior la ren ce r quebec.
lake m ichi gan n uro eh virginia st la k s pa n and mass.
l ak tario l on rie ee ish louis o hi o albany.
conn transylvania sipp i r mis s is iana north carolina georgia.
charleston by spain and georgia 90w gulf of mexico.
new york n 40 s atl a n t i c o cean vandalia virginia w r i md.
south carolina e n h new boston york mass.
virginia r l philadelphia n j.
and conn port royal n 300 miles the proclamation of 1763 prohibited white settlement west of the appalachian mountains.
nonetheless anglo american settlers and land speculators proposed the new colonies of vandalia and transylvania to the west of virginia and north carolina.
the quebec act of 1774 designated most western lands as indian reserves and vastly enlarged the boundaries of quebec dashing speculators hopes and eliminating the old sea to sea land claims of many seaboard colonies.
the act especially angered new england protestants who condemned it for allowing french residents to practice catholicism and colonial political leaders who protested its failure to provide quebec with a representative assembly.
300 kilometers boundaries after treaty of paris 1763 british trading company 13 colonies other british possessions spain 30n quebec in 1763 quebec in 1774 proclamation line of 1763 state boundaries including western claims proposed western colonies 80w be limited to matters of trade.
it also approved a program of economic retaliation americans would stop importing british goods in december 1774 if parliament did compare and not repeal the coercive acts by contrast september 1775 the congress why did parliament prefer vowed to cut off virtually all colonorths solution to the boston tea party to nial exports to britain ireland william pitts.
and the british west indies.
ten years of constitutional conflict had culminated in a threat of all out commercial warfare.
a few british leaders still hoped for compromise.
in january 1775 william pitt now sitting in the house of lords as the earl of chatham asked parliament to renounce its power to tax the colonies and to recognize the continental congress as a lawful body.
in return he suggested the congress should acknowledge parliamentary supremacy and provide a permanent source of revenue to help defray the national debt.
the british ministry rejected pitts plan.
twice it had backed down in the face of colonial resistance a third retreat was impossible.
branding the continental congress an illegal assembly the ministry rejected 70w lord dartmouths proposal to send commissioners to negotiate a settlement.
instead lord north set stringent terms americans must pay for their own defense and administration and acknowledge parliaments authority to tax them.
to put teeth in these demands north imposed a naval blockade on american trade with foreign nations and ordered general gage to suppress dissent in massachusetts.
now the case seemed desperate the prime minister told thomas hutchinson whom the patriots had forced into exile in london.
parliament would not could not concede.
for aught he could see it must come to violence the rising of the countryside the fate of the urban led patriot movement would depend on the colonies large rural population.
most farmers had little interest in imperial affairs.
their lives were deeply rooted in the soil and their prime allegiance was to family and community.
but imperial policies had increasingly intruded into the lives of farm families by sending their sons to war and raising their taxes.
in 1754 farmers on long island new york had paid an average tax of 10 shillings by 1756 thanks to chapter 5 of happiness that government derives its just powers from the consent of the governed and can rightly be overthrown if it becomes destructive of these ends by linking these doctrines of individual liberty popular sovereignty the principle that ultimate power lies in the hands of the electorate and republican government with american independence jefferson established them as the defining political values of the new nation.
for jefferson as for paine the pen proved mightier than the sword.
the declaration won wide support in france and germany at home it sparked celebrations in rural hamlets and seaport cities as crowds burned effigies and toppled statues of the king.
on july 8 1776 in easton pennsylvania a great number of spectators heard a reading of the declaration gave their hearty assent with three loud huzzahs and cried out may god long preserve and unite the free and independent states of america summary chapter 4 esp.
87 6 kathleen m blee women in the klan berkeley and los angeles university of california press 1991 78 79 149 151 7 mcveigh 64 65 8 american standard april 15 1925 172 analyzing the evidence 1 based on the documents above identify factors that made the kkk appealing to some americans in the 1920s.
2 which groups in source 5 were over and underrepresented in the klan.
the same historian found that at least 34 percent of local klan members were german american.
review the thinking like a historian feature in chapter 22 other writers also explored the dark side of the human psyche.
in such dramas as desire under the elms 1924 playwright eugene oneill depicted characters driven by raw ungovernable sexual impulses.
oneill first made his mark with the emperor jones 1920 a popular broadway drama about a black dictator driven from power by his people.
appealing to americans fascination with haiti the play offered an ambiguous message its black protagonist was played not by the customary white actors made up in blackface but by african americans who won acclaim for their performances.
w e b du bois called it a splendid tragedy but others were dissatisfied with the plays primitivism one actor who played emperor jones altered the script to omit offensive racial epithets.
the white crowds who made the emperor jones a hit like those who flocked to harlems jazz clubs indulged a problematic fascination with primitive sexuality.
in a decade of conflict between traditional and modern worldviews many writers exposed what they saw as the hypocrisy of small town and rural life american voices p.
the most savage critic of conformity was sinclair lewis whose novel babbitt 1922 depicted the disillusionment of an ordinary small town salesman.
babbitt was widely denounced as un american elmer gantry 1927 a satire about a greedy evangelical minister on the make provoked even greater outrage.
but critics found lewiss work superb and in 1930 he became the first american to win the nobel prize for literature.
even more famous was f scott fitzgeralds the great gatsby 1925 which offered a scathing indictment of americans mindless pursuit of pleasure and material wealth.
from boom to bust spurred by rapid expansion during the war american business thrived in the 1920s.
corporations expanded more and more into overseas markets while at home a national consumer culture emphasized leisure and fun.
but some sectors of the economy notably agriculture never recovered from a sharp recession in the wake of world war i meanwhile close observers worried over the rapid economic growth and easy credit that fueled the roaring twenties.
their fears proved well founded the roar ended in the great depression.
the postwar economy immediately after world war i the united states experienced a series of economic shocks.
they began with rampant inflation as prices jumped by one third in cultural conflict bubble and bust 1919 1932 1919 alone.
then came a two year recession that raised unemployment to 10 percent.
finally the economy began to grow smoothly and more americans began to benefit.
between 1922 and 1929 national per capita income rose an impressive 24 percent.
large scale corporations continued to replace small business in many sectors of the economy.
by 1929 through successive waves of consolidation the two hundred largest businesses had come to control almost half of the countrys nonbanking corporate wealth.
the greatest number of mergers occurred in rising industries such as chemicals with dupont in the lead and electrical appliances general electric.
at the same time mergers between wall street banks enhanced new york citys position as the financial center of the nation and increasingly the world.
aided by washingtons dollar diplomats u s companies exercised growing global power.
seeking cheaper livestock giant american meat packers opened plants in argentina the united fruit company developed plantations in costa rica honduras and guatemala general electric set up production facilities in latin america asia and australia.
despite the boom the u s economy had areas of significant weakness throughout the 1920s.
agriculture which still employed one fourth of all american workers never fully recovered from the postwar recession.
once europes economy revived its farmers flooded world markets with grain and other farm products causing agricultural prices to fall.
other industries including coal and textiles languished for similar reasons.
as a consequence many rural americans shared little of the decades prosperity.
the bottom 40 percent of american families earned an average annual income of only 725 about 9 100 today.
many especially rural tenants and sharecroppers languished in poverty and malnutrition.
consumer culture in middle class homes americans of the 1920s sat down to a breakfast of kelloggs corn flakes before getting into ford model ts to work or shop at safeway.
on weekends they might head to the local theater to see the newest charlie chaplin film.
by 1929 electric refrigerators and vacuum cleaners came into use in affluent homes 40 percent of american households owned a radio.
the advertising industry reached new levels of ambition and sophistication entering what one historian calls the era of the aggressive hard sell the 1920s gave birth for example to fashion modeling and style consulting.
sell them their dreams one radio announcer urged advertisers in 1923.
people american voices urban writers describe small town america in the early twentieth century the united states was becoming an urban society.
by 1920 life outside the metropolis seemed sufficiently remarkable to warrant sociological investigation or at least city people thought so.
presented here are three views of rural and small town america all published during the 1920s.
though cities had become the wellspring of american intellectual life urban writers juxtaposed their own experiences with those of people they thought of as living in middletown u s a sinclair lewis main street in his novel main street 1920 sinclair lewis portrayed the fictional midwestern town of gopher prairie.
in the excerpts below lewiss narrator describes the reactions of young urban carol kennicott wife of the towns new doctor and bea sorenson a swedish american farm girl.
when carol had walked for thirty two minutes she had completely covered the town east and west north and south and she stood at the corner of main street and washington avenue and despaired.
main street with its two story brick shops its storyand a half wooden residences its muddy expanse from concrete walk to walk its huddle of fords and lumberwagons was too small to absorb her.
the broad straight unenticing gashes of the streets let in the grasping prairie on every side.
she realized the vastness and the emptiness of the land.
the skeleton iron windmill on the farm a few blocks away at the north end of main street was like the ribs of a dead cow.
she thought of the coming of the northern winter when the unprotected houses would crouch together in terror of storms galloping out of that wild waste.
they were so small and weak the little brown houses.
they were shelters for sparrows.
she wanted to run fleeing from the encroaching prairie demanding the security of a great city.
her dreams of creating a beautiful town were ludicrous.
oozing out from every drab wall she felt a forbidding spirit which she could never conquer.
she trailed down the street on one side back on the other glancing into the cross streets.
it was a private seeing main street tour.
she was within ten minutes beholding not only the heart of a place called gopher prairie but ten thousand towns from albany to san diego.
dyers drug store a corner building of regular and unreal blocks of artificial stone.
inside the store a greasy marble soda fountain with an electric lamp of red and green and curdled yellow mosaic shade.
pawed over heaps of toothbrushes and combs and packages of shaving soap.
shelves of soap cartons teething rings garden seeds and patent medicines in yellow packages nostrums for consumption for womens diseases notorious mixtures of opium and alcohol in the very shop to which her husband sent patients for the filling of prescriptions.
the train which brought carol to gopher prairie also brought miss bea sorenson.
miss bea was a stalwart corn colored laughing young woman and she was bored by farm work.
she desired the excitements of city life and the way to enjoy city life was she had decided to go get a yob as a hired girl in gopher prairie.
bea had never before been in a town larger than scandia crossing which has sixty seven inhabitants.
as she marched up the street she was meditating that it didnt hardly seem like it was possible there could be so many folks all in one place at the same time.
it would take years to get acquainted with them all.
and swell people too.
a fine big gentleman in a new pink shirt with a diamond and not no washed out blue denim working shirt.
a lovely lady in a longery dress but it must be an awful hard dress to wash.
and the stores.
a drug store with a soda fountain that was just huge awful long and all lovely marble.
and the soda spouts they were silver and they came right out of the bottom of the lamp stand.
behind the fountain there were glass shelves and bottles of new kinds of soft drinks that nobody ever heard of.
suppose a fella took you there.
anzia yezierska bread givers a child of jewish immigrants from eastern europe anzia yezierska grew up on the lower east side of new york city.
in her autobiographical novel bread givers 1925 yezierska described her arrival in the ohio town where she attended college.
before this new york was all of america to me.
but now i came to a town of quiet streets shaded with green trees.
no crowds no tenements.
no hurrying noise to beat the race of the hours.
only a leisured quietness whispered in the air peace.
each house had its own green grass in front its own free space all around and it faced the street with the calm security of being owned for generations and not rented by the month from a landlord.
in the early twilight it was like a picture out of fairyland to see people sitting on their porches lazily swinging in their hammocks or watering their own growing flowers.
so these are the real americans i thought thrilled by the lean straight bearing of the passers by.
they had none of that terrible fight for bread and rent that i always saw in the new york peoples eyes.
all the young people i had ever seen were shut up in factories.
but here were young girls and young men enjoying life free from the worry for a living.
the spick and span cleanliness of these people.
it smelled from them the soap and the bathing.
their fingernails so white and pink.
what a feast of happenings each day of college was to those other students.
societies dances letters from home packages of food midnight spreads and even birthday parties.
i never knew that there were people glad enough of life to celebrate the day they were born.
source from bread givers by anzia yezierska.
copyright 1970 by louise levitas henriksen.
reprinted by permission of persea books inc new york.
all rights reserved.
robert s lynd and helen merrell lynd locally are bought on time payment and a working man earning 35 00 a week frequently plans to use one weeks pay each month as payment for his car.
the automobile has apparently unsettled the habit of careful saving for some families.
ill go without food before ill see us give up the car said one woman emphatically.
many families feel that an automobile is justified as an agency holding the family group together.
but the fact that 348 boys and 382 girls in the three upper years of the high school placed use of the automobile fifth and fourth respectively in a list of twelve possible sources of disagreement between them and their parents suggests that this may be an increasing decentralizing agent.
if the automobile touches the rest of middletowns living at many points it has revolutionized its leisure.
making leisure time enjoyment a regularly expected part of every day and week rather than an occasional event.
the frequency of movie attendance of high school boys and girls is about equal business class families tend to go more often than do working class families and children of both groups attend more often without their parents than do all the individuals or combinations of family members put together.
it is probable that time formerly spent in lodges saloons and unions is now being spent in part at the movies at least occasionally with other members of the family.
like the automobile and radio the movies break up leisure time into an individual family or small group affair.
source excerpt from middletown a study in american culture by robert s lynd and helen m lynd.
copyright 1929 by harcourt inc and renewed 1957 by robert s and helen m lynd.
reprinted by permission of houghton mifflin harcourt publishing company.
all rights reserved.
middletown in 1929 sociologists robert s lynd and helen merrell lynd published middletown a study of life in a small midwestern city.
middletown was not a single community but a composite of several communities studied by the lynds.
the first real automobile appeared in middletown in 1900.
at the close of 1923 there were 6 221 passenger cars in the city one for every 6 1 persons or roughly two for every three families.
as at the turn of the century business class people began to feel apologetic if they did not have a telephone so ownership of an automobile has now reached the point of being an accepted essential of normal living.
according to an officer of a middletown automobile financing company 75 to 90 percent of the cars purchased questions for analysis 1 what attitudes toward the small town and big city does main street represent.
why do you think lewis includes views as different as carols and beas.
2 how does the urban experience of yezierskas narrator shape her reaction to life in an ohio town.
how might small town residents have reacted to her description of them as the real americans.
how might lewis have responded to yezierskas description.
3 how do the two novelists lewis and yezierska differ from the sociologists the lynds in the issues they emphasize and in their tone and point of view.
what features of small town life does each text emphasize.
part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 american companies abroad united fruit was one of the many american companies that found opportunities for investment in south america in the 1920s and that introduced tropical foods to the united states.
the company used elaborate and informative color advertisements to sell its products.
bananas were sufficiently exotic that the ads explained to consumers how to tell when bananas were ripe and how to store them never place them in the ice box.
john w hartman center duke university special collections library.
dont buy things to have things.
they buy hope hope of what your merchandise will do for them in practice participation in consumer culture was as contested as the eras politics.
it was no accident that white mobs in the tulsa race riot plundered radios and phonograph players from prosperous african american homes the message was that whites deserved such items and blacks did not.
but neither prosperity nor poverty was limited by race.
surrounded by exhortations to indulge in luxuries millions of working class americans barely squeaked by with wives and mothers often working to pay for basic necessities.
in times of crisis some families sold their furniture starting with pianos and phonographs and continuing if necessary to dining tables and beds.
in the los angeles suburb of south gate white working class men secured jobs in the steel and automobile industries but prices were high and families often found it difficult to make ends meet.
self help was the watchword as families bartered with neighbors and used their yards to raise vegetables rabbits and chickens.
the lure of consumer culture created friction.
wives resented husbands who spent all their discretionary cash at the ballpark.
generational conflicts emerged especially when wage earning children challenged the expectation that their pay should go all to mother in st louis a czech born woman was exasperated when her son and daughter stopped contributing to rent and food and pooled their wages to buy a car.
in los angeles one fifteen year old girl spent her summer earning 2 a day at a local factory.
planning to enroll in business school she spent 75 on dressy shoes and a black coat with a red fox collar her brother reported that mom is angry at her for squandering so much money chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
proclamation line limits white settlement sugar act and currency act colonists oppose vice admiralty courts stamp act imposes direct tax quartering act requires barracks for british troops stamp act congress meets americans boycott british goods first compromise stamp act repealed declaratory act passed townshend duties second american boycott second compromise partial repeal of townshend act boston massacre committees of correspondence form tea act leads to boston tea party coercive acts punish massachusetts dunmores war against the shawnees continental congress meets third american boycott general gage marches to lexington and concord second continental congress creates continental army lord dunmore recruits loyalist slaves patriots invade canada and skirmish with loyalists in south western settlers occupy kentucky thomas paines common sense declaration of independence key turning points the boston tea party 1773 the coercive acts 1774 and the first continental congress 1774.
what did parliament hope to achieve with the coercive acts.
how did the decision to convene a continent wide congress demonstrate the failure of parliaments efforts.
making war and republican governments 1776 1789 c h a p t e r the trials of war 1776 1778 war in the north armies and strategies victory at saratoga the perils of war financial crisis valley forge the path to victory 1778 1783 the french alliance war in the south the patriot advantage diplomatic triumph creating republican institutions 1776 1787 the state constitutions how much democracy.
women seek a public voice the wars losers loyalists native americans and slaves the articles of confederation shayss rebellion the constitution of 1787 the rise of a nationalist faction the philadelphia convention the people debate ratification w hen patriots in frederick identify the big idea county maryland demanded how revolutionary was the amerhis allegiance to their cause in ican revolution.
what political 1776 robert gassaway would have none social and economic changes did it of it.
it was better for the poor people to produce and what stayed the same.
lay down their arms and pay the duties and taxes laid upon them by king and parliament than to be brought into slavery and commanded and ordered about by you he told them.
the story was much the same in farmington connecticut where patriot officials imprisoned nathaniel jones and seventeen other men for remaining neutral in pennsylvania quakers accused of loyalism were rounded up jailed and charged with treason and some were hanged for aiding the british cause.
everywhere the outbreak of fighting in 1776 forced families to choose the loyalist or the patriot side.
the patriots control of most local governments gave them an edge in this battle.
patriot leaders organized militia units and recruited volunteers for the continental army a ragtag force that surprisingly held its own on the battlefield.
i admire the american troops tremendously exclaimed a french officer.
it is incredible that soldiers composed of every age even children of fifteen of whites and blacks almost naked unpaid and rather poorly fed can march so well and withstand fire so steadfastly military service created political commitment and vice versa.
many patriot leaders encouraged americans not only to support the war but also to take an active role in government.
as more people did so their political identities changed.
previously americans had lived within a social world dominated by the links of family kinship and locality.
now the abstract bonds of citizenship connected them directly to more distant institutions of government.
from subjects to citizens the difference is immense remarked south carolina patriot david ramsay.
by repudiating monarchical rule and raising a democratic army the patriots launched the age of republican revolutions.
soon republicanism would throw france into turmoil and inspire revolutionaries in spains american colonies.
the independence of the anglo american colonies remarked the venezuelan political leader francisco de miranda who had been in new york and philadelphia at the end of the american revolution was bound to be.
the infallible preliminary to our own independence movement the patriot uprising of 1776 set in motion a process that gradually replaced an atlantic colonial system that spanned the americas with an american system of new nations.
general washington 1780 by wars end george washington was a hero on both sides of the atlantic.
this engraving printed in paris in 1780 shows him with various british bills and declarations in tatters at his feet while he holds copies of the declaration of independence and the treaty of alliance with france.
in the background of this vaguely orientalized scene a black slave presumably william lee washingtons valet and constant companion during the revolution saddles his horse.
anne s k brown military collection brown university library.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 the trials of war 1776 1778 the declaration of independence appeared just as the british launched a full scale military assault.
for two years british troops manhandled the continental army.
a few inspiring american victories kept the rebellion alive but during the winters of 1776 and 1777 the patriot cause hung in the balance.
once the british resorted to military force few europeans gave the rebels a chance.
the population of great britain was 11 million the colonies 2 5 million 20 percent of whom were enslaved africans.
moreover the british government had access to the immense wealth generated by the south atlantic system and the emerging industrial revolution.
britain also had the most powerful navy in the world a standing army of 48 000 britons plus thousands of german hessian soldiers and the support of thousands of american loyalists and powerful indian coalitions.
in the carolinas the cherokees resisted colonists demands for their lands by allying with the british as did four of the six iroquois nations of new york map 6 1.
in the ohio country shawnees and their allies armed by the british attacked the new kentucky settlements.
by contrast the americans were economically and militarily weak.
they lacked a strong central government and a reliable source of tax revenue.
their new continental army commanded by general george washington consisted of 18 000 poorly trained and inexperienced recruits.
to demonstrate britains military superiority the prime minister lord north ordered general william howe to capture new york city.
his strategy was to seize control of the hudson river and thereby isolate the radical patriots in new england from the colonies to the south.
as the second continental congress declared independence in philadelphia in july 1776 howe landed 32 000 troops british regulars and german mercenaries outside new york city.
in august 1776 understand howe defeated the americans in points of view the battle of long island and why was control of new forced their retreat to manhattan york city britains first military objective in the island.
there howe outflanked emerging war.
washingtons troops and nearly trapped them.
outgunned and outmaneuvered the continental army again retreated eventually crossing the hudson river to new jersey.
nova scotia mass.
vt n h o ntari l o l war in the north halifax british canada boston new york mass.
conn newport n rhode island e w ie er s new york philadelphia pennsylvania new jersey delaware atlantic ocean maryland virginia norfolk north carolina wilmington south carolina savannah 300 miles 300 kilometers loyalist strongholds strongly contested areas indians loyalist or neutral patriot strongholds charles town georgia a scattering of loyalists could be found in many areas of patriot strength.
map 6 1 patriot and loyalist strongholds patriots were in the majority in most of the thirteen mainland colonies and used their control of local governments to funnel men money and supplies to the rebel cause.
although loyalists could be found in every colony their strongholds were limited to nova scotia eastern new york new jersey and certain areas in the south.
however most native american peoples favored the british cause and bolstered the power of loyalist militias in central new york see map 6 3 and in the carolina backcountry.
by december the british army had pushed the rebels across new jersey and over the delaware river into pennsylvania.
from the patriots perspective winter came just in time.
following eighteenth century custom the british halted their military campaign for the cold months allowing the americans to catch them off guard.
on christmas night 1776 washington crossed the delaware river and staged a successful surprise attack on trenton new jersey where he forced the surrender of 1 000 german soldiers.
in early january 1777 the continental army won a small victory at nearby princeton map 6 2.
but these minor triumphs could chapters 15 and 22 imagine that you are investigating a series of klan meetings in each era 1870s and 1920s.
where would you conduct your investigation.
how might you explain to the public the klans membership and activities.
how would you compare the two klans.
more to explore chapter contents and what youve learned in class write a short essay that explains how the presence of slaves created a triangular war in the south assesses the choices that individual slaves had to make during the revolution and considers how the differences in the institution of slavery between northern and southern colonies shaped slaves experiences in the war.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 in e r es ai nt u o yorktown oct 1781 g 17 81 li s allis c o rnw 1 fo rc e.
on r ah rn is si al nn va co ll wa wilmington a tigu an om fr.
south carolina charleston may 1780 georgia 7 81 r aug 1780 e r ar e nte sa camden d 1 1 es t ga north carolina from west indies kings mt.
oct 1780 f cape sa guilford court house w 8 rn 0 co 17 8 charlotte cowpens jan 1781 augusta march 1781 h oo e u atl a n t i c o c e an e bl s de ss m virginia ra an e w s richmond ene gre e chesapeake bay g mo rg d ri n te ja m charlottesville jersey delaware et ay pro cl a ma t io r n hi as w l af nl n ha r ka aw maryland n o gt new ba ac om po t of 1 763 100 kilometers rochambeau o rra york g ra ve s h 100 miles ns philadelphia r h io.
pennsylvania british victory new york american victory new york.
ood french forces su british forces ar ann ueh sq delaware r american forces b is r it h va in savannah dec 1778 map 6 4 the war in the south 1778 1781 britains southern military strategy started well.
british forces captured savannah in december 1778 took control of georgia during 1779 and vanquished charleston in may 1780 over the next eighteen months brutal warfare between the british troops and loyalist units and the continental army and militia raged in the interior of the carolinas and ended in a stalemate.
hoping to break the deadlock british general charles cornwallis carried the battle into virginia in 1781 a francoamerican army led by washington and lafayette with the help of the french fleet under admiral de grasse surrounded cornwalliss forces on the yorktown peninsula and forced their surrender.
american guerrillas commanded by the swamp fox general francis marion also won a series of small but fierce battles.
then in january 1781 general daniel morgan led an american force to a bloody victory at cowpens south carolina.
in march greenes soldiers fought cornwalliss seasoned army to a draw at north carolinas guilford court house.
weakened by this war of attrition the british general decided to concede the carolinas to greene and seek a decisive victory in virginia.
there many patriot militiamen had refused to take up arms claiming that the rich wanted the poor to fight for them exploiting these social divisions cornwallis moved easily through the tidewater region of virginia in the chapter 23 north cascades c a n a d a olympic mount rainier glacier wa voyageurs nd craters of the moon id redwood ny sd ut capitol reef zion kings canyon sequoia death valley rocky mountain il co joshua tree mo nc n big bend e sc ar ms al w ga s tx atlantic ocean shenandoah va tn great smoky mountains white sands de ky ok el malpais nm nj in ks great sand dunes pacific ocean md oh wv canyonlands petrified mojave forest natonal az preserve saguaro ri pa ia grand canyon channel islands ct mi dinosaur nh ma wi ne nv acadia vt wy yosemite me mn yellowstone grand teton lassen volcanic ca isle royale pictured rocks mt crater lake or managing the great depression forging the new deal 1929 1939 la 300 miles 300 kilometers fl ccc camp mexico gulf of mexico everglades u s national park map 23 2 civilian conservation corps camps the civilian conservation corps ccc gave hope to unemployed young men during the great depression.
the first camp opened in big meadows virginia in july 1933 and by the end of the decade ccc camps had appeared across the length of the country located in rural mountainous and forested regions alike.
young men constructed bridges and roads built hiking trails erected public campgrounds and performed other improvements.
by the early 1940s the ccc had planted three billion trees among its many other contributions to the national infrastructure.
and the subsequent housing act of 1937 permanently changed the mortgage system and set the foundation for the broad expansion of home ownership in the post world war ii decades chapter 23 managing the great depression forging the new deal 1929 1939 united auto workers strike trade unions were among the most active and vocal organizations of the 1930s.
organized labor led a number of major strikes between 1934 and 1936 in various industries.
none was more important to the future of trade unions than the sit down strikes at major automobile plants including general motors and chevrolet in flint michigan in 1936 and 1937 these strikes in which workers stopped the assembly lines but refused to leave the factories compelled gm to recognize the united auto workers uaw which became one of the strongest trade unions in american history.
bettmann corbis.
families with dependent children afdc enrolled 14 1 million americans.
a minor program during the new deal afdc grew enormously in the 1960s and remained an often maligned cornerstone of the welfare state until it was eliminated under president clinton in 1996 new deal liberalism the second new deal created what historians call new deal liberalism.
classical liberalism held individual liberty to be the foundation of a democratic society and the word liberal had traditionally denoted support for freemarket policies and weak government.
roosevelt and his advisors along with intellectuals such as british economist john maynard keynes disagreed.
they countered that to preserve individual liberty government must assist the needy and guarantee the basic welfare of citizens.
this liberal welfare state was opposed by inheritors of the nineteenth century ideology of laissez faire capitalism who gradually became known as conservatives.
these two visions of liberty and government with liberals on one side and conservatives on the other would shape american politics for the next half century.
from reform to stalemate roosevelts first term had seen an extraordinary expansion of the federal state.
the great burst of government action between 1933 and 1935 was unequaled in the nations history though congress and president lyndon johnson nearly matched it in 1965 1966 see chapter 7 hammering out a federal republic 1787 1820 hamiltons system of public credit millions of dollars debts assets 75 6 million in bonds sold mostly to the wealthy creating a permanent national debt total debt 42 4 national war debt redemption of confederation securities 21 5 war debts assumed from states 11 7 owed to foreigners excise and other revenue 1 2 4 4 5 6 million gross revenue customs revenue 4 6 annual interest owed to bondholders on debt 1 0 net revenue for govt spending figure 7 1 hamiltons fiscal structure 1792 as treasury secretary alexander hamilton established a national debt by issuing government bonds and using the proceeds to redeem confederation securities and assume the war debts of the states.
to pay the annual interest due on the bonds he used the revenue from excise taxes and customs duties.
hamilton deliberately did not attempt to redeem the bonds because he wanted to tie the interests of the wealthy americans who owned them to the new national government.
british financiers.
however hamiltons redemption plan would give enormous profits to speculators who had bought up depreciated securities.
for example the massachusetts firm of burrell burrell had paid 600 for confederation notes with a face value of 2 500 it stood to reap a profit of 1 900.
such windfall gains offended a majority of americans who condemned the speculative practices of capitalist financiers.
equally controversial was hamiltons proposal to pay the burrells and other note holders with new interest bearing securities thereby creating a permanent national debt.
patrick henry condemned this plan to erect and concentrate and perpetuate a large monied interest and warned that it would prove fatal to the existence of american liberty james madison demanded that congress recompense those who originally owned confederation securities the thousands of shopkeepers farmers and soldiers who had bought or accepted them during the dark days of the war.
however it would have been difficult to trace the original owners moreover nearly half the members of the house of representatives owned confederation securities and would profit personally from hamiltons plan.
melding practicality with self interest the house rejected madisons suggestion.
hamilton then proposed that the national government further enhance public credit by assuming the war debts of the states.
this assumption plan costing 22 mil understand points lion also favored well to do cred of view itors such as abigail adams who why did hamilton believe had bought depreciated massa a national debt would chusetts government bonds with strengthen the united a face value of 2 400 for only a states and help to ensure few hundred dollars and would its survival.
reap a windfall profit.
still adams was a long term investor not a speculator like assistant secretary of the treasury william duer.
knowing hamiltons intentions in advance duer and his associates secretly bought up 4 6 million of the war bonds of southern states at bargain rates.
congressional critics condemned duers speculation.
they also pointed out that some states had already paid off their war debts in response hamilton promised to reimburse those states.
to win the votes of congressmen from virginia and maryland the treasury chief arranged another deal he agreed that the permanent national capital would be built along the potomac river where suspicious southerners could easily watch its operations.
such astute bargaining gave hamilton the votes he needed to enact his redemption and assumption plans.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 creating a national bank in december 1790 hamilton asked congress to charter the bank of the united states which would be jointly owned by private stockholders and the national government.
hamilton argued that the bank would provide stability to the specie starved american economy by making loans to merchants handling government funds and issuing bills of credit much as the bank of england had done in great britain.
these potential benefits persuaded congress to grant hamiltons bank a twenty year charter and to send the legislation to the president for his approval.
at this critical juncture secretary of state thomas jefferson joined with james madison to oppose hamiltons financial initiatives.
jefferson charged that hamiltons national bank was unconstitutional.
the incorporation of a bank jefferson told president washington was not a power expressly delegated to the united states by the constitution jeffersons argument rested on a strict interpretation of the constitution.
hamilton preferred a loose interpretation he told washington that article 1 section 8 empowered congress to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper to carry out the provisions of the constitution.
agreeing with hamilton the president signed the legislation.
raising revenue through tariffs hamilton now sought revenue to pay the annual interest on the national debt.
at his insistence congress imposed excise taxes including a duty on whiskey distilled in the united states.
these taxes would yield 1 million a year.
to raise another 4 million to 5 million the treasury secretary proposed higher tariffs on foreign imports.
although hamiltons report on manufactures 1791 urged the expansion of american manufacturing he did not support high protective tariffs that would exclude foreign products.
rather he advocated moderate revenue tariffs that would pay the interest on the debt and other government expenses.
hamiltons scheme worked brilliantly.
as american trade increased customs revenue rose steadily and paid down the national debt.
controversies notwithstanding the treasury secretary had devised a strikingly modern and successful fiscal system as entrepreneur samuel blodget jr declared in 1801 the country prospered beyond all former example jeffersons agrarian vision hamilton paid a high political price for his success.
as washington began his second four year term in 1793 hamiltons financial measures had split the federalists into bitterly opposed factions.
most northern federalists supported the treasury secretary while most southern federalists joined a group headed by madison and jefferson.
by 1794 the two factions had acquired names.
hamiltonians remained federalists the allies of madison and jefferson called themselves democratic republicans or simply republicans.
thomas jefferson spoke for southern planters and western farmers.
well read in architecture natural history agricultural science and political theory jefferson embraced the optimism of the enlightenment.
he believed in the improvability of the human race and deplored the corruption and social divisions that threatened its progress.
having seen the poverty of laborers in british factories jefferson doubted that wageworkers had the economic and political independence needed to sustain a republican polity.
two visions of america thomas jefferson left and alexander hamilton confront each other in these portraits as they did in the political battles of the 1790s.
jefferson was pro french hamilton pro british.
jefferson favored farmers and artisans hamilton supported merchants and financiers.
jefferson believed in democracy and rule by legislative majorities hamilton argued for strong executives and judges.
still in the contested presidential election of 1800 hamilton who detested candidate aaron burr threw his support to jefferson and secured the presidency for his longtime political foe.
the white house historical association white house collection.
yale university art gallery art resource ny.
chapter 7 northwest territory nish territory candidate electoral vote terr.
south of the ohio river id or fl a presidential election maps usually show the strength of each state in the electoral college.
the number of electoral votes cast by a state is the sum of the number of its senators two and its representatives in the u s congress.
states gain or lose representatives depending on their population as determined each decade by the u s census.
consequently the number of a states electoral votes may change over time.
spa erritory nish t northwest indiana terr.
candidate electoral vote mississippi territory a id or fl the revolution of 1800 the campaign of 1800 degenerated into a bitter no holds barred contest.
the federalists launched personal attacks on jefferson branding him an irresponsible pro french radical and because he opposed state support of religion in virginia the arch apostle of irreligion and free thought both parties changed state election laws to favor their candidates and rumors circulated of a federalist plot to stage a military coup.
the election did not end these worries.
thanks to a low federalist turnout in virginia and pennsylvania and the three fifths rule which boosted electoral votes in the southern states jefferson won a narrow 73 to 65 victory over adams in the electoral college.
however the republican electors also gave 73 votes to aaron burr of new york who was jeffersons vicepresidential running mate map 7 1.
the constitution specified that in the case of a tie vote the house of representatives would choose between the candidates.
for thirty five rounds of balloting federalists in the house blocked jeffersons election prompting rumors that virginia would raise a military force to put him into office.
ironically arch federalist alexander hamilton ushered in a more democratic era by supporting jefferson.
calling burr an embryo caesar and the most unfit man in the united states for the office of president hamilton persuaded key federalists to allow jeffersons election.
the federalists concern for political stability also played a role.
as senator james bayard of delaware explained it was admitted on all presidential elections quickly became a central focus of american political life.
political leaders used mental maps to envision those areas likely to support various candidates and to map their election strategies accordingly.
spa power to review congressional legislation was uncertain and because most of the justices were federalists.
instead madison and jefferson looked to the state legislatures.
at their urging the kentucky and virginia legislatures issued resolutions in 1798 declaring the alien and sedition acts to be unauthoritative void and of no force the virginia and kentucky resolutions set forth a states rights interpretation of the constitution asserting that the states had a right to judge the legitimacy of national laws.
the conflict over the sedition act set the stage for the presidential election of 1800 jefferson once opposed on principle to political parties now asserted that they could watch and relate to the people the activities of an oppressive government.
meanwhile john adams reevaluated his foreign policy.
rejecting hamiltons advice to declare war against france and benefit from the resulting upsurge in patriotism adams put country ahead of party and used diplomacy to end the maritime conflict.
hammering out a federal republic 1787 1820 states may cast their electoral votes either by district as for example in north carolina or as a single statewide total.
when thomas jefferson and aaron burr both received 73 electoral votes the house of representatives decided which one would be president.
map 7 1 the presidential elections of 1796 and 1800 both elections pitted federalist john adams of massachusetts against republican thomas jefferson of virginia and both saw voters split along regional lines.
adams carried every new england state and reflecting federalist strength in maritime and commercial areas the eastern districts of the middle atlantic states jefferson won most of the agricultural based states of the south and west kentucky and tennessee.
new york was the pivotal swing state.
it gave its 12 electoral votes to adams in 1796 and thanks to the presence of aaron burr on the republican ticket bestowed them on jefferson in 1800 part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 hands that we must risk the constitution and a civil war or take mr jefferson why did jefferson consider jefferson called the election his election in 1800 to be the revolution of 1800 and so it revolutionary.
the bloodless transfer of power showed that popularly elected governments could be changed in an orderly way even in times of bitter partisan conflict.
in his inaugural address in 1801 jefferson praised this achievement declaring we are all republicans we are all federalists understand points of view a republican empire is born in the treaty of paris of 1783 great britain gave up its claims to the trans appalachian region and said one british diplomat left the indian nations to the care of their american neighbours care was hardly the right word many white americans wanted to destroy native communities.
cut up every indian cornfield and burn every indian town proclaimed congressman william henry drayton of south carolina so that their nation be extirpated and the lands become the property of the public other leaders including henry knox washingtons first secretary of war favored assimilating native peoples into euro american society.
knox proposed the division of tribal lands among individual indian families who would become citizens of the various states.
indians resisted both forms of domination and fought to retain control of their lands and cultures.
in the ensuing struggle the united states emerged as an expansive power determined to control the future of the continent.
sham treaties and indian lands as in the past the major struggle between natives and europeans centered on land rights.
invoking the paris treaty and regarding britains indian allies as conquered peoples the u s government asserted both sovereignty over and ownership of the transappalachian west.
indian nations rejected both claims pointing out they had not been conquered and had not signed the paris treaty.
our lands are our life and our breath declared creek place events chief hallowing king if we part in context with them we part with our why did the united states blood brushing aside such go to war against western objections and threatening miliindians so quickly after the tary action u s commissioners revolution.
forced the pro british iroquois peoples mohawks onondagas cayugas and senecas to cede huge tracts in new york and pennsylvania in the treaty of fort stanwix 1784.
new york land speculators used liquor and bribes to take a million more acres confining the once powerful iroquois to reservations essentially colonies of subordinate peoples.
american negotiators used similar tactics to grab ohio valley lands.
at the treaties of fort mcintosh 1785 and fort finney 1786 they pushed the chippewas delawares ottawas wyandots and shawnees to cede most of the future state of ohio.
the tribes quickly repudiated the agreements justifiably claiming they were made under duress.
recognizing the failure of these agreements american negotiators arranged for a comprehensive agreement at fort harmar 1789 but it too failed.
to defend their lands these tribes joined with the miami and potawatomi indians to form the western confederacy.
led by miami chief little turtle confederacy warriors crushed american expeditionary forces sent by president washington in 1790 and 1791 the treaty of greenville fearing an alliance between the western confederacy and the british in canada washington doubled the size of the u s army and ordered general mad anthony wayne to lead a new expedition.
in august 1794 wayne defeated the confederacy in the battle of fallen timbers near present day toledo ohio.
however continuing indian resistance forced a compromise.
in the treaty of greenville 1795 american negotiators acknowledged indian ownership of the land and in return for various payments the western confederacy ceded most of ohio map 7 2.
the indian peoples also agreed to accept american sovereignty placing themselves under the protection of the united states and no other power whatever these american advances caused britain to agree in jays treaty 1795 to reduce its trade and military aid to indians in the trans appalachian region.
the greenville treaty sparked a wave of white migration.
kentucky already had a population of 73 000 in 1790 and in 1792 it was admitted to the union as the fifteenth state vermont entered a year earlier.
by 1800 more than 375 000 people had moved into the ohio and tennessee valleys in 1805 the new state of ohio alone had more than 100 000 residents.
thousands more farm families moved into the future states of indiana and illinois sparking new conflicts with native peoples over land and hunting rights.
between 1790 and 1810 farm families settled as much chapter 7 four year term and rotating it among citizens from different states.
the convention also suggested amendments restricting commercial embargoes to sixty days and requiring a two thirds majority in congress to declare war prohibit trade or admit a new state to the union.
as a minority party the federalists could prevail only if the war continued to go badly a very real prospect.
the war had cost 88 million raising the national debt to 127 million.
and now as albert gallatin warned henry clay in may 1814 britains triumph over napoleon in europe meant that a well organized and large army is now ready.
to act immediately against us when an attack from canada came in the late summer of 1814 only an american naval victory on lake champlain stopped the british from marching down the hudson river valley.
a few months later thousands of seasoned british troops landed outside new orleans threatening american control of the mississippi river.
with the nation politically divided and under attack from north and south gallatin feared that the war might prove vitally fatal to the united states peace overtures and a final victory fortunately for the young american republic by 1815 britain wanted peace.
the twenty year war with france had sapped its wealth and energy so it began negotiations with the united states in ghent belgium.
at first the american commissioners john quincy adams gallatin and clay demanded territory in canada and florida while british diplomats sought an indian buffer state between the united states and canada.
both sides quickly realized that these objectives were not worth the cost of prolonged warfare.
the treaty of ghent signed on christmas eve 1814 retained the prewar borders of the united states.
that result hardly justified three years of war but before news of the treaty reached the united states a final military victory lifted americans morale.
on january 8 1815 general jacksons troops crushed the british forces attacking new orleans.
fighting from carefully constructed breastworks the americans rained grapeshot and cannister bombs on the massed british formations.
the british lost 700 men and 2 000 more were wounded or taken prisoner just 13 americans died and only 58 suffered wounds.
a newspaper headline proclaimed almost incredible victory.
glorious news the victory made jackson a national hero redeemed the nations battered pride and undercut the hartford conventions demands for constitutional revision.
hammering out a federal republic 1787 1820 the federalist legacy the war of 1812 ushered in a new phase of the republican political revolution.
before the conflict federalists had strongly supported alexander hamiltons program of national mercantilism a funded debt a central bank and tariffs while jeffersonian republicans had opposed it.
after the war the republicans split into two camps.
led by henry clay national republicans pursued federalist like policies.
in 1816 clay pushed legislation through congress creating the second bank of the united states and persuaded president madison to sign it.
in 1817 clay won passage of the bonus bill which created a national fund for roads and other internal improvements.
madison vetoed it.
reaffirming traditional jeffersonian republican principles he argued that the national government lacked the constitutional authority to fund internal improvements.
meanwhile the federalist party crumbled.
as one supporter explained the national republicans in the eastern states had destroyed the federalist party by the adoption of its principles while the favorable farm policies of jeffersonians maintained the republican partys dominance in the south and west.
no federal character can run with success gouverneur morris of new york lamented and the election of 1818 proved him right republicans outnumbered federalists 37 to 7 in the senate and 156 to 27 in the house.
westward expansion and the success of jeffersons revolution of 1800 had shattered the first party system.
marshalls federalist law however federalist policies lived on thanks to john marshalls long tenure on the supreme court.
appointed chief justice by president john adams in january 1801 marshall had a personality and intellect that allowed him to dominate the court until 1822 and strongly influence its decisions until his death in 1835 three principles informed marshalls jurisprudence judicial authority the supremacy of national laws and traditional property rights table 7 1.
marshall claimed the right of judicial review for the supreme court in marbury v madison 1803 and the court frequently used that power to overturn state laws that in its judgment violated the constitution.
asserting national supremacy the important case of mcculloch v maryland 1819 involved one such law.
when congress created the second bank of the united states in 1816 it allowed the bank to set up state branches that competed with state chartered banks.
in response the maryland legislature imposed a part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 table 7 1 major decisions of the marshall court date case significance of decision judicial authority marbury v madison asserts principle of judicial review property rights fletcher v peck protects property rights through broad reading of constitutions contract clause dartmouth college v woodward safeguards property rights especially of chartered corporations mcculloch v maryland interprets constitution to give broad powers to national government gibbons v ogden gives national government jurisdiction over interstate commerce supremacy of national law tax on notes issued by the baltimore branch of the second bank.
the second bank refused to pay claiming that the tax infringed on national powers and was therefore unconstitutional.
the states lawyers then invoked jeffersons argument that congress lacked the constitutional authority to charter a national bank.
even if a national bank was legitimate the lawyers argued maryland could tax its activities within the state.
marshall and the nationalist minded republicans on the court firmly rejected both arguments.
the second bank was constitutional said the chief justice because it was necessary and proper given the national govunderstand ernments control over currency points of view and credit and maryland did not why do historians think have the power to tax it.
the decisions of the marthe marshall court again shall court constitute a federalist legacy.
asserted the dominance of national over state statutes in gibbons v ogden 1824.
the decision struck down a new york law granting a monopoly to aaron ogden for steamboat passenger service across the hudson river to new jersey.
asserting that the constitution gave the federal government authority over interstate commerce the chief justice sided with thomas gibbons who held a federal license to run steamboats between the two states.
upholding vested property rights finally marshall used the constitution to uphold federalist notions of property rights.
during the 1790s jefferson republicans had celebrated the will of the people prompting federalists to worry that popular sovereignty would result in a tyranny of the majority if state legislatures enacted statutes infringing on the property rights of wealthy citizens federalist judges vowed to void them.
marshall was no exception.
determined to protect individual property rights he invoked the contract clause of the constitution to do it.
the contract clause in article i section 10 prohibits the states from passing any law impairing the obligation of contracts economic conservatives at the philadelphia convention had inserted the clause to prevent stay laws which kept creditors from seizing the lands and goods of delinquent debtors.
in fletcher v peck 1810 marshall greatly expanded its scope.
the georgia legislature had granted a huge tract of land to the yazoo land company.
when a new legislature cancelled the grant alleging fraud and bribery speculators who had purchased yazoo lands appealed to the supreme court to uphold their titles.
marshall did so by ruling that the legislative grant was a contract that could not be revoked.
his decision was controversial and far reaching.
it limited state power bolstered vested property rights and by protecting out of state investors promoted the development of a national capitalist economy.
the court extended its defense of vested property rights in dartmouth college v woodward 1819.
dartmouth college was a private institution created by a royal charter issued by king george iii.
in 1816 new hampshires republican legislature enacted a statute converting the school into a public university.
the dartmouth trustees opposed the legislation and hired daniel webster to plead their case.
a renowned constitutional lawyer and a leading federalist webster cited the courts decision in fletcher v peck and argued that the royal charter was an unalterable contract.
the marshall court agreed and upheld dartmouths claims.
chapter 23 timeline chapter 24 the world at war 1937 1945 adolf hitler adolf hitler salutes german troops during a parade at the nazi partys annual congress at nuremberg.
german fascism reveled in great public spectacles such as the famous nuremberg rallies held every year between the early 1920s and the late 1930s.
hitler used these mass rallies at which tens and sometimes hundreds of thousands of soldiers and civilians gathered to build wide support for his policies of aggressive militarism abroad and suppression of jews and other minorities at home.
getty images.
1936 he sent troops into the rhineland a demilitarized zone under the terms of versailles.
again france and britain took no action.
later that year hitler and mussolini formed the rome berlin axis a political and military alliance between the two fascist nations.
also in 1936 germany signed a pact to create a military alliance with japan against the soviet union.
with these alliances in place and with france and great britain reluctant to oppose him hitler had seized the military advantage in europe by 1937 war approaches as hitler pushed his initiatives in europe which was mired in economic depression as deeply as the united states the roosevelt administration faced widespread isolationist sentiment at home.
in part this desire to avoid european entanglements reflected disillusion with american participation in world war i in 1934 gerald p nye a progressive republican senator from north dakota launched an investigation into the profits of munitions makers during that war.
nyes committee alleged that arms manufacturers popularly labeled merchants of death had maneuvered president wilson into world war i although nyes committee failed to prove its charge against weapon makers its factual findings prompted an isolationist minded congress to pass a series of acts to prevent the nation from being drawn into another overseas war.
the neutrality act of 1935 imposed an embargo on selling arms to warring countries and declared that americans traveling on the ships of belligerent nations did so at their own risk.
in 1936 congress banned loans to belligerents and in 1937 it imposed a cash and carry requirement if a warring country wanted to purchase nonmilitary goods from the united states it had to pay cash and carry them in its own ships keeping the united states out of potentially dangerous naval warfare.
americans for the most part had little enthusiasm for war and a wide variety of groups and individuals espoused isolationism.
many isolationists looked to republican ohio senator robert taft who distrusted both roosevelt and european nations with equal conviction or to the aviator hero charles a lindbergh who delivered impassioned speeches against intervention in europe.
some isolationists such as the conservative national legion of mothers of america combined anticommunism christian morality and even anti semitism.
isolationists were primarily part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 as the united states france and britain remained neutral.
in the united states the popular front drew from a wide range of social groups.
the american communist party which had increased its membership to 100 000 as the depression revealed flaws in the capitalist system led the way.
african american civil rights activists trade unionists left wing writers and intellectuals and even a few new deal administrators also joined the coalition.
in time however many supporters in the united states grew uneasy with the popular front because of the rigidity of communists and the brutal political repression in the soviet union under joseph stalin.
nevertheless popular front activists were among a small but vocal group of americans encouraging roosevelt to take a stronger stand against european fascism.
charles lindbergh cartoon charles lindbergh the first person to fly solo nonstop across the atlantic ocean was an american hero in the 1930s.
in 1941 he had become the public face of the america first committee which was determined the keep the united states from entering the wars raging in europe and asia.
in this political cartoon from october 1941 lindbergh is shown standing on a soapbox labeled fascism looking up at the figure of democracy the implication is that lindbergh had been fooled by german propaganda into taking its side.
less than two months after the cartoon appeared japan attacked pearl harbor and isolationist sentiment all but disappeared in the united states.
library of congress.
conservatives but a contingent of progressives or liberals opposed americas involvement in the war on pacifist or moral grounds.
whatever their philosophies ardent isolationists forced roosevelt to approach the brewing war cautiously.
the popular front other americans responded to the rise of european fascism by advocating u s intervention.
some of the most prominent americans pushing for greater involvement in europe even if it meant war were affiliated with the popular front.
fearful of german and japanese aggression the soviet union instructed communists in western europe and the united states to join with liberals in a broad coalition opposing fascism.
this popular front supported various international causes backing the loyalists in their fight against fascist leader francisco franco in the spanish civil war 1936 1939 for example even the failure of appeasement encouraged by the weak worldwide response to the invasions of china ethiopia and the rhineland and emboldened by british and french neutrality during the spanish civil war hitler grew more aggressive in 1938 he sent troops to annex german speaking austria while making clear his intention to seize part of czechoslovakia.
because czechoslovakia had an alliance with france war seemed imminent.
but at the munich conference in september 1938 britain and france capitulated agreeing to let germany annex the sudetenland a german speaking border area of czechoslovakia in return for hitlers pledge to seek no more territory.
the agreement declared british prime minister neville chamberlain guaranteed peace for our time hitler drew a different conclusion telling his generals our enemies are small fry.
i saw them in munich within six months hitlers forces had overrun the rest of czechoslovakia and were threatening to march into poland.
realizing that their policy of appeasement capitulating to hitlers demands had been disastrous britain and france warned hitler that further aggression meant war.
then in august 1939 hitler and stalin shocked the world by signing a mutual nonaggression pact.
for hitler this pact was crucial as it meant that germany would not have to wage a twofront war against britain and france in the west and the soviet union in the east.
on september 1 1939 hitler launched a blitzkrieg against poland.
two days later britain and france declared war on germany.
world war ii had officially begun.
two days after the european war started the united states declared its neutrality.
but president roosevelt made no secret of his sympathies.
when war broke out chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
1784 1789 contested indian treaties fort stanwix 1784 fort mcintosh 1785 fort finney 1786 and fort harmar 1789 1789 1799 french revolution judiciary act establishes federal courts hamiltons public credit system approved 1790 1791 western confederacy defeats u s armies 1791 1803 haitian revolution bill of rights ratified bank of the united states chartered kentucky joins union war between britain and france madison and jefferson found republican party whiskey rebellion battle of fallen timbers jays treaty with great britain pinckneys treaty with spain treaty of greenville accepts indian land rights xyz affair alien sedition and naturalization acts virginia and kentucky resolutions jefferson elected president 1801 1812 gallatin reduces national debt louisiana purchase marbury v madison asserts judicial review 1804 1806 lewis and clark explore west embargo act cripples american shipping madison elected president tecumseh and tenskwatawa revive western confederacy 1812 1815 war of 1812 1817 1825 era of good feeling adams ons treaty mcculloch v maryland dartmouth college v woodward key turning points the northwest ordinance 1787 chapter 26.
wartime civil rights among african americans a new militancy prevailed during the war.
pointing to parallels between anti semitism in germany and racial american voices women in the wartime workplace during world war ii millions of men served in the armed forces and millions of women worked in war related industries.
a generation later some of these women workers recounted their wartime experiences to historians in oral interviews.
evelyn gotzion donna jean harvey becoming a union activist wartime challenges and new experiences evelyn gotzion went to work at rayovac a battery company in madison wisconsin in 1935 she retired in 1978 while at rayovac gotzion and her working husband raised three children.
during the war harvey raised her first child while working as a riveter and radio installer at a plant in cheyenne wyoming.
i had all kinds of jobs.
during the war we had one line a big line where youd work ten hours and youd stand in one spot or sit in one spot.
it got terrible all day long.
so i suggested to my foreman the general foreman that we take turns of learning everybodys job and switching every half hour.
well they the management didnt like it but we were on the side every once in a while learning each others job and learning how to do it so eventually most all of us got so we could do all the jobs of which there were probably fifteen or twenty on the line.
we could do every job so we could go up and down the line and rotate.
and then they found out that that was really a pretty good thing to do because it made the people happier.
one day i was the steward and they wouldnt listen to me.
they cut our rates so i shut off the line and the boss came up and he said what are you doing i said well i have asked everybody that i know why we have gotten a cut in pay and why were doing exactly the same amount of work as we did.
so anyhow we wrote up a big grievance and they all signed it and then i called the president of the union and then we had a meeting.
at that point the president decided that i should be added to the bargaining committee so that i would go in and argue our case because i could do it better than any of the rest of them because i knew what it was.
we finally got it straightened out and we got our back pay too.
from then on i was on the bargaining committee all the years that i worked at rayovac.
source women remember the war 1941 1945 edited by michael e stevens and ellen d goldlust state historical society of wisconsin press 1993.
reprinted with permission of the wisconsin historical society.
i graduated from cheyenne high school in 1940 i married lewis early harvey in january 1941 he was drafted when the war broke out and was sent to the aleutian islands and from there he transferred to the paratroopers.
in october i gave birth to my first son lewis early jr labor force was critical at that time so i went to united modification plant and learned how to rivet do installations of various kinds and etc.
when the new radar system was implemented i asked to be put on that crew.
investigated me and found me to be worthy and i proceeded to install radar along with my riveting duties while waiting for the next shipment of planes to come in.
i was awarded the army navy e award and was presented with a pin.
ive always been very proud of that.
i certainly got educated in more ways than i ever expected being a very young girl.
but looking back i wouldnt trade my experiences for anything.
my feeling about the war in most instances was a conglomerate of mixed emotions.
i had lived a fairly sheltered life but i listened and learned and managed to survive but i must admit it left a scar on my memory that can never be erased.
i was living in one of my parents apartments during the war and since they were both retired they baby sat my young son.
my mother decided after a while that she too would like to do something in some little way to help.
so she applied for maintenance and between my father and the girl next door i managed to have a baby sitter available at all times.
the government was asking for rubber donations so my mother and i gave them our rubber girdles.
we liked to think that our girdles helped win the war.
my life took on a totally new perspective the longer i worked there.
i saw many tragic accidents none of which i care to talk about which haunt me to this day.
i couldnt do much socializing as i had a small infant at home to care for when off work and besides i was really pooped.
those midnight shifts were killers i hope i never have to do that again.
i tried to write weekly letters to my husband in between my other duties.
our community gathered together and collected scrap metals and such to help in the war effort and thanks to a good neighbor who was growing a victory garden we managed to get gifts of potatoes and lettuce etc.
the government issued coupon books that allowed us two bananas a week one pound of sugar and so many gallons of gas.
we traded back and forth depending on our individual needs.
i had a 1934 ford and fortunately it wasnt a gas eater and it managed to get me where i was going when i needed it.
there were no unions there at that time and no baby sitting service provided.
the single people formed a club and they entertained themselves after work but i was a married person with a child and so i didnt participate in any of their activities.
after the war was over most people went back to their previous jobs.
i opened a beauty salon and when my husband returned home from the service he got a job with the frontier refinery.
source national park service rosie the riveter women working during world war ii nps.
gov pwro collection website donna htm.
fanny christina tina hill nothing but shooting and bucking rivets.
you stood on one side of the panel and your partner stood on this side and he would shoot the rivets with a gun and youd buck them with the bar.
that was about the size of it.
i just didnt like it.
went over to the union and they told me what to do.
i went back inside and they sent me to another department where you did bench work and i liked that much better.
some weeks i brought home twenty six dollars.
then it gradually went up to thirty dollars about 420 in 2010.
whatever you make youre supposed to save some.
i was also getting that fifty dollars a month from my husband and that was just saved right away.
i was planning on buying a home and a car.
my husband came back from the war and.
looked for a job in the cleaning and pressing place which was just plentiful.
thats why he didnt bother to go out to north american.
but what we both werent thinking about was that they north american have better benefits because they did have an insurance plan and a union to back you up.
later he did come to work there in 1951 or 1952.
when north american called me back after i left to have a baby was i a happy soul.
it made me live better.
it really did we always say that lincoln took the bale off of the negroes.
i think there is a statue up there in washington d c where hes lifting something off the negro.
well my sister always said thats why you cant interview her because shes so radical hitler was the one that got us out of the white folks kitchen source rosie the riveter revisited by sherna b gluck boston g k hall co 1987.
used by permission of susan berger gluck.
war work social and racial mobility after migrating to california from texas and working as a domestic servant tina hill an african american got a wartime job at north american aircraft.
after time off for a pregnancy in 1945 hill worked there until 1980 most of the men was gone and.
most of the women was in my bracket five or six years younger or older.
i was twenty four.
there was a black girl that hired in with me.
i went to work the next day sixty cents an hour.
i could see where they made a difference in placing you in certain jobs.
they had fifteen or twenty departments but all the negroes went to department 17 because there was analyzing the evidence 1 how did the war change the lives of these women.
2 consider how the themes of identity and work technology and economic change connect to the lives of these two women.
how was their experience of the wartime industrial workplace tied to their class and gender identities.
how did labor unions affect their conditions of employment.
3 these interviews occurred long after the events they describe.
how might that long interval have affected the womens accounts of those years.
part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 wartime civil rights fighting fascism abroad while battling racism at home was the approach taken by black communities across the country during world war ii.
securing democracy in europe and asia while not enjoying it in the united states did not seem just.
jobs were plentiful as the wartime economy hummed along at a fevered pitch.
but when employers and unions kept jim crow hiring policies in place african americans did not hesitate to protest.
here picketers rally for defense jobs outside the glenn martin plant in omaha nebraska in the early 1940s.
schomburg center for research in black culture new york public library art resource ny.
discrimination in the united states black leaders waged the double v campaign calling for victory over nazism abroad and racism at home.
this is a war for freedom.
whose freedom the renowned black leader w e b du bois asked.
if it meant the freedom of negroes in the southern united states du bois answered my gun is on my shoulder even before pearl harbor black labor activism was on the rise.
in 1940 only 240 of the nations 100 000 aircraft workers were black and most of them were janitors.
african american leaders demanded that the government require defense contractors to hire more black workers.
when washington took no action a philip randolph head of the brotherhood of sleeping car porters the largest black labor union in the country announced plans for a march on washington in the summer of 1941 roosevelt was not a strong supporter of african american equality but he wanted to avoid public protest and a disruption of the understand nations war preparations.
so the points of view president made a deal he issued how does the slogan a executive order 8802 and in jim crow army cannot june 1941 randolph canceled the fight for a free world march.
the order prohibited disconnect the war abroad crimination in the employment with the civil rights of workers in defense industries struggle at home.
or government because of race creed color or national origin and established the fair employment practices commission fepc.
mary mcleod bethune called the wartime fepc a refreshing shower in a thirsty land this federal commitment to black employment rights was unprecedented but limited it did not affect segregation in the armed forces and the fepc could not enforce compliance with its orders.
nevertheless wartime developments laid the groundwork for the civil rights revolution of the 1960s.
the naacp grew ninefold to 450 000 members by 1945 in chicago james farmer helped to found the congress of racial equality core in 1942 a group that would become known nationwide in the 1960s for its direct action protests such as sit ins.
the fepc inspired black organizing against employment discrimination in hundreds of cities and workplaces.
behind this combination of government action and black militancy the civil rights movement would advance on multiple fronts in the postwar years.
mexican americans too challenged long standing practices of discrimination and exclusion.
throughout much of the southwest it was still common for signs to read no mexicans allowed and mexican american workers were confined to menial low paying jobs.
several organizations including the league of united latin american citizens lulac and the congress of spanish speaking peoples pressed the government chapter 26.
the presidents call for social legislation sought to reinvigorate the new deal political coalition.
in the election of 1944 roosevelt again headed the democratic ticket.
but party leaders aware of fdrs health problems and fearing that vice president henry wallaces outspoken support for labor and civil rights would alienate moderate voters dropped him from the ticket.
in his place they chose senator harry s truman of missouri a straight talking no nonsense politician with little national experience.
the republicans nominated governor thomas e dewey of new york.
dewey who accepted the general principles of welfarestate liberalism domestically and favored internationalism in foreign affairs attracted some of roosevelts supporters.
but a majority of voters preferred political continuity and roosevelt was reelected with 53 5 percent of the nationwide vote.
the democratic coalition retained its hold on government power and the era of republican political dominance 1896 1932 slipped further into the past.
life on the home front the united states escaped the physical devastation that ravaged europe and east asia but the war profoundly changed the country.
americans welcomed wartime prosperity but shuddered when they saw a western union boy on his bicycle fearing that he carried a war department telegram reporting the death of someones son husband or father.
citizens also grumbled about annoying wartime regulations and rationing but accepted that their lives would be different for the duration part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 a family effort after migrating from the midwest to portland oregon fifteen members of the family of john r brauckmiller sixth from left found jobs at henry kaisers swan island shipyard.
from 1943 to 1945 the shipyard turned out 152 t 2 tankers mostly for use by the u s navy to carry fuel oil.
a local newspaper pronounced the brauckmillers as the shipbuildingest family in america and because of the importance of shipbuilding to the war effort life magazine featured the family in its issue of august 16 1943 ralph vincent the journal portland oregon picture research consultants archives.
for the duration spurred by both government propaganda and a desire to serve the war cause people on the home front took on wartime responsibilities.
they worked on civilian defense committees recycled old newspapers and scrap material and served on local rationing and draft boards.
about twenty million backyard victory gardens produced 40 percent of the nations vegetables.
various federal agencies encouraged these efforts especially the office of war information owi which disseminated news and promoted patriotism.
the owi urged advertising agencies to link their clients products to the war effort arguing that patriotic ads would not only sell goods but also invigorate instruct and inspire citizens thinking like a historian p 784.
popular culture especially the movies reinforced connections between the home front and the war effort.
hollywood producers directors and actors offered their talents to the war department.
director frank capra created a documentary series titled why we fight to explain war aims to conscripted soldiers.
movie stars such as john wayne and spencer tracy portrayed heroic american fighting men in numerous films such as guadalcanal diary 1943 and thirty seconds over tokyo 1945.
in this pretelevision era newsreels accompanying the feature films kept the public up to date on the war as did on the spot radio chapter 21.
as blacks and whites competed for jobs and housing racial conflicts broke out in more than a hundred cities in 1943 detroit saw the worst violence.
in june 1943 a riot incited by southern born whites and polish americans against african americans left thirty four people dead and hundreds injured.
racial conflict struck the west as well.
in los angeles male hispanic teenagers formed pachuco youth gangs.
many dressed in zoot suits broad brimmed felt hats thigh length jackets with wide lapels and padded shoulders pegged trousers and clunky shoes.
pachucas young women favored long coats huarache sandals and pompadour hairdos.
other working class teenagers in los angeles and elsewhere took up the zoot suit style to underline their rejection of middle class values.
to many adults the zoot suit symbolized juvenile delinquency.
rumors circulating in los angeles in june 1943 that a pachuco gang had beaten an anglo white sailor set off a fourday riot in which hundreds of anglo servicemen roamed through mexican american neighborhoods and attacked zoot suiters taking special pleasure in slashing their pegged pants.
in a stinging display of bias los angeles police officers arrested only mexican american youth and the city council passed an ordinance outlawing the wearing of the zoot suit.
gay and lesbian communities wartime migration to urban centers created new opportunities for gay men and women to establish communities.
religious thinking like a historian mobilizing the home front the u s office of war information owi promoted everything from food rationing to car pooling during world war ii and the u s treasury encouraged millions of americans to buy war bonds.
more than 20 million victory gardens were planted by ordinary americans.
by 1944 they were producing more than 40 percent of all vegetables grown in the united states.
through these and other measures those on the home front were encouraged to see themselves as part of the war effort.
1 u s government advertisement from the minneapolis star journal 1943 of us after our boy takes over on the farm.
for after ten years we get four dollars back for every three we have invested 3 poster from the u s office of price administration 1943 john w hartman center for sales advertising and marketing history duke university.
2 copy from war advertising council u s.
treasury department advertisement 1943 farmer well theres something we really want now more than anything else.
and i guess everybody does.
its victory in this war.
we had started saving for a new milking machine and a deep well pump that we will be needing in a few years.
were still going to have that milking machine and that pump and a lot of other new improvements after the war.
when our son comes home from the fighting front hell help us pick them out.
and well have the cash to pay for them.
with the money we are saving now in war bonds.
and we are going to hang on to as many war bonds as possible to take care united states office of price administration northwestern university library.
4 h club exhibiting victory garden posters c 1943.
4 h club boys and girls id 0016623 special collections research center north carolina state university libraries raleigh north carolina.
5 oral histories about life during the war.
tessie hickam wilson a young woman from oklahoma.
it was a hard time but we felt like we were doing our part and all the people we knew were doing their part.
we had rationing.
sugar coffee gasoline and meat were some of the items that were hard to come by.
we had ration books every so often and we had to use them sparingly.
we bought savings bonds to help in the war effort.
we also had radios and record players and when we could afford it we went to the movies.
and even though there were hard times we did what we could in the war effort and i will always be glad i was part of it.
write v mail.
i had brother brothers in law in the service.
we wed write v mail to them.
it was called v mail.
victory mail.
we couldnt put their address on because they were moved around a lot and we didnt want the enemy to know.
there were a lot of secrets.
they would say zip your lip was the was the word of the days then.
zip your lip because we didnt want the enemy to get information.
sources 2 digital collections duke university libraries 4 national park service rosie the riveter women working during world war ii and the library of congress veterans history project.
virginia j bondra a student and clothing worker from ohio.
the only newsreel footage we saw was in the theaters when we went to a movie.
and we used to bring scrap metal or cans and wed get in the movies free.
they needed scrap metal and they the usa needed scrap fat.
my mother used to scrap fat you know in a can.
shed save it and wed bring it to a certain place.
sugar was rationed.
each member of the family would get one pound of sugar a week.
and i always had time to bake because we had sugar.
different things were rationed.
we couldnt buy nylons because it was needed.
for parachutes.
so wed wed my older sisters would paint their legs with a certain makeup that came out in place of nylons.
it was makeup for legs.
they painted a eyebrow pencil line down the back of their leg so it would look like real nylons.
and we would analyzing the evidence 1 examine sources 1 2 and 3 who created these sources and what does this suggest about the context and purpose of these documents.
can you tell from their content who the intended audience was.
2 study the photograph source 4.
who is depicted and how were they posed.
what does this suggest about the victory garden program as well as war efforts on the home front more broadly.
3 how do the oral histories in source 5 add to your understanding of home front involvement in the war effort.
does their testimony force you to question the other documents in any way and if so how.
putting it all together analyze some of the ways the u s government encouraged ordinary citizens to participate in the war effort and evaluate the objectives and results of these efforts.
part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 zoot suit youth in los angeles during a four day riot in june 1943 servicemen in los angeles attacked young latino men wearing distinctive zoot suits which were widely viewed as emblems of gang membership and a delinquent youth culture.
the police response was to arrest scores of zoot suiters.
here a group of handcuffed young latino men is about to board a los angeles county sheriffs bus to make a court appearance.
note the wide legged pants that taper at the ankle a hallmark of the zoot suit.
the so called zoot suit riot was evidence of cracks in wartime unity on the home front.
library of congress.
morality and social conventions against gays and lesbians kept the majority of them silent and their sexuality hidden.
during the war however cities such as new york san francisco los angeles chicago and even kansas city buffalo and dallas developed vibrant gay neighborhoods sustained in part by a sudden influx of migrants and the relatively open wartime atmosphere.
these communities became centers of the gay rights movement of the 1960s and 1970s chapter 7 consistently upheld corporate charters and grants of eminent domain to private transportation companies.
the opening of good and easy internal communications is one of the highest duties of government declared a new jersey judge.
state mercantilism soon spread beyond transportation.
following jeffersons embargo of 1807 which cut off goods and credit from europe the new england states awarded charters to two hundred iron mining textile manufacturing and banking companies while pennsylvania granted more than eleven hundred.
by 1820 state governments had created a republican political economy a commonwealth system that funneled state aid to private businesses whose projects would improve the general welfare.
toward a democratic republican culture after independence many americans in the northern states embraced a democratic republicanism that celebrated political equality and social mobility.
these citizens primarily members of the emerging middle class redefined the nature of the family and of education by chapter 24 finland 400 miles 400 kilometers the world at war 1937 1945 norway leningrad sweden estonia moscow united kingdom 44 ireland n w s normandy invasion june 6 1944 danzig france battle of the bulge dec 1944 jan.
1945 4 al por tug black sea bulgaria alb.
turkey greece anzio jan 22 1944 syria tunisia allied advances allied air operations mediterranean sea palestine transjordan saudi arabia major battle neutral nations iraq leb.
tunis axis occupied areas monte cassino jan 27 may 18 1944 axis powers allied powers and possessions kiev june 4 1944 algeria stalingrad 1 9 44 morocco east prussia yu 1944 go sla via rome liberated italy rome algiers soviet union hungary romania austria 1945 switz.
morocco berlin falls may 2 1945 belg.
remagen germany 1945 warsaw mar.
1945 poland 1945 prague cze ch.
paris vienna lux.
atlantic ocean lithuania denmark neth.
london e latvia north sea libya egypt map 24 3 world war ii in europe 1944 1945 by the end of 1943 the russian army had nearly pushed the germans out of the soviet union and by june 1944 when the british and americans finally invaded france the russians had liberated eastern poland and most of southeastern europe.
by the end of 1944 british and american forces were ready to invade germany from the west and the russians were poised to do the same from the east.
germany surrendered on may 7 1945 than 1 5 million soldiers and thousands of tons of military supplies and equipment flowed into france.
much to the allies advantage they never faced more than one third of hitlers wehrmacht armed forces because the soviet union continued to hold down the germans on the eastern front.
in august allied troops liberated paris by september they had driven the germans out of most of france and belgium.
meanwhile long range allied bombers attacked german cities such as hamburg and dresden as well as military and industrial targets.
the air campaign killed some 305 000 civilians and soldiers and injured another 780 000 a grisly reminder of the wars human brutality.
the germans were not yet ready to give up however.
in december 1944 they mounted a final offensive in belgium the so called battle of the bulge before being pushed back across the rhine river into germany.
american and british troops drove toward berlin from the west while soviet troops advanced east through poland.
on april 30 1945 as russian troops massed outside berlin hitler committed suicide on may 7 germany formally surrendered.
the holocaust when allied troops advanced into poland and germany in the spring of 1945 they came face to face with hitlers final solution for the jewish population of germany and the german occupied part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 countries the extermination camps in which 6 million jews had been put to death along with another 6 million poles slavs gypsies homosexuals and other undesirables photographs of the nazi death camps at buchenwald dachau and auschwitz showed bodies stacked like cordwood and survivors so emaciated that they were barely alive.
published in life and other masscirculation magazines the photographs of the holocaust horrified the american public and the world.
the nazi persecution of german jews in the 1930s was widely known in the united states.
but when jews had begun to flee europe the united states refused to relax its strict immigration laws to take them in.
in 1939 when the ss st louis a german ocean liner carrying nearly a thousand jewish refugees sought permission from president roosevelt to dock at an american port fdr had refused.
its passengers futures uncertain the st louis was forced to return to europe where many would later be deported to auschwitz and other extermination camps.
american officials along with those of most other nations continued this exclusionist policy during world war ii as the nazi regime extended its control over millions of eastern european jews.
various factors inhibited american action but the most important was widespread anti semitism in the state department christian churches and the public at large.
the legacy of the immigration restriction legislation of the 1920s and the isolationist attitudes of the 1930s also discouraged policymakers from assuming responsibility for the fate of the refugees.
taking a narrow view of the national interest the state department allowed only 21 000 jewish refugees to enter the united states during the war.
but the war refugee board which president roosevelt established in 1944 at the behest of secretary of the treasury henry morgenthau helped move 200 000 european jews to safe havens in other countries.
the war in the pacific winning the war against japan was every bit as arduous as waging the campaign against germany.
after crippling the american battle fleet at pearl harbor the japanese quickly expanded into the south pacific with seaborne invasions of hong kong wake island and guam.
japanese forces then advanced into southeast asia conquering the solomon islands burma and malaya and threatening australia and india.
by may 1942 they had forced the surrender of u s forces in the philippine islands and in the bataan death march caused the deaths of 10 000 american prisoners of war.
at that dire moment american naval forces scored two crucial victories.
these were possible because the attack on pearl harbor had destroyed several american battleships but left all aircraft carriers unscathed.
in the battle of the coral sea off southern new guinea in may 1942 they halted the japanese offensive against australia.
then in june at the battle of midway island the american navy severely damaged the japanese fleet.
in both battles planes launched from american aircraft carriers provided the margin of victory.
the u s military command led by general douglas macarthur and admiral chester w nimitz now took the offensive in the pacific map 24 4.
for the next eighteen months american forces advanced slowly toward japan taking one island after another in the face of determined japanese resistance.
in october 1944 macarthur and nimitz began the reconquest of the philippines by winning the battle of leyte gulf a massive naval encounter in which the japanese lost practically their entire fleet map 24 5.
by early 1945 victory over japan was in sight.
japanese military forces had suffered devastating losses and american bombing of the japanese homeland had killed 330 000 civilians and crippled the nations economy.
the bloodletting on both sides was horrendous.
on the small islands of iwo jima and okinawa tens of thousands of japanese soldiers fought to the death killing 13 000 u s marines and wounding 46 000 more.
desperate to halt the american advance and short on ammunition japanese pilots flew suicidal kamikaze missions crashing their bomb laden planes into american ships.
among the grim realities of war in the pacific was the conflicts racial overtones.
the attack on pearl harbor reawakened the long tradition of anti asian sentiment in the united states.
in the eyes of many americans the japanese were yellow monkeys an inferior race whose humanity deserved minimal respect.
racism was evident among the japanese as well.
their brutal attacks on china including the rape of nanjing their forcing of korean comfort women to have sex with japanese soldiers and their treatment of american prisoners in the philippines flowed from their own sense of racial superiority.
anti japanese attitudes in the united states would subside in the 1950s as the island nation became a trusted ally.
but racism would again play a major role in the u s war in vietnam in the 1960s.
as the american navy advanced on japan in the late winter of 1945 president roosevelt returned to the united states from the yalta conference a major meeting of the big three at yalta a resort town on the black chapter 5 circulated among slaves in virginia and the carolinas prompting thousands of african americans to flee behind british lines.
two neighbors of virginia patriot richard henry lee lost every slave they had in the world as did many other planters.
in 1781 when the british army evacuated charleston more than 6 000 former slaves went with them another 4 000 left from savannah.
all told 30 000 blacks may have fled their owners.
hundreds of freed black loyalists settled permanently in canada.
more than 1 000 others poorly treated in british nova scotia sought a better life in sierra leone west aristocratic republicanism and slavery republicanism in the south differed significantly from that in the north.
enslaved africans constituted onethird of the souths population their bondage contradicted the new nations professed ideology of freedom and equality.
how is it that we hear the loudest yelps for liberty among the drivers of negroes british author samuel johnson had chided the american rebels in 1775 a point that some patriots took to heart.
i wish most sincerely there was not a slave in the province abigail adams confessed to her husband john.
it always appeared a most iniquitous scheme to me to fight ourselves for what we are daily robbing and plundering from those who have as good a right to freedom as we have the revolution and slavery 1776 1800 in fact the whites struggle for independence had raised the prospect of freedom for blacks.
as the revolutionary war began a black preacher in georgia told his fellow slaves that king george iii came up with the book the bible and was about to alter the world and set the negroes free similar rumors probably republican families.
and servants around 1828 an unidentified artist painted this york pennsylvania family with an african american servant.
the artist gives equal emphasis to the wife and the husband suggesting they enjoyed a companionate style marriage.
reflecting the outlook of republican motherhood the mother takes the leading role in educating the children.
the family probably of upper middle class status given their attire and furnishings employs an african american woman as a domestic servant and nanny common occupations among free black women of the time.
the saint louis art museum missouri usa the bridgeman art library.
chapter 24 timeline chapter 25 presence of soviet troops in those nations fdr had to accept a pledge from stalin to hold free and unfettered elections at a future time.
the three leaders also formalized their commitment to divide germany into four administrative zones each controlled by one of the four allied powers and to similarly partition the capital city berlin which was located in the middle of the soviet zone.
at yalta the big three also agreed to establish an international body to replace the discredited league of nations.
based on plans drawn up at the 1944 dumbarton oaks conference in washington d c the new organization to be known as the united nations would have both a general assembly in which all nations would be represented and a security council composed of the five major allied powers the united states britain france china and the soviet union and seven other nations elected on a rotating basis.
the big three determined that the five permanent members of the security council should have veto power over decisions of the general assembly.
they announced that the united nations would convene for the first time in san francisco on april 25 1945 potsdam following the yalta conference developments over the ensuing year further hardened relations between the soviets on one side and the americans and british on the other.
at the potsdam conference outside berlin in july 1945 harry truman replaced the deceased roosevelt.
inexperienced in world affairs and thrown into enormously complicated negotiations trumans instinct was to stand up to stalin.
unless russia is faced with an iron fist and strong language he said another war is in the making but truman was in no position to realign events in eastern europe where soviet imposed governments in poland hungary and romania were backed by the red army and could not be eliminated by trumans bluster.
in poland and romania in particular stalin was determined to establish communist governments punish wartime nazi collaborators and win boundary concessions that augmented soviet territory the soviet leader sought eastern polish lands for the soviet union and sought to make far northeastern germany part of poland.
yalta and potsdam thus set the stage for communist rule to descend over eastern europe.
the elections called for at yalta eventually took place in finland hungary bulgaria and czechoslovakia with varying degrees of democratic openness.
nevertheless stalin got the client regimes he desired in those countries and would soon exert near complete control over their governments.
stalins unwillingness to honor cold war america 1945 1963 self determination for nations in eastern europe was from the american point of view the precipitating event of the cold war.
germany represented the biggest challenge of all.
american officials at potsdam believed that a revived german economy was essential to ensuring the prosperity of democratic regimes throughout western europe and to keeping ordinary germans from turning again to nazism.
in contrast stalin hoped merely to extract reparations from germany in the form of industrial machines and goods.
in exchange for recognizing the new german polish border truman and secretary of state james byrnes convinced the soviet leader to accept german reparations only from the soviet zone which lay in the far eastern and largely rural portion of germany and promised little wealth or german industry to plunder.
as they had done for europe as a whole the yalta and potsdam agreements paved the way for the division of germany into east and west map 25 1.
yalta and potsdam had demonstrated that in private negotiations the united states and the soviet union had starkly different objectives.
subsequent public utterances only intensified those differences.
in february 1946 stalin delivered a speech in which he insisted understand that according to marxist points of view leninist principles the uneven how did american and ness of development of the soviet viewpoints differ capitalist countries was likely over the postwar fate of to produce violent disturbance europe.
and even another war.
he seemed to blame any future war on the capitalist west.
churchill responded in kind a month later.
while visiting truman in missouri to be honored for his wartime leadership churchill accused stalin of raising an iron curtain around eastern europe and allowing police government to rule its people.
he went further claiming that a fraternal association of english speaking peoples and not russians ought to set the terms of the postwar world.
the cities and fields of europe had barely ceased to run with the blood of world war ii before they were menaced again by the tense standoff between the soviet union and the united states.
with stalin intent on establishing client states in eastern europe and the united states equally intent on reviving germany and ensuring collective security throughout europe the points of agreement were few and far between.
among the allies anxiety about a nazi victory in world war ii had been quickly replaced by fear of a potentially more cataclysmic war with the soviet union.
part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 n w iceland e nato members warsaw pact members neutral nations 500 kilometers swe den 500 miles leningrad lux.
france ger.
bonn west ger.
yu l ga rtu east berlin in 1947 america britain and france merged their zones of occupation as west berlin.
austria hungary rome spain west berlin poland czech.
italy american zone british zone french zone soviet zone 9 1 8 19 6 ll paris warsaw berlin wa belg.
al east neth.
berlin divided b berl i n atlantic ocean tic north united sea denmark ireland kingdom london soviet union sea norwegian sea no rw ay d finlan s po romania go sl av ia black sea bulgaria constantinople alb.
iran turkey greece syria morocco algeria tunisia mediterranean sea cyprus u k iraq leb.
map 25 1 cold war in europe 1955 this map vividly shows the cold war division of europe.
the nato countries colored green are allies of the united states the warsaw pact countries in purple are allied to the ussr.
at that point west germany had just been admitted to nato completing europes stabilization into two rival camps.
but berlin remained divided and one can see from its location deep in east germany why the former capital was always a flash point in cold war controversies.
the containment strategy in the late 1940s american officials developed a clear strategy toward the soviet union that would become known as containment.
convinced that the ussr was methodically expanding its reach the united states would counter by limiting stalins influence to eastern europe while reconstituting democratic governments in western europe.
in 1946 1947 three specific issues worried truman and his advisors.
first the soviet union was pressing iran for access to oil and turkey for access to the mediterranean.
second a civil war was roiling in greece between monarchists backed by england and insurgents supported by the greek and yugoslavian communist parties.
third as european nations suffered through terrible privation in 1946 and 1947 communist parties gained strength particularly in france and italy.
all three developments as seen from the united states threatened to expand the influence of the soviet union outside of eastern europe.
toward an uneasy peace in this anxious context the strategy of containment emerged in a series of incremental steps between 1946 and 1949 in february 1946 american diplomat george f kennan first proposed the idea in an 8 000 word cable a confidential message to the u s state department from his post at the u s embassy in moscow.
kennan argued that the chapter 8 timeline chapter 25 cold war america 1945 1963 broadcast on the new medium of television brought mccarthys tactics into the nations living rooms support for him plummeted.
in december 1954 the senate voted 67 to 22 to censure mccarthy for unbecoming conduct.
he died from an alcohol related illness three years later at the age of forty eight his name forever attached to a period of political repression of which he was only the most flagrant manifestation.
the politics of cold war liberalism as election day 1952 approached the nation was embroiled in the tense cold war with the soviet union and fighting a hot war in korea.
though americans gave the republicans victory radical change was not in the offing.
the new president dwight d eisenhower set the tone for what his supporters called modern republicanism an updated gop approach that aimed at moderating not dismantling the new deal state.
eisenhower and his supporters were more successors of fdr than of herbert hoover.
foreign policy revealed a similar continuity.
like their predecessors republicans saw the world in cold war polarities.
republicans rallied around eisenhower the popular former commander of allied forces in europe but divisions in the party persisted.
more conservative party activists preferred robert a taft of ohio the republican leader in the senate who was a vehement opponent of the new deal.
a close friend of business he particularly detested labor unions.
though an ardent anticommunist the isolationist minded taft criticized trumans aggressive containment policy and opposed u s participation in nato.
taft ran for president three times and though he was never the republican nominee he won the loyalty of conservative americans who saw the welfare state as a waste and international affairs as dangerous foreign entanglements.
in contrast moderate republicans looked to eisenhower and even to more liberal minded leaders like nelson rockefeller who supported international initiatives such as the marshall plan and nato and were willing to tolerate labor unions and the welfare state.
eisenhower was a man without a political past.
believing that democracy required the military to stand aside he had never voted.
rockefeller the scion of one of the richest families in america was a cold war internationalist.
he served in a variety of capacities under eisenhower including as an advisor on foreign affairs.
having made his political name rockefeller was elected the governor of new york in 1959 and became the de facto leader of the liberal wing of the republican party.
dwight eisenhower in this photo taken during the 1952 presidential campaign dwight d eisenhower acknowledges cheers from supporters in chicago.
ike as he was universally known had been a popular five star general in world war ii also serving as supreme allied commander in the european theater and turned to politics in the early 1950s as a member of the republican party.
however eisenhower was a centrist who did little to disrupt the liberal social policies that democrats had pursued since the 1930s.
bettmann corbis.
for eight years between 1952 understand and 1960 eisenhower steered points of view a precarious course from the what were the components middle of the party with conser of cold war liberalism vative taft republicans on one and why did the demoside and liberal rockefeller cratic party embrace them.
republicans on the other.
his popularity temporarily kept the two sides at bay though more ardent conservatives considered him a closet new dealer.
ike as he was widely known proved willing to work with the mostly democraticcontrolled congresses of those years.
eisenhower signed bills increasing federal outlays for veterans benefits housing highway construction chapter 11 beginning in the 1810s the rapid expansion of white male suffrage and political parties created a competitive and responsive democratic polity.
pressure came from ordinary citizens who organized political movements such as the anti masonic working mens and liberty parties to advance their interests and beliefs.
farmers workers and entrepreneurs persuaded state legislatures to improve transportation shorten workdays and award valuable charters to banks and business corporations.
catholic immigrants from ireland and germany entered the political arena to protect their cultural habits and religious institutions from restrictive legislation advocated by protestant nativists and reformers.
then during the 1830s andrew jackson and the democratic party led a political and constitutional revolution that cut federal and state government aid to financiers merchants and corporations.
to contend with the democrats the whig party devised a competing program that stressed state sponsored economic development moral reform and individual social mobility.
this party competition engaged the energies of the electorate helped to unify a fragmented social order and during the 1830s and 1840s lessened sectional tensions.
chapter 9 transforming the economy 1800 1860 view of the erie canal this pastoral view of the erie canal near lockport new york painted by artist john william hill hints at this waterways profound impact on american life.
without the canal the town in the background would not exist and farmers such as the man in the foreground would not have a regional market for their cattle and grain.
the success of the erie canal had led to the construction of a vast system of canals by 1860 this infrastructure was as important to the nation as the railroad network of the late nineteenth century and the interstate highway and airport transportation systems of the late twentieth century.
bettmann corbis.
moved along the canal at a steady 30 miles a day cutting transportation costs and accelerating the flow of goods.
in 1818 the mills in rochester new york processed 26 000 barrels of flour for export east and north to montreal for sale as canadian produce to the west indies ten years later their output soared to 200 000 barrels and by 1840 it was at 500 000 barrels.
the spectacular benefits of the erie canal prompted a national canal boom.
civic and business leaders in philadelphia and baltimore proposed waterways to link their cities to the midwest.
copying new yorks fiscal innovations they persuaded their state legislatures to invest directly in canal companies or to force state chartered banks to do so.
they also won state guarantees that encouraged british and dutch investors as one observer noted in 1844 the prosperity of america her railroads canals steam navigation and banks are the fruit of english capital soon artificial waterways connected philadelphia and baltimore via the pennsylvania canal and the chesapeake and ohio canal to the great lakes region.
equally important was the vast network of navigable rivers that drained into the mississippi.
every year 25 000 farmer built flatboats used these waterways to carry produce to new orleans.
in 1848 the completion of the michigan and illinois canal which linked chicago to the mississippi river completed an inland all water route from new york city to new orleans the two most important port cities in north america map 9 3.
the steamboat another product of the industrial age added crucial flexibility to the mississippi basins river based transportation system.
in 1807 engineerinventor robert fulton built the first american steamboat the clermont which he piloted up the hudson river.
to navigate shallow western rivers engineers broadened steamboats hulls to reduce their draft and enlarge their cargo capacity.
these improved vessels halved the cost of upstream river transport along the mississippi river and its tributaries and dramatically increased the flow of goods people and news.
in 1830 a traveler or a letter from new york could reach buffalo or pittsburgh by water in less than a week and detroit chicago or st louis in two weeks.
in 1800 the same journeys had taken twice as long.
the state and national governments played key roles in developing this interregional network of trade and travel.
state legislatures subsidized canals while the national government created a vast postal system the first network for the exchange of information.
thanks to the post office act of 1792 there were more than eight thousand post offices by 1830 and they safely delivered thousands of letters and banknotes worth millions of dollars.
the u s supreme court headed by john marshall likewise encouraged interstate trade by firmly establishing federal authority over part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 map 9 3 e superior lak l lake michiga n n y n r dso hu tario l on buffalo mich albany n h boston mass.
r i conn r ie l e chicago iowa vt uron eh ak wis the transportation revolution roads and canals 1820 1850 maine canada minn terr.
ss oh io r i ll in ois r pa cleveland new york n j ind.
ohio pittsburgh philadelphia wheeling cumberland d baltimore columbus ill indianapolis roa l md.
m na n del.
o i potomac r i cincinnati t vandalia na ou r i r va louisville james r w st louis wabash r richmond mo.
c ky arka nsa memphis tenn e s s e e r sa va n s c.
ala a r ga am re d r.
natchez mobile ab al montgomery la.
atl a n t i c o cean n c.
hr na miss.
canals roads navigable river jacksonville fla by 1850 the united states had an efficient system of water borne transportation with three distinct parts.
short canals and navigable rivers carried cotton tobacco and other products from the countryside of the southern seaboard states into the atlantic commercial system.
a second system centered on the erie chesapeake and ohio and pennsylvania mainline canals linked northeastern seaports to the vast trans appalachian region.
finally a set of regional canals in the midwest connected most of the great lakes region to the ohio and mississippi rivers and the port of new orleans.
charleston savannah new orleans gulf of mexico e s land r ber um nashville tenn.
mississippi r interstate commerce chapter.
john lewis gaddis the cold war a new history 2005 and walter lafeber america russia and the cold war 1945 2006 10th ed.
excellent overviews of the cold war from distinct perspectives.
john earl haynes and harvey klehr venona decoding soviet espionage in america 1999.
a thoughtful analysis of soviet espionage.
w j rorabaugh kennedy and the promise of the sixties 2002.
a good starting point for kennedys presidency.
ellen schrecker many are the crimes mccarthyism in america 1998.
an excellent detailed account of the mccarthy period.
the center for the study of the pacific northwests site the cold war and red scare in washington state at washington edu uwired outreach cspn website classroom materials curriculum packets cold war red scare cold war and red scare html provides detailed information on how the red scare operated in one state.
the woodrow wilson international center has established the cold war international history project at wilsoncenter org cwihp.
part 8 chapters replete with womens auxiliaries sprang up from maine to part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 cincinnati and beyond.
the general union demanded that congress repeal an 1810 law allowing mail to be transported though not delivered on sundays.
members boycotted shipping companies that did business on the sabbath and campaigned for municipal laws forbidding games and festivals on the lords day.
the benevolent empires efforts to impose its sabbatarian values provoked opposition from workers and freethinkers.
men who labored twelve to fourteen hours a day six days a week wanted the freedom to spend their one day of leisure as they wished.
to keep goods movidentify causes ing shipping company managers who opposed the work demanded that the erie canal of the benevolent empire and why.
provide lockkeepers on sundays using laws to enforce a particular set of moral beliefs was contrary to the free spirit of our institutions they said.
when evangelical reformers proposed teaching christianity to slaves they aroused hostility among white southerners.
this popular resistance by workers and planters limited the success of the benevolent empire.
charles grandison finney revivalism and reform presbyterian minister charles grandison finney found a new way to propagate religious values.
finney was not part of the traditional religious elite.
born into a poor farming family in connecticut he had planned to become a lawyer and rise into the middle class.
but in 1823 finney underwent an intense religious experience and chose the ministry as his career.
beginning in towns along the erie canal the young minister conducted emotional revival meetings that stressed conversion rather than doctrine.
repudiating calvinist beliefs he preached that god would welcome any sinner who submitted to the holy spirit.
finneys ministry drew on and greatly accelerated the second great awakening the wave of protestant revivalism that had begun after the revolution chapter 9 lydia and other middle class women carried the christian message to the wives of the unconverted set up sunday schools for poor children and formed the female charitable society to assist the unemployed.
finneys efforts to create a spiritual christian community were not completely successful.
skilled workers in strong craft organizations boot makers carpenters stonemasons and boatbuilders protested that they needed higher wages and better schools more urgently than sermons and prayers.
poor people ignored finneys revival as did irish catholic immigrants many of whom hated protestants as religious heretics and political oppressors.
nonetheless revivalists from new england to the midwest copied finneys evangelical message and techniques.
in new york city wealthy silk merchants arthur and lewis tappan founded a magazine the christian evangelist that promoted finneys ideas.
the revivals swept through pennsylvania north carolina tennessee and indiana where a convert reported you could not go upon the street and hear any conversation transforming the economy 1800 1860 except upon religion the success of the revivals has been so general and thorough concluded a presbyterian general assembly that the whole customs of society have changed explain consequences what was finneys central message and how did it influence the work of reform movements.
temperance the temperance movement was the most successful social reform.
beer and rum had long been standard fare in american rituals patriotic ceremonies work breaks barn raisings and games.
long before the arrival of spirit drinking irish and beerdrinking german immigrants grogshops dotted almost every block in working class districts and were centers of disorder.
during the 1820s and 1830s alcohol consumption reached new heights even among the elite alcoholism killed daniel tompkins vice president under james monroe and undermined henry clays bid for the presidency.
heavy drinking was especially devastating for wage earners who could ill afford its costs.
although methodist artisans and ambitious the drunkards progress from the first glass to the grave this 1846 lithograph published by n currier suggests the inevitable fate of those who drink.
the drunkards descent into poverty and disease ends with death by suicide leaving a grieving and destitute wife and child.
temperance reformers urged americans to take the cold water cure by drinking water instead of alcoholic beverages.
to promote abstinence among the young in 1836 revivalist preacher reverend thomas poage hunt founded the cold water army an organization that grew to embrace several hundred thousand children all of whom pledged perpetual hate to all that can intoxicate library of congress.
american voices a debate over catholic immigration between 1776 and 1830 few immigrants came to the united states.
then increasing population and poverty in europe prompted the migration of hundreds of thousands of germans both catholics and protestants and irish catholics.
the sudden arrival of foreign catholics amidst the intense protestantism of the second great awakening led to religious riots the formation of the nativist american party and sharp debates in the public press.
contemporary pamphlets and books offer historians access to the public rhetoric and the private passions of the time.
lyman beecher catholicism is incompatible with republicanism lyman beecher 1775 1863 was a leading protestant minister and the father of a remarkable family the influential minister henry ward beecher and authors harriet beecher stowe uncle toms cabin and catharine beecher a treatise on domestic economy.
in a plea for the west 1835 lyman beecher warned protestants of the powerful priestly hierarchy of the roman catholic church and its opposition to republicanism.
papal encyclicals issued by pope gregory xvi mirari vos 1832 and pope pius ix quanta cura 1864 condemned republicanism freedom of conscience and the separation of church and state as false political ideologies.
since the irruption of the northern barbarians the world has never witnessed such a rush of dark minded population from one country to another as is now leaving europe and dashing upon our shores.
they come also not undirected.
they are led or followed quickly by a catholic priesthood who maintain over them in the land of strangers and unknown tongues an absolute ascendancy.
the ministers of no protestant sect could or would dare to attempt to regulate the votes of their people as the catholic priests can do who.
have almost unlimited power over the conscience as it respects the performance of every civil or social duty.
there is another point of dissimilarity.
the opinions of the protestant clergy are congenial with liberty they are chosen by the people who have been educated as freemen and they are dependent on them for patronage and support.
the catholic system is adverse to liberty and the clergy to a great extent are dependent on foreigners the pope and european bishops opposed to the principles of our government.
nor is this all.
how many mechanics merchants lawyers physicians in any political crisis might the priests reach and render timid.
a tenth part of the suffrage of the nation thus condensed and wielded by the catholic powers of europe might decide our elections perplex our policy inflame and divide the nation break the bond of our union and throw down our free institutions.
catholicism is a religion which never prospered but in alliance with despotic governments has always been and still is the inflexible enemy of liberty of conscience and free inquiry and at this moment is the main stay of the battle against republican institutions.
source lyman beecher a plea for the west cincinnati truman smith 1835 72 73 126 59 63 85 86 59 orestes brownson catholicism as a necessity for popular government like lyman beecher orestes brownson was born into the presbyterian church but he quickly grew dissatisfied with its doctrines.
after experimenting with unitarianism communalism socialism and transcendentalism brownson converted to catholicism in 1844 a zealous convert brownson defended catholicism with rigorous provocative arguments in this article catholicity necessary to sustain popular liberty 1845.
without the roman catholic religion it is impossible to preserve a democratic government and secure its free orderly and wholesome action.
the theory of democracy is construct your government and commit it to the people to be taken care of.
as they shall think proper.
it is a beautiful theory and would work admirably if it were not for one little difficulty namely the people are fallible both individually and collectively and governed by their passions and interests which not unfrequently lead them far astray and produce much mischief.
we know of but one solution of the difficulty and that is in religion.
there is no foundation for virtue but in religion and it is only religion that can command the degree of popular virtue and intelligence requisite to insure to popular government the right direction.
but what religion.
it must be a religion which is above the people and controls them or it will not answer the purpose.
it cannot be protestantism because.
the faith and discipline of a protestant sect take any and every direction the public opinion of that sect demands.
all is loose floating is here to day is there tomorrow and next day may be nowhere.
according to the prejudices interests or habits of the people.
here then is the reason why protestantism though it may institute cannot sustain popular liberty.
it is itself subject to popular control and must follow in all things the popular will passion interest ignorance prejudice or caprice.
if protestantism will not answer the purpose what religion will.
the roman catholic or none.
the roman catholic religion assumes as its point of departure that it is instituted not to be taken care of by the people but to take care of the people not to be governed by them but to govern them.
the word is harsh in democratic ears we admit but it is not the office of religion to say soft or pleasing words.
the people need governing and must be governed or nothing but anarchy and destruction await them.
they must have a master.
quote our expression the people must have a master as you doubtless will hold it up in glaring capitals to excite the unthinking and unreasoning multitude and to doubly fortify their prejudices against catholicity.
even as you seek to bring the people into subjection to your banks or moneyed corporations.
the roman catholic religion then is necessary to sustain popular liberty because popular liberty can be sustained only by a religion free from popular control above the people speaking from above and able to command them.
source orestes a brownson essays and reviews chiefly on theology politics and socialism new york d j sadlier 1852 368 370 372 373 376 379 381.
questions for analysis 1 according to beecher what specific dangers does catholicism pose to american republican institutions.
why do protestant churches not pose the same dangers.
2 compare and contrast brownsons and beechers views of the social and political impact of catholicism.
how does brownson defend the values and practices of the catholic church.
3 given brownsons statement that the people must have a master what would be his view of popular democratic government.
would the leaders of the protestant benevolent empire agree with any aspects of brownsons social and political philosophy.
part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 craft workers swore off liquor to protect their work skills health and finances other workers drank heavily on the job and not just during the traditional 11 a m and 4 p m refreshers a baker recalled how one man was stationed at the window to watch while the rest drank the evangelical protestants who took over the american temperance society in 1832 set out to curb the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
the society grew quickly to two thousand chapter 26 begin retiring huge funding problems threaten to engulf social security and medicare.
the intimate decisions of so many couples after world war ii continued to shape american life well into the twenty first century.
improving health and education baby boom children benefitted from a host of important advances in public health and medical practice in the postwar years.
formerly serious illnesses became merely routine after the introduction of such miracle drugs as penicillin introduced in 1943 streptomycin 1945 and cortisone 1946.
when dr jonas salk perfected a polio vaccine in 1954 he became a national hero.
the free distribution of salks vaccine in the nations schools followed in 1961 by dr albert sabins oral polio vaccine demonstrated the potential of government sponsored public health programs.
the baby boom also gave the nations educational system a boost.
postwar middle class parents americas first college educated generation placed a high value on education.
suburban parents approved 90 percent of school bond issues during the 1950s.
by 1970 school expenditures accounted for 7 2 percent of the gross national product double the 1950 level.
in the 1960s the baby boom generation swelled college enrollments.
state university systems grew in tandem the pioneering university of california university of wisconsin and state university of new york systems added dozens of new campuses and offered students in their states a low cost college education.
dr benjamin spock to keep baby boom children healthy and happy middle class parents increasingly relied on the advice of experts.
dr benjamin spocks common sense book of baby and child care sold 1 million copies every year after its publication in 1946 spock urged mothers to abandon the rigid feeding and baby care schedules of an earlier generation.
new mothers found spocks commonsense approach liberating.
your little paperback is still in my cupboard with loose pages rather worn from use because i brought up two babies using it as my bible a california housewife wrote to spock.
despite his commonsense approach to child rearing spock was part of a generation of psychological experts whose advice often failed to reassure women.
if mothers were too protective spock and others argued they might hamper their childrens preparation for adult life.
on the other hand mothers who wanted to work outside the home felt guilty because spock recommended that they be constantly available for their triumph of the middle class 1945 1963 children.
as american mothers aimed for the perfection demanded of them seemingly at every turn many began to question these mixed messages.
some of them would be inspired by the resurgence of feminism in the 1960s.
place events in context why was there an increase in births in the decades after world war ii and what were some of the effects of this baby boom.
women work and family two powerful forces shaped womens relationships to work and family life in the postwar decades.
one was the middle class domestic ideal in which women were expected to raise children attend to other duties in the home and devote themselves to their husbands happiness.
so powerful was this ideal that in 1957 the ladies home journal entitled an article is college education wasted on women the second force was the job market.
most working class women had to earn a paycheck to help their family.
and despite their education middle class women found that jobs in the professions and business were dominated by men and often closed to them.
for both groups the market offered mostly womens jobs in teaching nursing and other areas of the growing service sector and little room for advancement american voices p 852.
the idea that a womans place was in the home was of course not new.
the postwar obsession with femininity and motherhood bore a remarkable similarity to the nineteenth centurys notion of domesticity.
the updated version drew on new elements of twentiethcentury science and culture.
psychologists equated motherhood with normal female identity and suggested that career minded mothers needed therapy.
a mother who runs out on her children to work except in cases of absolute necessity betrays a deep dissatisfaction with motherhood or with her marriage wrote one leading psychiatrist.
television shows and movies depicted career women as social misfits.
the postwar consumer culture also emphasized womens domestic role as purchasing agents for home and family.
can a woman ever feel right cooking on a dirty range asked one advertisement.
the postwar domestic ideal held that womens principal economic contribution came through consumption women shopped for the family.
in reality their contributions increasingly took them outside their homes and into the workforce.
in 1954 married women made up half of all women workers.
six years later the 1960 census reported a stunning fact the number of mothers who worked had increased four times and over one third of these women had children american voices coming of age in the postwar years at the dawn of the postwar era americans faced new opportunities and new anxieties.
many former soldiers attended college and purchased new homes on the gi bill which forever changed their lives.
women faced new pressures to realize the ideal role of housewife and mother.
on the horizon both in reality and in the american imagination lurked communism which americans feared but little understood.
and racial segregation continued to shape the ordinary lives of americans.
recorded here are several different reactions to these postwar tensions distinct experiences of coming of age in the 1940s and 1950s.
art buchwald studying on the gi bill art buchwald was one of the best known humorists in american journalism.
but in 1946 he was an ordinary exserviceman using the gi bill to go to college.
it was time to face up to whether i was serious about attending school.
my decision was to go down to the university of southern california and find out what i should study at night to get into the place.
there were at least 4 000 ex gis waiting to register.
i stood in line with them.
hours later i arrived at the counter and said i would like to.
the clerk said fill this out having been accepted as a full time student under the g i.
bill i was entitled to seventy five dollars a month plus tuition books and supplies.
meanwhile i found a boardinghouse a few blocks from campus run by a cheery woman who was like a mother to her thirteen boarders.
at the time just after the second world war had ended an undeclared class war was going on at usc.
the g i s returning home had little use for the fraternity men since most of the frat boys were not only much younger but considered very immature.
the g i s were intent on getting their educations and starting new lives.
source from leaving home a memoir by art buchwald new york g p putnams sons 1993.
used by permission of joel buchwald.
betty friedan living the feminine mystique like buchwald betty friedan would one day become famous as a writer author of one of the most widely read books of the 1960s the feminine mystique.
in the late 1940s friedan was not yet a feminist but she was deeply engaged in the politics of the era.
and then the boys our age had come back from the war.
i was bumped from my job on a small labor news service by a returning veteran and it wasnt so easy to find another job i really liked.
i filled out the applications for time life researcher which id always scorned before.
all the girls i knew had jobs like that but it was official policy that no matter how good researchers who were women could never become writers or editors.
they could write the whole article but the men they were working with would always get the by line as writer.
i was certainly not a feminist then none of us were a bit interested in womens rights.
but i could never bring myself to take that kind of job.
after the war i had been very political very involved consciously radical.
not about women for heavens sake.
if you were a radical in 1949 you were concerned about the negroes and the working class and world war iii and the un american activities committee and mccarthy and loyalty oaths and communist splits and schisms russia china and the un but you certainly didnt think about being a woman politically.
source from it changed my life writings on the womens movement by betty friedan cambridge ma harvard university press 1976.
copyright 1963 by betty friedan.
reprinted by permission of curtis brown ltd susan allen toth learning about communism toth is a writer who grew up in ames iowa surrounded by cornfields.
she writes here about her experience learning just how anxious people could become in the 1950s when the issue of communism was raised.
of course we all knew there was communism.
as early as sixth grade our teacher warned us about its dangers.
i listened carefully to mr casper describe what communists wanted which sounded terrible.
world domination.
enslavement.
destruction of our way of life.
i hung around school one afternoon hoping to catch mr casper whom i secretly adored to ask him why communism was so bad.
he stayed in another teachers room so late i finally scrawled my question on our blackboard dear mr casper why is communism so bad.
sue allen and went home.
next morning the message was still there.
like a warning from heaven it had galvanized mr casper.
he began class with a stern lecture repeating everything he had said about dangerous russians and painting a vivid picture of how we would all suffer if the russians took over the city government in ames.
we certainly wouldnt be able to attend a school like this he said where free expression of opinion was allowed.
at recess that day one of the boys asked me if i was a dirty commie two of my best friends shied away from me on the playground i saw mr casper talking low to another teacher and pointing at me.
i cried all the way home from school and resolved never to commit myself publicly with a question like that again.
source from susan allen toth boyfriend from blooming a small town girlhood.
reprinted by permission of molly friedrich on behalf of the author.
melba patillo beals encountering segregation melba patillo beals was one of the little rock nine the high school students who desegregated central high school in little rock arkansas in 1957 here she recounts an experience documenting what it was like to come of age as a black southerner under jim crow.
an experience i endured on a december morning would forever affect any decision i made to go potty in a public place.
we were christmas shopping when i felt the twinge of emergency.
i convinced mother and grandmother that i knew the way to restroom by myself.
i was moving as fast as i could when suddenly i knew i wasnt going to make it all the way down those stairs and across the warehouse walkway to the colored ladies toilet.
so i pushed open the door marked white ladies and taking a deep breath i crossed the threshold.
it was just as bright and pretty as i had imagined it to be.
across the room other white ladies sat on a couch reading the newspaper.
suddenly realizing i was there two of them looked at me in astonishment.
unless i was the maid they said i was in the wrong place.
while they shouted at me to get out my throbbing bladder consumed my attention as i frantically headed for the unoccupied stall.
they kept shouting good lord do something i was doing something by that time seated comfortably on the toilet listening to the hysteria building outside my locked stall.
one woman even knelt down to peep beneath the door to make certain that i didnt put my bottom on the toilet seat.
she ordered me not to pee.
source reprinted with permission of atria publishing group a division of simon schuster inc warriors dont cry a searing memoir of the battle to integrate little rock by melba patillo beals.
copyright 1994 1995 by melba beals.
all rights reserved.
david beers california suburbia david beers grew up in the suburbs of california in what would eventually become known as silicon valley.
in his memoir he recalls the ritual of buying a house.
we never looked at a used house my father remembers of those days in the early 1960s when he and my mother went shopping for a home of their own in the valley of hearts delight.
a used house did not interest us instead they roved in search of balloons and bunting and the many billboards advertising low interest.
no money down.
to military veterans like my father.
they would follow the signs to the model homes standing in empty fields and tour the empty floor plans and leave with notes carefully made about square footage and closet space.
we shopped for a new house my father says the way you shopped for a car.
we were blithe conquerors my tribe.
when we chose a new homeland invaded a place settled it and made it over in our image we did so with a smiling sense of our own inevitability.
we were drawn to the promise of a blank page inviting our design upon it.
source david beers blue sky dream a memoir of americas fall from grace new york harcourt brace company 1996 31 39 questions for analysis 1 what do you think buchwald meant by an undeclared class war.
why would the influx of gi bill veterans into colleges create conflict.
2 why do you think friedan didnt think about being a woman politically in the 1940s and 1950s.
why do you think she was bumped from her job by a returning veteran.
3 what does toths experience as a young student suggest about american anxieties during the cold war.
why would her question cause embarrassment and ridicule.
4 what does bealss experience suggest about the indignities faced by young people on the front lines of challenging racial segregation.
does it help explain why youth were so important in breaking racial barriers.
5 what do you think beers means by our tribe.
what was the blank page.
part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 mom at home and at work middle class womens lives grew increasingly complicated in the postwar decades.
they may have dreamed of a suburban home with a brand new kitchen like the one shown in this 1955 photograph left but laboring all day over children dirty dishes and a hot stove proved dissatisfying to many.
betty friedan called the confinement of womens identities to motherhood the feminine mystique but did the working woman have it much better.
most women in the 1950s and 1960s were confined to low level secretarial work right waitressing and other service sector work or worse factory or domestic labor.
by the end of the 1960s women had begun to crack the glass ceiling and enter the professions in larger numbers.
but regardless of their occupation the majority of working women performed the double day a full day at work and a full day at home.
such were the expectations and double bind women faced.
elliott erwitt magnum photos inge morath the inge morath foundation magnum photos.
between the ages of six and seventeen.
in that same year 30 percent of wives worked and by 1970 it was 40 percent.
for working class women in particular the economic needs of their families demanded that they work outside the home.
despite rising employment rates occupational segmentation still haunted women.
until 1964 the classified sections of newspapers separated employment ads into help wanted male and help wanted female more than 80 percent of all employed women did stereotypical womens work as salesclerks health care trace change technicians waitresses stewardover time esses domestic servants recepwhat transformations in tionists telephone operators and womens economic role took place in the 1950s secretaries.
in 1960 only 3 perand 1960s.
cent of lawyers and 6 percent of physicians were women on the flip side 97 percent of nurses and 85 percent of librarians were women.
along with womens jobs went womens pay which averaged 60 percent of mens pay in 1963 contrary to stereotype however womens paid work was not merely supplementary.
it helped lift families into the middle class.
even in the prosperous 1950s many men found that their wages could not pay for what middle class life demanded cars houses vacations and college education for the children.
many families needed more than one wage earner just to get by.
among married women the highest rates of laborforce participation in the 1950s were found in families at the lower end of the middle class.
over the course of the postwar decades from 1945 to 1965 more and more women including married women from all class backgrounds entered the paid workforce.
how could american society steadfastly uphold the domestic ideal when so many wives and mothers were out of the house and at work.
in many ways the contradiction was hidden by the women themselves.
fearing public disapproval women would explain chapter 26 farmland on the outskirts of cities filled up with tract housing and shopping malls.
entire counties that had once been rural such as san mateo south of san francisco or passaic and bergen in new jersey west of manhattan went suburban.
by 1960 one third of americans lived in suburbs.
home construction having ground to a halt during the great depression surged after the war.
one fourth of the countrys entire housing stock in 1960 had not even existed a decade earlier.
william j levitt and the fha two unique postwar developments remade the national housing market and gave it a distinctly suburban shape.
first an innovative long island building contractor william j levitt revolutionized suburban housing by applying mass production techniques and turning out new homes at a dizzying speed.
levitts basic four room house complete with kitchen appliances was priced at 7 990 when homes in the first levittown went on sale in 1947 about 76 000 today.
levitt did not need to advertise word of mouth brought buyers flocking to his developments all called levittown in new york pennsylvania and new jersey.
dozens of other developers were soon snapping up cheap farmland and building subdivisions around the country.
even at 7 990 levitts homes would have been beyond the means of most young families had the traditional home financing standard a down payment of half the full price and ten years to pay off the balance still prevailed.
that is where the second postwar development came in.
the federal housing administration fha and the veterans administration va that is the federal government brought the home mortgage market within the reach of a broader range of americans than ever before.
after the war the fha insured thirty year mortgages with as little as 5 percent down and interest at 2 or 3 percent.
the va was even more generous requiring only a token 1 down for qualified ex gis.
fha and va mortgages best explain why after hovering around 45 percent for the previous half century home ownership jumped to 60 percent by 1960 what purchasers of suburban houses got in addition to a good deal were homogeneous communities.
the developments contained few elderly people or unmarried adults.
even the trees were young.
levitts company enforced regulations about maintaining lawns and not hanging out laundry on the weekends.
then there was the matter of race.
levitts houses came with restrictive covenants prohibiting occupancy by members of other than the caucasian race restrictive covenants often applied to jews and in california triumph of the middle class 1945 1963 asian americans as well.
levittowns were hardly alone.
suburban developments from coast to coast exhibited the same age class and racial homogeneity thinking place events like a historian p 858.
in context in shelley v kraemer 1948 place postwar suburbanthe supreme court outlawed ization in the context restrictive covenants but racial dis of the growing size and crimination in housing changed influence of the federal little.
the practice persisted long government.
how did after shelley because the fha and the national government va continued the policy of redlin encourage suburbanizaing refusing mortgages to african tion.
americans and members of other minority groups seeking to buy in white neighborhoods.
indeed no federal law or even court decisions like shelley actually prohibited racial discrimination in housing until congress passed the fair housing act in 1968 interstate highways without automobiles suburban growth on such a massive scale would have been impossible.
planners laid out subdivisions on the assumption that everybody would drive.
and they did to get to work to take the children to little league to shop.
with gas plentiful and cheap 15 cents a gallon no one cared about the fuel efficiency of their v 8 engines or seemed to mind the elaborate tail fins and chrome that weighed down their cars.
in 1945 americans owned twenty five million cars by 1965 just two decades later the number had tripled to seventy five million america compared p 860.
american oil consumption followed course tripling as well between 1949 and 1972 more cars required more highways and the federal government obliged.
in 1956 in a move that drastically altered americas landscape and driving habits the national interstate and defense highways act authorized 26 billion over a ten year period for the construction of a nationally integrated highway system 42 500 miles map 26 1.
cast as a cold war necessity because broad highways made evacuating crowded cities easier in the event of a nuclear attack the law changed american cities forever.
an enormous public works program surpassing anything undertaken during the new deal and enthusiastically endorsed by the republican president dwight eisenhower federal highways made possible the massive suburbanization of the nation in the 1960s.
interstate highways rerouted traffic away from small towns bypassed well traveled main roads such as the cross country route 66 and cut wide swaths through old neighborhoods in the cities.
thinking like a historian the suburban landscape of cold war america between the end of world war ii and the 1980s americans built and moved into suburban homes in an unprecedented wave of construction and migration that changed the nation forever.
new home loan rules and government backing under the federal housing administration and veterans administration made new suburban houses cheaper and brought home ownership within reach of a larger number of americans than ever before.
commentators cheered these developments as a boon to ordinary citizens but by the 1960s a generation of urban critics led by journalist jane jacobs had begun to find fault with the nations suburban obsession.
the following documents provide the historian with evidence of how these new suburban communities arose and how they began to transform american culture.
peacetime cornucopia the new yorker october 6 1945.
2 life magazine a life round table on housing january 31 1949 the most aggressive member of lifes round table whether as builder or debater was william j levitt president of levitt and sons inc of manhasset ny.
he feels that he has started a revolution the essence of which is size.
builders in his estimation are a poor and puny lot too small to put pressure on materials manufacturers or the local czars of the building codes or the bankers or labor.
a builder ought to be a manufacturer he said and to this end must be big.
he himself is a nonunion operator.
the levitt prescription for cheaper houses may be summarized as follows 1 take infinite pains with infinite details 2 be aggressive 3 be big enough to throw your weight around 4 buy at wholesale and 5 build houses in concentrated developments where mass production methods can be used on the site.
3 site plan sketch for park forest illinois 1946.
constanin alajalov new yorker conde nast publications.
the park forest historical society.
4 william h whyte jr the organization man 1956 whyte a prominent journalist wrote about the decline of individualism and the rise of a national class of interchangeable white collar workers.
and is this not the whole drift of our society.
we are not interchangeable in the sense of being people without differences but in the externals of existence we are united by a culture increasingly national.
and this is part of the momentum of mobility.
the more people move about the more similar american environments become and the more similar they become the easier it is to move about.
more and more the young couples who move do so only physically.
with each transfer the dcor the architecture the faces and the names may change the people the conversation and the values do not and sometimes the dcor and architecture dont either.
suburban residents like to maintain that their suburbia not only looks classless but is classless.
that is they are apt to add on second thought there are no extremes and if the place isnt exactly without class it is at least a one class society identified as the middle or upper middle according to the inclination of the residents.
we are all they say in the same boat 5 jane jacobs the death and life of great american cities 1961 a classic celebration of vibrant urban neighborhoods by a new york writer and architectural critic.
although it is hard to believe while looking at dull gray areas or at housing projects or at civic centers the fact is that big cities are natural generators of diversity and prolific incubators of new enterprises and ideas of all kinds.
this is because city populations are large enough to support wide ranges of variety and choice in these things.
and again we find that bigness has all the advantages in smaller settlements.
towns and suburbs for instance are natural homes for huge supermarkets and for little else in the way of groceries for standard movie houses or drive ins and for little else in the way of theater.
there are simply not enough people to support further variety although there may be people too few of them who would draw upon it were it there.
cities however are the natural homes of supermarkets and standard movie houses plus delicatessens viennese bakeries foreign groceries art movies and so on.
the diversity of whatever kind that is generated by cities rests on the fact that in cities so many people are so close together and among them contain so many different tastes skills needs supplies and bees in their bonnets.
6 herbert j gans the levittowners 1967 one of the first sociological studies of the new postwar suburbs and their residents.
the strengths and weakness of levittown are those of many american communities and the levittowners closely resemble other young middle class americans.
they are not america for they are not a numerical majority of the population but they represent the major constituency of the latest and more powerful economic and political institutions in american society the favored customers and voters whom these seek to attract and satisfy.
although they are citizens of a national polity and their lives are shaped by national economic social and political forces levittowners deceive themselves into thinking that the community or rather the home is the single most important unit of their lives.
in viewing their homes as the center of life levitowners are still using a societal model that fit the rural america of self sufficient farmers and the feudal europe of self isolating extended families.
sources 2 life january 31 1949 74 4 william h whyte jr the organization man new york simon and schuster 1956 276 299 5 jane jacobs the death and life of great american cities westminster md vintage 1992 145 147 6 herbert j gans the levittowners new york columbia university press 1982 417 418.
analyzing the evidence 1 compare sources 1 4 and 6 how do they reinforce or contradict one another.
2 in source 4 what does whyte mean by classless.
why would suburbanites wish to think of their communities as not beset by class inequality.
were they right in this point of view.
3 do you see evidence in source 2 of the ways the postwar housing market was transformed.
how does levitts vision of the home building industry relate to other kinds of american industries.
4 in source 5 what advantages does jacobs see in large cities over suburbs.
can you interpret source 3 from the perspective that jacobs outlines in source 5.
putting it all together write an essay in which you use the knowledge youve gained from this chapter 9 timeline chapter review ask yourself why this chapters main ideas.
1 how did andrew jackson and the democratic party fundamentally change public policy.
illustrate your argument with specific examples.
2 what were the various constitutional arguments underlying the debates over internal improvements the tariff and nullification.
3 how and why did the policies of the federal and state governments toward native americans change between the 1790s chapter of the naacp was shot in the back in his driveway in american voices challenging white supremacy among the many challenges historians face is figuring out the processes by which long oppressed ordinary people finally rise up and demand justice.
during the 1950s a liberating process was quietly under way among southern blacks bursting forth dramatically in the montgomery bus boycott of 1955 and then by the end of the decade emerging across the south.
here are excerpts of the testimony of two individuals who stepped forward and took the lead in those struggles.
franklin mccain desegregating lunch counters franklin mccain was one of the four african american students at north carolina a t college in greensboro north carolina who sat down at the woolworths lunch counter on february 1 1960 setting off a wave of student sit ins that rocked the south and helped initiate a national civil rights movement.
in the following interview mccain describes how he and his friends took that momentous step.
the planning process was on a sunday night i remember it quite well.
i think it was joseph who said its time that we take some action now.
weve been getting together and weve been up to this point still like most people weve talked about for the past few weeks or so that is people who talk a lot but in fact make very little action after selecting the technique then we said lets go down and just ask for service it certainly wasnt titled a sit in or sit down at that time.
lets just go down to woolworths tomorrow and ask for service and the tactic is going to be simply this well just stay there.
once getting there.
we did make purchases of school supplies and took the patience and time to get receipts for our purchases and joseph and myself went over to the counter and asked to be served coffee and doughnuts.
as anticipated the reply was im sorry we dont serve you here and of course we said we just beg to disagree with you.
weve in fact already been served.
the attendant or waitress was a little bit dumbfounded just didnt know what to say under circumstances like that.
at that point there was a policeman who had walked in off the street who was pacing the aisle.
behind us where we were seated with his club in his hand just sort of knocking it in his hand and just looking mean and red and a little bit upset and a little bit disgusted.
and you had the feeling that he didnt know what the hell to do.
usually his defense is offense and weve provoked him yes but we havent provoked outwardly enough for him to resort to violence.
and i think this is just killing him you can see it all over him.
if its possible to know what it means to have your soul cleansed i felt pretty clean at that time.
i probably felt better on that day than ive ever felt in my life.
seems like a lot of feelings of guilt or what have you suddenly left me and i felt as though i had gained my manhood.
not franklin mccain only as an individual but i felt as though the manhood of a number of other black persons had been restored and had gotten some respect from just that one day.
the movement started out as a movement of nonviolence and a christian movement.
it was a movement that was seeking justice more than anything else and not a movement to start a war.
we knew that probably the most powerful and potent weapon that people have literally no defense for is love kindness.
that is whip the enemy with something that he doesnt understand.
the individual who had probably the most influence on us was gandhi.
yes martin luther kings name was well known when the sit in movement was in effect but.
no he was not the individual we had upmost in mind when we started the sit in movement.
source my soul is rested by howell raines copyright 1977 howell raines.
used by permission of g p putnams sons a division of penguin group usa inc and russell volkening as agents for the author.
john mcferren demanding the right to vote in this interview given about ten years after the events he describes john mcferren tells of the battle he undertook in 1959 to gain the vote for the blacks of fayette county tennessee.
by the time of the interview mcferren had risen in life and become a grocery store owner and property holder thanks he says to the economic boycott imposed on him by angry whites.
unlike greensboro the struggle in fayette county never made national headlines.
it was just one of many local struggles that signaled the beginning of a new day in the south.
my name is john mcferren.
im forty six years old.
im a negro was born and raised in west tennessee the county of fayette district 1 my foreparents was brought here from north carolina five years before the civil war.
because the rumor got out among the slaveholders that west tennessee was still goin to be a slaveholdin state.
and my people was brought over here and sold.
and after the civil war my people settled in west tennessee.
thats why fayette and haywood counties have a great number of negroes.
back in 1957 and 58 there was a negro man accused of killin a deputy sheriff.
this was burton dodson.
he was brought back after hed been gone twenty years.
j f estes was the lawyer defendin him.
myself and him both was in the army together.
and the stimulation from the trial got me interested in the way justice was bein used.
the only way to bring justice would be through the ballot box.
in 1959 we got out a charter called the fayette county civic and welfare league.
fourteen of us started out in that charter.
we tried to support a white liberal candidate that was named l t redfearn in the sheriff election and the local democrat party refused to let negroes vote.
we brought a suit against the democrat party and i went to washington for a civil rights hearing.
myself and estes and harpman jameson made the trip.
it took us twenty two hours steady drivin.
i was lookin all up lotsa big tall buildins.
i had never seen old tall buildins like that before.
after talkin to john doar we come on back to the justice department building and we sat out in the hall while he had a meetin inside the attorney generals office.
and when they come out they told us they was gonna indict the landowners who kept us from voting.
just after that in 1960 in january we organized a thousand negroes to line up at the courthouse to register to vote.
we started pourin in with big numbers in this county it was 72 percent negroes when we started to register to vote to change the situation.
in the followin.
october and november they started puttin our people offa the land.
once you registered you had to move.
once you registered they took your job.
then after they done that in november we had three hundred people forced to live in tents on shepard towless land.
and when we started puttin em in tents then thats when the white citizens council and the ku klux klan started shootin in the tents to run us out.
tent city was parta an economic squeeze.
the local merchants run me outa the stores and said i went to washington and caused this mess to start.
they had a blacklist.
and they had the list sent around to all merchants.
once you registered you couldnt buy for credit or cash.
but the best thing in the world was when they run me outa them stores.
it started me thinkin for myself.
the southern white has a slogan keep em niggers happy and keep em singin in the schools and the biggest mistake of the past is that the negro has not been teached economics and the value of a dollar.
back at one time we had a teacher.
from mississippi and he pulled up and left the county because he was teachin the negroes to buy land and own land and work it for hisself and the county board of education didnt want that taught in the county.
and they told him keep em niggers singin and keep em happy and dont teach em nothin.
you cannot be free when youre beggin the man for bread.
but when youve got the dollar in your pocket and then got the vote in your pocket thats the only way to be free.
and i have been successful and made good progress because i could see the only way i could survive is to stay independent.
the negro is no longer goin back.
hes goin forward.
source from looking for america second edition 2 volumes edited by stanley i kutler new york norton 1979.
reprinted with permission of stanley kutler.
questions for analysis 1 mccain took a stand on segregated lunch counters.
mcferren took a stand on the right to vote.
how did these targets represent two different goals of the civil rights movement.
2 mccain speaks of the sense of manhood he felt as he sat at that woolworths counter.
what does his personal feeling suggest about the civil rights movement as a whole.
3 almost certainly mccain and mcferren never met.
suppose they had.
what would they have had in common.
would what they had in common have been more important than what separated them.
4 mccain speaks knowingly of the figures and ideas that influenced him.
why do you suppose mcferren is silent about such matters.
part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 the battle of birmingham one of the hardest fought desegregation struggles of the early 1960s took place in april and may 1963 in birmingham alabama.
in response to the daily rallies and peaceful protests authorities cracked down arresting hundreds.
they also employed tactics such as those shown here turning fire hoses on young nonviolent student demonstrators and using police dogs to intimidate peaceful marchers.
these protests led by martin luther king jr and broadcast on television news prompted president kennedy to introduce a civil rights bill in congress in june 1963.
bob adelman corbis.
jackson by a white supremacist.
everss martyrdom became a spur to further action map 27 3.
the march on washington and the civil rights act to marshal support for kennedys bill civil rights leaders adopted a tactic that a philip randolph had first advanced in 1941 a massive demonstration in washington.
under the leadership of randolph and bayard rustin thousands of volunteers across the country coordinated car pools freedom buses and freedom trains and on august 28 1963 delivered a quarter of a million people to the lincoln memorial for the officially named march on washington for jobs and freedom thinking like a historian p 888.
although other people did the planning martin luther king jr was the public face of the march.
it was kings dramatic i have a dream speech beginning with his admonition that too many black people lived on a lonely island of poverty and ending with the exclamation from a traditional black spiritual free at last.
free at last.
thank god almighty we are free at last that captured the nations imagination.
the sight of 250 000 blacks and whites marching solemnly together marked the high point of the civil rights movement and confirmed kings position as the leading spokesperson for the cause.
to have any chance of getting the civil rights bill through congress king randolph and rustin knew they had to sustain this broad coalition of blacks and whites.
they could afford to alienate no one.
reflecting a younger more militant set of activists however sncc member john lewis had prepared a more provocative speech for that afternoon.
lewis wrote the time will come when we will not confine our marching to washington.
we will march through the south through the heart of dixie the way sherman did signaling a growing restlessness among black youth lewis warned we shall fragment the south into a thousand pieces and put them back together again in the image of democracy fearing the speech would chapter 27 pennsylvania iowa nebraska 8 1963 thousands from every state join protest march on washington.
martin luther king jr delivers i have a dream speech.
1 1954 in brown v board of education the united states supreme court rules public school segregation unconstitutional.
illinois indiana missouri kansas texas west virginia tenn w virginia south carolina 4 1960 sit in movement begins in greensboro north carolina and quickly spreads to nashville atlanta and other places.
ala georgia miss.
7 1962 meeting stiff local resistance sclc and martin luther king s attempt at desegregation fails.
2 1955 56 rosa parks refuses to move to back of the bus launching montgomery bus boycott.
atlantic ocean 10 1965 protest march from selma to montgomery following bloody sunday 9 1964 student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc and other groups organize the freedom summer voter registration drive.
n florida gulf of mexico e s mexico 300 miles 300 kilometers map 27 3 the civil rights struggle 1954 1965 in the postwar battle for black civil rights the first major victory was the naacp litigation of brown v board of education which declared public school segregation unconstitutional.
as indicated on this map the struggle then quickly spread raising other issues and seeding new organizations.
other organizations quickly joined the battle and shifted the focus away from the courts to mass action and organization.
the year 1965 marked the high point when violence against the selma alabama marchers spurred the passage of the voting rights act.
alienate white supporters rustin and others implored lewis to tone down his rhetoric.
with only minutes to spare before he stepped up to the podium lewis agreed.
he delivered a more conciliatory speech but his conflict with march organizers signaled an emerging rift in the movement.
although the march on washington galvanized public opinion it changed few congressional votes.
southern senators continued to block kennedys del.
north carolina arkansas la.
n j ohio oklahoma 6 1962 james meredith integrates the university of mississippi under the protection of federal troops.
kentucky 5 1961 sponsored by the congress of racial equality core the freedom ride meets with violence in alabama.
3 1957 president eisenhower sends federal troops to enforce integration of central high school.
walking into freedom land the civil rights movement 1941 1973 legislation.
georgia senator richard russell a leader of the opposition refused to support any bill that would bring about social equality and intermingling and amalgamation of the races then suddenly tragedies piled up one on another.
in september white supremacists bombed a baptist church in birmingham killing four black girls in sunday school.
less than two months later kennedy himself lay dead the victim of assassination.
thinking like a historian civil rights and black power strategy and ideology the documents collected below reveal the range of perspectives and ideas at work within the broad civil rights or black freedom struggle in the 1960s.
1 martin luther king jr if the negro wins labor wins speech 1962 king speaking to a meeting of the nations trade union leaders explained the economic objectives of the black freedom struggle.
if we do not advance the crushing burden of centuries of neglect and economic deprivation will destroy our will our spirits and our hopes.
in this way labors historic tradition of moving forward to create vital people as consumers and citizens has become our own tradition and for the same reasons.
this unity of purpose is not an historical coincidence.
negroes are almost entirely a working people.
there are pitifully few negro millionaires and few negro employers.
our needs are identical with labors needs decent wages fair working conditions livable housing old age security health and welfare measures conditions in which families can grow have education for their children and respect in the community.
that is why negroes support labors demands and fight laws which curb labor.
the two most dynamic and cohesive liberal forces in the country are the labor movement and the negro freedom movement.
together we can be architects of democracy in a south now rapidly industrializing.
2 police in birmingham alabama use trained german shepherds against peaceful african american protesters 1963 bill hudson ap images.
3 bayard rustin from protest to politics commentary february 1965.
it would be hard to quarrel with the assertion that the elaborate legal structure of segregation and discrimination particularly in relation to public accommodations has virtually collapsed.
on the other hand without making light of the human sacrifices involved in the direct action tactics sit ins freedom rides and the rest that were so instrumental to this achievement we must recognize that in desegregating public accommodations we affected institutions which are relatively peripheral both to the american socio economic order and to the fundamental conditions of life of the negro people.
in a highly industrialized 20th century civilization we hit jim crow precisely where it was most anachronistic dispensable and vulnerable in hotels lunch counters terminals libraries swimming pools and the like.
at issue after all is not civil rights strictly speaking but social and economic conditions.
4 james farmer freedom when 1965.
but when will the demonstrations end the perpetual question.
and a serious question.
actually it is several questions for the meaning of the question differs depending upon who asks it.
coming from those whose dominant consideration is peace public peace and peace of mind the question means when are you going to stop tempting violence and rioting some put it more strongly when are you going to stop sponsoring violence assumed is the necessary connection between demonstration and violence.
isnt the patience of the white majority wearing thin.
why nourish the displeasure of 90 percent of the population with provocative demonstrations.
remember you need allies and the assumptions of these cassandras of the backlash is that freedom and equality are in the last analysis wholly gifts in the white mans power to bestow.
what the public must realize is that in a demonstration more things are happening at more levels of human activity than meets the eye.
demonstrations in the last few years have provided literally millions of negroes with their first taste of self determination and political selfexpression.
5 stokely carmichael and charles hamilton black power the politics of liberation in america 1967 black people must redefine themselves and only they can do that.
throughout this country vast segments of the black communities are beginning to recognize the need to assert their own definitions to reclaim their history their culture to create their own sense of community and togetherness.
there is a growing resentment of the word negro for example because this term is the invention of our oppressor it is his image of us that he describes.
the concept of black power rests on a fundamental premise before a group can enter the open society it must first close ranks.
by this we mean that group solidarity is necessary before a group can operate effectively from a bargaining position of strength in a pluralistic society.
6 black power salute at the 1968 olympics in mexico city.
tommie smith and john carolos right won gold and bronze medals in the 200 meters.
the silver medalist australian peter norman left is wearing an olympic project for human rights badge to show his support.
sources 1 if the negro wins labor wins by martin luther king delivered february 12 1962 reprinted by arrangement with the heirs to the estate of martin luther king jr c o writers house as agent for the proprietor new york ny.
copyright 1962 martin luther king jr copyright renewed 1991 coretta scott king 3 commentary february 1965 4 james farmer freedom when.
new york random house 1965 25 27 42 47 5 stokely carmichael and charles v hamilton black power the politics of liberation new york vintage 1992 orig.
1967 37 44 analyzing the evidence 1 compare sources 1 and 3 what does rustin mean when he says that ending segregation in public accommodations has not affected the fundamental conditions of african american life.
how does kings point in document 1 address such issues.
2 examine the two photographs.
what do they reveal about different kinds of protest.
about different perspectives among african americans.
3 what does self determination mean for farmer and carmichael and hamilton.
putting it all together compose an essay in which you use the documents above in addition to your reading of the chapters 6 and 7 explain how party systems and political alignments changed over time and then assess the strength of this argument.
more to explore visual evidence look again at the political cartoons on the tariff p 320 and the vicepresidency p 324.
what point of view does the cartoonist support and how effective are the cartoons in championing that view.
how are todays negative political advertisements on television similar or different.
start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter 8.
for inspiration they turned to european romanticism a new conception of self and society.
romantic thinkers such as german philosopher immanuel kant and english poet samuel taylor coleridge rejected the ordered rational world of the eighteenth century enlightenment.
they embraced human passion and sought deeper insight into the mysteries of existence.
by tapping their intuitive powers the young unitarians believed people could come to know the infinite and the eternal.
as a unitarian emerson stood outside the mainstream of american protestantism.
unlike most christians unitarians believed that god was a single being not a trinity of father son and holy spirit.
in 1832 emerson took a more radical step by resigning his boston pulpit and rejecting all organized religion.
he moved to concord massachusetts and wrote influential essays probing what he called the infinitude of the private man the radically free person.
the young philosopher argued that people were trapped by inherited customs and institutions.
they the founder of transcendentalism as this painting of ralph waldo emerson by an unknown artist indicates the young philosopher was an attractive man his face brimming with confidence and optimism.
with his radiant personality and incisive intellect emerson deeply influenced dozens of influential writers artists and scholars and enjoyed great success as a lecturer to the emerging middle class.
the metropolitan museum of art.
image source art resource ny.
wore the ideas of earlier times new england calvinism for example as a kind of faded masquerade and they needed to shed those values.
what is a man born for but to be a reformer a remaker of what man has made emerson asked.
in his view individuals could be remade only by discovering their original relation with nature and entering into a mystical union with the currents of universal being the ideal setting for this transcendent discovery was under an open sky in solitary communion with nature.
the revivalist charles grandison finney described his religious conversion in emersonian terms an individual in the woods alone joining with god in a mystical union.
the transcendentalist message of individual selfrealization reached hundreds of thousands of people through emersons writings and lectures.
public lectures had become a spectacularly successful way of chapter 11 cities of the united states.
there they created a popular culture that challenged some sexual norms reinforced traditional racist feelings and encouraged new styles of dress and behavior.
as a scathing critic of transcendentalism.
his most powerful statement was moby dick 1851 the story of captain ahabs obsessive hunt for a mysterious white whale that ends in death for ahab and all but one member of his crew.
here the quest for spiritual meaning in nature brings death not transcendence because ahab the liberated individual lacks inner discipline and self restraint.
moby dick was a commercial failure.
the middleclass audience that devoured sentimental american fiction refused to follow melville into the dark dangerous realm of individualism gone mad.
what middleclass readers emphatically preferred were the more modest examples of individualism offered by emerson and finney personal improvement and religious piety through spiritual awareness and self discipline.
the utopian impulse many rural communalists were farmers and artisans seeking refuge from the economic depression of 1837 1843 others were religious idealists.
whatever their origins these rural utopias were symbols of social protest and experimentation.
by advocating the common ownership of property socialism and unconventional forms of marriage and family life the communalists challenged traditional property rights and gender roles.
mother ann and the shakers the united society of believers in christs second appearing known as the shakers because of the ecstatic dances that were part of their worship was the first successful american communal movement.
in 1770 ann lee stanley mother ann a young cook in manchester england had a vision that she was an incarnation of christ.
four years later she led a few followers to america and established a church near albany new york.
after mother anns death in 1784 the shakers honored her as the second coming of christ withdrew from the profane world and formed disciplined rural communalism and urban popular culture between 1820 and 1860 thousands of americans grew dissatisfied with life in americas emerging market society and retreated into rural areas of the northeast and midwest map 11 1.
there they sought to create ideal communities or utopias that would allow people to live differently and realize their spiritual potential.
simultaneously tens of thousands of rural americans and european immigrants poured into the larger map 11 1 major communal experiments before 1860 some experimental communities settled along the frontier but the vast majority chose rural areas in settled regions of the north and midwest.
because they opposed slavery communalists usually avoided the south.
most secular experiments failed within a few decades as the founders lost their reformist enthusiasm or died off tightly knit religious communities such as the shakers and the mormons were longer lived.
religion and reform 1800 1860 300 miles n 300 kilometers c a na da e w maine s oneida community 1848 1879 minnesota vt n h new york wisconsin mass.
michigan r i conn iowa pa amana 1843 1932 nebr.
n j ohio illinois nauvoo kansas terr.
indiana virginia new harmony 1824 1827 north carolina tennessee icaria 1848 1849 texas arkansas nashoba 1825 1830 miss.
atlantic ocean kentucky missouri unorg.
brook farm 1841 1846 alabama south carolina georgia experimental communities fourierists owenites shakers others after bestor and meinig part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 shakers at prayer most americans viewed the shakers with a mixture of fascination and suspicion.
they feared the sects radical aspects such as a commitment to celibacy and communal property and considered the shakers dancing more an invitation to debauchery than a form of prayer.
those apprehensions surfaced in this engraving the shakers of new lebanon new york which expresses both the powerful intensity and the menacing character of this shaker spiritual ritual.
the work of the journalist engraver joseph becker the picture appeared in frank leslies illustrated newspaper in 1873.
religious communities.
members embraced the common ownership of property accepted strict oversight by church leaders and pledged to abstain from alcohol tobacco politics and war.
shakers also repudiated sexual pleasure and marriage.
their commitment to celibacy followed mother anns testimony against the lustful gratifications of the flesh as the source and foundation of human corruption the shakers theology was as radical as their social thought.
they held that god was a dual person male and identify causes female this doctrine prompted what factors led to the shakers to repudiate male leaderproliferation of rural ship and to place community govutopian communities ernance in the hands of both in nineteenth century women and men the eldresses america.
and the elders.
shakers founded twenty communities mostly in new england new york and ohio.
their agriculture and crafts especially furniture making acquired a reputation for quality that made most shaker communities self sustaining and even comfortable.
because the shakers disdained sexual intercourse they relied on conversions and the adoption of thousands of young orphans to increase their numbers.
during the 1830s three thousand adults mostly women joined the shakers attracted by their communal intimacy and sexual equality.
to rebecca cox jackson an african american seamstress from philadelphia the shakers seemed to be loving to live forever however with the proliferation of public and private orphanages during the 1840s and 1850s shaker communities began to decline and by 1900 had virtually disappeared.
they chapters 8 strong missionary impulse creand 9.
ated a wealthy and expansive church that now claims a worldwide membership of about 12 million people.
urban popular culture as utopians organized communities in the countryside rural migrants and foreign immigrants created a new urban culture.
in 1800 american cities were overgrown towns with rising death rates new york had only 60 000 residents philadelphia had 41 000 and life expectancy at birth was a mere twenty five years.
then urban growth accelerated as a huge in migration outweighed the high death rates.
by 1840 new yorks population had ballooned to 312 000 philadelphia and its suburbs had 150 000 residents and three other cities new orleans boston and baltimore each had about 100 000 by 1860 new york had become a metropolis with more than 1 million residents 813 000 in manhattan and another 266 000 in the adjacent community of brooklyn.
sex in the city these newly populous cities particularly new york generated a new urban culture.
thousands of young men and women flocked to the city searching for adventure and fortune but many found only a hard life.
young men labored for meager wages building thousands of tenements warehouses and workshops.
others worked as low paid clerks or operatives in hundreds of mercantile and manufacturing firms.
the young women had an even harder time.
thousands toiled as live in domestic servants ordered about by the mistress of the household and often sexually exploited by the master.
thousands more scraped out a bare living as needlewomen in new york citys booming ready made clothes industry.
unwilling to endure domestic service or subsistence wages many young girls turned to prostitution.
dr william sangers careful survey commissioned in 1855 by worried city officials found six thousand women engaged in commercial sex.
three fifths were native born whites and the rest were foreign immigrants most were between fifteen and twenty years old.
half were or had been domestic servants half had children and half were infected with syphilis.
commercialized sex and sex in general formed one facet of the new urban culture.
sporting men engaged freely in sexual conquests otherwise respectable married men kept mistresses in handy apartments and working men frequented bawdy houses.
new york city had two hundred brothels in the 1820s and five hundred by the 1850s.
prostitutes so called public women openly advertised their wares on broadway chapters and 40 000 members throughout the north and midwest.
employing only women as agents the society provided moral guidance for young women who were working as factory operatives seamstresses or servants.
society members visited brothels where they sang hymns offered prayers searched for runaway girls and noted the names of clients.
they also founded homes of refuge for prostitutes and won the passage of laws in massachusetts and new york that made seduction a crime.
improving prisons creating asylums expanding education other women set out to improve public institutions and dorothea dix 1801 1887 was their model.
dixs paternal grandparents were prominent bostonians but her father a methodist minister ended religion and reform 1800 1860 up an impoverished alcoholic.
trace change emotionally abused as a child over time dix grew into a compassionate using the material on young woman with a strong sense womens lives in chapof moral purpose.
she used ters 4 8 and 11 analyze money from her grandparents to and explain the changing set up charity schools to rescue nature of their private some of americas miserable chil and public lives.
dren from vice and became a successful author.
by 1832 she had published seven books including conversations on common things 1824 an enormously successful treatise on natural science and moral improvement.
in 1841 dix took up a new cause.
discovering that insane women were jailed alongside male criminals she persuaded massachusetts lawmakers to enlarge the state hospital to house indigent mental patients.
exhilarated by that success dix began a national movement to establish state asylums for the mentally ill by 1854 she had traveled more than 30 000 miles and had visited eighteen state penitentiaries three hundred county jails and more than five hundred almshouses and hospitals.
dixs reports and agitation prompted many states to improve their prisons and public hospitals.
both as reformers and teachers other northern women transformed public education.
from maine to wisconsin women vigorously supported the movement led by horace mann to increase elementary schooling and improve the quality of instruction.
as secretary of the massachusetts board of education from 1837 to 1848 mann lengthened the school year established teaching standards in reading writing and arithmetic and recruited well educated women as teachers.
the intellectual leader of the new women educators was catharine beecher who founded academies for young women in hartford connecticut and cincinnati ohio.
in widely read publications beecher argued that energetic and benevolent women were better qualified than men were to impart moral and intellectual instruction to the young.
by the 1850s most teachers were women both because local school boards heeded beechers arguments and because they could hire women at lower salaries than men.
as secular educators as well as moral reformers women were now part of american public life.
from black rights to womens rights as women addressed controversial issues such as moral reform and emancipation they faced censure over their public presence.
offended by this criticism which revealed their own social and legal inferiority some women sought full freedom for their sex.
american voices saving the nation from drink the temperance crusade was the most successful antebellum reform movement.
it mobilized more than a million supporters in all sections of the nation and significantly lowered the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
nonetheless like other reform efforts the antidrinking crusade divided over questions of strategy and tactics.
the following passages taken from the writings of leading temperance advocates show that some reformers favored legal regulation while others preferred persuasion and voluntary abstinence.
lyman beecher intemperance is the sin of our land a leading protestant minister and spokesman for the benevolent empire lyman beecher regarded drunkenness as a sin.
his six sermons on.
intemperance 1829 condemned the recklessness of working class drunkards and called on responsible members of the middle class to lead the way to a temperate society.
intemperance is the sin of our land and with our boundless prosperity is coming in upon us like a flood and if anything shall defeat the hopes of the world which hang upon our experiment of civil liberty it is that river of fire.
in every city and town the poor tax created chiefly by intemperance is increasing the burden on taxpaying citizens.
the frequency of going upon the town relying on public welfare has taken away the reluctance of pride and destroyed the motives to providence which the fear of poverty and suffering once supplied.
the prospect of a destitute old age or of a suffering family no longer troubles the vicious portion of our community.
they drink up their daily earnings and bless god for the poor house and begin to look upon it as of right the drunkards home.
every intemperate and idle man whom you behold tottering about the streets and steeping himself at the stores regards your houses and lands as pledged to take care of him puts his hands deep annually into your pockets.
what then is this universal natural and national remedy for intemperance.
it is the banishment of ardent spirits from the list of lawful articles of commerce by a correct and efficient public sentiment such as has turned slavery out of half our land and will yet expel it from the world.
we are not therefore to come down in wrath upon the distillers and importers and venders of ardent spirits.
none of us are enough without sin to cast the first stone.
it is the buyers who have created the demand for ardent spirits and made distillation and importation a gainful traffic.
let the temperate cease to buy and the demand for ardent spirits will fall in the market three fourths and ultimately will fail wholly.
this however cannot be done effectually so long as the traffic in ardent spirits is regarded as lawful and is patronized by men of reputation and moral worth in every part of the land.
like slavery it must be regarded as sinful impolitic and dishonorable.
that no measures will avail short of rendering ardent spirits a contraband of trade is nearly self evident.
abraham lincoln a new class of champions in baltimore in 1840 a group of reformed alcoholics formed the washington temperance society which turned the antidrinking movement in a new direction.
by talking publicly about their personal experiences of alcoholic decline and spiritual recovery they inspired thousands to sign the pledge of total abstinence.
its philosophy exists today in the organization alcoholics anonymous.
in 1842 lincoln an ambitious lawyer and illinois legislator who did not drink praised such moral suasion in an address to the washingtonians of springfield illinois.
although the temperance cause has been in progress for near twenty years it is apparent to all that it is just now being crowned with a degree of success hitherto unparalleled.
the list of its friends is daily swelled by the additions of fifties of hundreds and of thousands.
the warfare heretofore waged against the demon intemperance has somehow or other been erroneous.
its champions for the most part have been preachers such as beecher lawyers and hired agents.
between these and the mass of mankind there is a want of approachability.
but when one who has long been known as a victim of intemperance bursts the fetters that have bound him and appears before his neighbors clothed and in his right mind.
to tell of the miseries once endured now to be endured no more.
there is a logic and an eloquence in it that few with human feelings can resist.
in my judgment it is to the battles of this new class of champions that our late success is greatly perhaps chiefly owing.
previously too much denunciation against dram sellers and dram drinkers was indulged in.
this i think was both impolitic and unjust.
when the dramseller and drinker were incessantly condemned.
as moral pestilences.
they were slow to.
join the ranks of their denouncers in a hue and cry against themselves.
by the washingtonians this system of consigning the habitual drunkard to hopeless ruin is repudiated.
they teach hope to all despair to none.
as applying to their cause they deny the doctrine of unpardonable sin.
if the relative grandeur of revolutions shall be estimated by the great amount of human misery they alleviate and the small amount they inflict then indeed will this be the grandest the world shall ever have seen.
of our political revolution of 76 we are all justly proud.
it has given us a degree of political freedom far exceeding that of any other nation of the earth.
but with all these glorious results past present and to come this freedom had its evils too.
it was abused by drunken husbands and thereby breathed forth famine swam in blood and rode in fire and long long after the orphans cry and the widows wail continued to break the sad silence that ensued.
these were the price the inevitable price paid for the blessings it brought.
turn now to the temperance revolution.
in it we shall find a stronger bondage broken a viler slavery manumitted a greater tyrant deposed in it more of want supplied more disease healed more sorrow assuaged.
by it no orphans starving no widows weeping.
glorious consummation.
hail fall of fury.
reign of reason all hail.
american temperance magazine you shall not sell in 1851 the maine legislature passed a statute prohibiting the sale of alcoholic beverages in the state.
the maine supreme court upheld the statute arguing that the legislature had the right to regulate by law the sale of any article the use of which would be detrimental of the morals of the people subsequently the american temperance magazine became a strong advocate of legal prohibition and by 1856 had won passage of maine laws in twelve other states chapter 9 pp.
3 in which of these selections do you see the influence of the second great awakening especially the evangelical message of charles grandison finney.
where do you see the influence of the market revolution and the cultural values of the rising middle class.
what positions do these selections take with respect to the appropriate role of government in regulating morality and personal behavior.
part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 abolitionist women women were central to the antislavery movement because they understood the special horrors of slavery for women.
in her autobiography incidents in the life of a slave girl black abolitionist harriet jacobs described forced sexual intercourse with her white owner.
i cannot tell how much i suffered in the presence of these wrongs she wrote.
according to jacobs and other enslaved women such sexual assaults incited additional cruelty by their owners wives who were enraged by their husbands promiscuity.
in her best selling novel uncle toms cabin 1852 harriet beecher stowe pinpointed the sexual abuse of women as a profound moral failing of the slave regime.
as garrisonian women attacked slavery they frequently violated social taboos by speaking to mixed audiences of men and women.
maria w stewart an african american spoke to mixed crowds in boston in the early 1830s.
as abolitionism blossomed scores of white women delivered lectures condemning slavery and thousands more made home visitations to win converts to their cause map 11 4.
when congregationalist clergymen in new england assailed angelina and sarah grimk for such activism in a pastoral letter in 1837 sarah grimk turned to the bible for justification the lord jesus defines the duties of his followers in his sermon on the mount.
without any reference to sex or condition she replied men and women were created equal both are moral and accountable beings and whatever is right for man to do is right for woman in a pamphlet debate with catharine beecher who believed that women should exercise authority primarily as wives mothers and schoolteachers angelina grimk pushed the argument beyond religion by invoking enlightenment principles to claim equal civic rights it is a womans right to have a voice in all the laws and regulations by which she is governed whether in church or state.
the present arrangements of society on these points are a violation of human rights a rank usurpation of power a violent seizure and confiscation of what is sacredly and inalienably hers.
by 1840 female abolitionists were asserting that traditional gender roles resulted in the domestic slavery of women.
how can we endure our present marriage relations asked elizabeth cady stanton which give a woman no charter of rights no individuality of her own as reformer ernestine rose put it the radical difficulty.
is that women are considered as belonging to men having acquired a public voice and map 11 4 women and antislavery 1837 1838 canada l superior o ntar i l o 852 michigan r ouri iss r ie l e5 887 o h io missouri 3 061 5 537 ind.
r virginia.
1 189 1 792 n h 2 088 mass.
r i conn n j del.
8 369 35 236 md.
ky n c tenn arkansas s c miss.
georgia alabama republic of texas vt n y pa ohio illinois unorg.
ippi r iss mis s iowa m territory maine l wisconsin territory l michigan at l a n t i c ocean la.
antislavery petitions to congress 1837 38 n gulf of mexico after opdycke fla terr.
e w s female signers male signers total signers 67 202 female signers 44 929 male signers 22 273 100 67 33 beginning in the 1830s abolitionists and antislavery advocates dispatched dozens of petitions to congress demanding an end to forced labor.
women accounted for two thirds of the 67 000 signatures on the petitions submitted in 1837 1838 a fact that suggests not only the influence of women in the antislavery movement but also the extent of female organizations and social networks.
lawmakers eager to avoid sectional conflict devised an informal agreement the gag rule to table the petitions without discussion.
chapter analyze the documents above to construct an essay in which you explore the vietnam wars causes and effects both domestic and international.
choose at least one domestic and one international theme and use the documents to providence evidence for your conclusions.
part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 to diminish order and liberty the yaf the largest student political organization in the country defended free enterprise and supported the war in vietnam.
its founding principles were outlined in the sharon statement drafted in sharon connecticut two years before the port huron statement and inspired young conservatives many of whom would play important roles in the reagan administration in the 1980s.
the counterculture while the new left organized against the political and economic system and the yaf defended it many other young americans embarked on a general revolt against authority and middle class respectability.
the hippie identified by ragged blue jeans or army fatigues tie dyed t shirts beads and long unkempt hair symbolized the new counterculture.
with roots in the 1950s beat culture of new yorks greenwich village and san franciscos north beach the 1960s counterculture initially turned to folk music for its inspiration.
pete seeger set the tone for the eras idealism with songs such as the 1961 antiwar ballad where have all the flowers gone in 1963 the year of the civil rights demonstrations in birmingham and president kennedys assassination bob dylans blowin in the wind reflected the impatience of people whose faith in america was wearing thin.
joan baez emerged alongside dylan and pioneered a folk sound that inspired a generation of female musicians.
by the mid 1960s other winds of change in popular music came from the beatles four working class brits whose awe inspiring music by turns lyrical and driving spawned a commercial and cultural phenomenon known as beatlemania.
american youths embrace of the beatles as well as even more rebellious bands such as the rolling stones the who and the doors deepened the generational divide between young people and their elders.
so did the recreational the counterculture the three day outdoor woodstock concert in august 1969 was a defining moment in the rise of the counterculture.
the event attracted 400 000 young people like those pictured here to bethel new york for a weekend of music drugs and sex.
the counterculture was distinct from the new left and was less a political movement than a shifting set of cultural styles attitudes and practices.
it rejected conformity of all kinds and placed rebellion and contrariness among its highest values.
another concept held dear by the counterculture was simply love in an era of military violence abroad and police violence at home many in the counterculture hoped that peace and love would prevail instead.
bill eppridge time life pictures getty images.
chapter 28 uncivil wars liberal crisis and conservative rebirth 1961 1972 ms magazine cofounded by the feminist gloria steinem ms magazine made its initial appearance in 1972 steinem and her cofounders believed that american women needed an explicitly feminist magazine distinct from the slew of available female focused lifestyle magazines such as mccalls and redbook.
ms would take on crucial but neglected issues relevant to women reproductive rights child care employment and educational equality sexual harassment and marriage and relations between men and women.
inspired by womens liberation ms has remained an important forum for feminist opinion and debate down to the present.
reprinted by permission of ms magazine 1972 struggle for racial equality.
chicana feminists came from catholic backgrounds in which motherhood and family were held in high regard.
we want to walk hand in hand with the chicano brothers with our children our viejitos elders our familia de la raza one chicana feminist wrote.
black and chicana feminists embraced the larger movement for womens rights but carried on their own struggles to address specific needs in their communities.
one of the most important contributions of womens liberation was to raise awareness about what feminist kate millett called sexual politics.
liberationists argued that unless women had control over their own bodies they could not freely shape their destinies.
they campaigned for reproductive rights especially access to abortion and railed against a culture that blamed women in cases of sexual assault and turned a blind eye to sexual harassment in the workplace.
meanwhile womens opportunities expanded dramatically in higher education.
dozens of formerly allmale bastions such as yale princeton and the u s military academies admitted women undergraduates for the first time.
colleges started womens studies programs which eventually numbered in the hundreds and the proportion of women attending graduate and professional schools rose markedly.
with the adoption of title ix in 1972 congress broadened the 1964 civil rights act to include educational institutions prohibiting colleges and universities that received federal funds from discriminating on the basis of sex.
by requiring comparable funding for sports programs title ix made womens athletics a real presence on college campuses.
women also became increasingly visible in public life.
congresswomen bella abzug and shirley chisholm joined betty friedan and gloria steinem the founder of ms magazine to create the national womens political caucus in 1971 abzug and chisholm both from new york joined congresswomen patsy mink from hawaii and martha griffiths from michigan to sponsor equal rights legislation.
congress authorized childcare tax deductions for working parents in 1972 and in 1974 passed the equal credit opportunity act which enabled married women to get credit including credit cards and mortgages in their own names.
antiwar activists black and chicano nationalists and womens liberationists had each challenged the cold war liberalism of the democratic party.
in doing so they helped build on the rights liberalism forged first by the african american led civil rights movement.
but they also created rifts among competing parts of the former liberal consensus.
many catholics for instance opposed abortion rights and other freedoms sought by womens liberationists.
still other democrats many of them blue collar trade unionists believed that antiwar protesters were unpatriotic and that supporting ones government in time of war was a citizens duty.
the antiwar movement and the evolving rights liberalism of the sixties had made the old democratic coalition increasingly unworkable.
stonewall and gay liberation the liberationist impulse transformed the gay rights movement as well.
homophile activists in the 1960s chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
lyceum movement begins david walkers appeal.
to the colored citizens of the world joseph smith publishes the book of mormon 1830s emergence of minstrelsy shows william lloyd garrison founds the liberator nat turners uprising in virginia ralph waldo emerson turns to transcendentalism garrison organizes american anti slavery society new york activists create female moral reform society abolitionists launch great postal campaign sparking series of antiabolitionist riots house of representatives adopts gag rule grimk sisters defend public roles for women liberty party runs james g birney for president 1840s fourierist communities arise in midwest dorothea dix promotes hospitals for mentally ill margaret fuller publishes woman in the nineteenth century henry david thoreau goes to walden pond brigham young leads mormons to salt lake seneca falls convention proposes womens equality nathaniel hawthornes the scarlet letter herman melville publishes moby dick harriet beecher stowe writes uncle toms cabin dr sanger surveys sex trade in new york city walt whitmans leaves of grass mormon war over polygamy key turning points most of the entries here relate to events in the 1830s 1840s and 1850s.
in your judgment which is the most important event in each decade.
over all three decades.
write a coherent essay that justifies your choices and if possible relates those events to each other.
the south expands slavery and society 1800 1860 c h a p t e r the domestic slave trade the upper south exports slaves the impact on blacks the world of southern whites the dual cultures of the planter elite planters smallholding yeomen and tenants expanding and governing the south the settlement of texas the politics of democracy the african american world evangelical black protestantism forging families and communities negotiating rights the free black population l ife in south carolina had been identify the big idea good to james lide.
a slave owning how did the creation of a cottonplanter along the pee dee river lide based economy change the lives of and his wife raised twelve children and whites and blacks in all regions of long resisted the alabama fever that the south.
prompted thousands of carolinians to move west.
finally at age sixty five probably seeking land for his many offspring he moved his slaves and family including six children and six grandchildren to a plantation near montgomery alabama.
there the family lived initially in a squalid log cabin with air holes but no windows.
even after building a new house the lides life remained unsettled.
pa is quite in the notion of moving somewhere his daughter maria reported.
although james lide died in alabama many of his children moved on.
in 1854 at the age of fifty eight eli lide migrated to texas telling his father something within me whispers onward and onward the lides story was that of southern society.
between 1800 and 1860 white planters moved west and using the muscles and sweat of a million enslaved african americans brought millions of acres into cultivation.
by 1840 the south was at the cutting edge of the american market revolution figure 12 1.
it annually produced and exported 1 5 million bales of raw cotton over two thirds of the worlds supply and its economy was larger and richer than that of most nations.
cotton is king boasted the southern cultivator.
no matter how rich they were few cotton planters in alabama mississippi and texas lived in elegant houses or led cultured lives.
they had forsaken the aristocratic gentility of the chesapeake and the carolinas to make money.
to sell cotton in order to buy negroes to make more cotton to buy more negroes ad infinitum is the aim.
of the thorough going cotton planter a traveler reported from mississippi in 1835.
his whole soul is wrapped up in the pursuit plantation women lamented the loss of genteel surroundings and polite society.
raised in north carolina where she was blest with every comfort even luxury mary drake found mississippi and alabama a dreary waste enslaved african americans knew what dreary waste really meant unremitting toil unrelieved poverty and profound sadness.
sold south from maryland where his family had lived for generations charles balls father became gloomy and morose and ran off and disappeared.
with good reason on new cotton plantations slaves labored from sunup to sundown and from one end of the year to the other forced to work by the threat of the lash.
always wanting more southern planters and politicians plotted to extend their plantation economy across the continent.
a slave family picking cotton picking cotton thousands of small bolls attached to 3 foot high woody and often prickly stalks was a tedious and time consuming task taking up to four months on many plantations.
however workers of both sexes and all ages could pick cotton and masters could measure output by weighing the baskets of each picker or family chastising those who failed to meet their quotas.
what does this early photograph of a family of pickers taken on a plantation near savannah georgia suggest about womens and childrens lives family relations and living conditions.
collection of the new york historical society.
part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 the domestic slave trade in 1817 when the american colonization society began to transport a few freed blacks to africa chapter review ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
john f kennedy assassinated lyndon b johnson assumes presidency civil rights act economic opportunity act inaugurates war on poverty free speech movement at berkeley gulf of tonkin resolution immigration act abolishes national quota system medicare and medicaid programs established operation rolling thunder escalates bombing campaign march first u s combat troops arrive in vietnam hippie countercultures summer of love 100 000 march in antiwar protest in washington d c october tet offensive begins january martin luther king jr and robert f kennedy assassinated womens liberation protest at miss america pageant riot at democratic national convention in chicago august richard nixon elected president stonewall riots june national womens strike for equality swan v charlotte mecklenburg approves countywide busing nixon visits china february nixon wins a second term november 7 paris peace accords end vietnam war milliken v bradley limits busing to school district boundaries vietnam reunified under communist rule key turning points which specific developments from this timeline made the years 1964 1965 and 1968 turning points in politics foreign policy and culture and why.
the search for order in an era of limits 1973 1980 c h a p t e r an era of limits energy crisis environmentalism economic transformation urban crisis and suburban revolt politics in flux 1973 1980 watergate and the fall of a president jimmy carter the outsider as president reform and reaction in the 1970s civil rights in a new era the womens movement and gay rights after the warren court the american family on trial working families in the age of deindustrialization navigating the sexual revolution religion in the 1970s the fourth great awakening e arly in 1971 a new fictional characidentify the big idea ter appeared on national television.
how did the legacy of social archie bunker was a gruff bluechanges such as shifting gender collar worker who berated his wife and roles civil rights and challenges to bemoaned his daughters marriage to a the family in the 1960s continue bearded hippie.
prone to bigoted and to reverberate in the 1970s leadinsensitive remarks archie and his wife ing to both new opportunities and edith sang those were the days at the political disagreement.
opening of each episode of all in the family a half hour comedy.
the song celebrated a bygone era when girls were girls and men were men disdainful of the liberal social movements of the 1960s archie professed a conservative hardscrabble view of the world.
archie bunker became a folk hero to many conservative americans in the 1970s he said what they felt.
but his significance went beyond his politics.
all in the family gave voice to a national search for order.
his feminist daughter liberal son in law and black neighbors brought that changing world into archies modest home in queens new york.
not all americans were as resistant to change as archie.
most were ordinary middle of the road people confronting the aftermath of the tumultuous late 1960s and early 1970s.
the liberalism of those years challenged americans to think in new ways about race gender roles sexual morality and the family.
vietnam and the watergate scandal had compounded matters by producing a crisis of political authority.
an old order had seemingly collapsed.
but what would take its place was not yet clear.
alongside cultural dislocation and political alienation the country confronted economic setbacks.
in 1973 inflation began to climb at a pace unprecedented in the post world war ii decades and economic growth slowed.
an energy crisis aggravated by u s foreign policy in the middle east produced fuel shortages.
foreign competition in manufacturing brought less expensive and often more reliable goods into the u s market from nations such as japan and west germany.
as a result more american plants closed.
the great economic ride enjoyed by the united states since world war ii was over.
what distinguishes the period between the energy crisis 1973 and the election of ronald reagan to the presidency 1980 is the collective national search for order in the midst of economic crisis political realignment and rapid social change.
virtually all the verities and touchstones of the postwar decades cold war liberalism rising living standards and the nuclear family had come under question and most agreed on the urgency to act.
for some this search demanded new forms of liberal experimentation.
for others it led instead to the conservatism of the emerging new right.
shifting gender roles as american society underwent dramatic changes in the 1970s women seized new opportunities and expanded their role in national life.
donna wright shown here on break from her work at the blue ribbon mine was the only woman working at the mine in 1979 photo by kit miniciler the denver post via getty images.
part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 an era of limits the economic downturn of the early 1970s was the deepest slump since the great depression.
every major economic indicator employment productivity growth turned negative and by 1973 the economy was in a tailspin.
inflation brought on in part by military spending in vietnam proved especially difficult to control.
when a middle east embargo cut oil supplies in 1973 prices climbed even more.
unemployment remained high and productivity growth low until 1982 overall the 1970s represented the worst economic decade of the postwar period what california governor jerry brown called an era of limits in this time of distress americans were forced to consider other limits to the growth and expansion that had long been markers of national progress.
the environmental movement brought attention to the toxic effects of modern industrial capitalism on the natural world.
as the urban crisis grew worse several major cities verged on bankruptcy.
finally political limits were reached as well none of the presidents of the 1970s could reverse the nations economic slide though each spent years trying.
energy crisis modern economies run on oil.
if the oil supply is drastically reduced woe follows.
something like that happened to the united states in the 1970s.
once the worlds leading oil producer the united states had become heavily dependent on inexpensive imported oil mostly from the persian gulf figure 29 1.
american and european oil companies had discovered and developed the middle eastern fields early in the twentieth century when much of the region was ruled by the british and french empires.
when middle eastern states threw off the remnants of european colonialism they demanded concessions for access to the fields.
foreign companies still extracted the oil but now they did so under profit sharing agreements with the persian gulf states.
in 1960 these nations and other oil rich developing countries formed a cartel a business association formed to control prices the organization of petroleum exporting countries opec.
conflict between israel and the neighboring arab states of egypt syria and jordan prompted opec to take political sides between 1967 and 1973 following israels victory in the 1967 six day war israeli arab tensions in the region grew closer to boiling over with each passing year.
in the 1973 yom kippur war egypt and syria invaded israel to regain territory lost in the 1967 conflict.
israel prevailed but only after being resupplied by an emergency american airlift.
in response to u s support for israel the arab states in opec declared an oil embargo in october 1973 gas prices in the united states quickly jumped by 40 percent and heating oil prices by 30 percent.
demand outpaced supply and americans found themselves parked for figure 29 1 u s energy consumption 1900 2000 quadrillion btu fuel wood hydroelectric nuclear coal oil natural gas coal was the nations primary source of energy until the 1950s when it was surpassed by oil and natural gas.
the revival of coal consumption after 1960 stemmed from new open pit mining in the west that provided cheaper fuel for power plants.
the decline in oil consumption in 1980 reflects the nations response to the oil crisis of the 1970s including most notably fuel efficient automobiles.
nuclear energy became an important new fuel source but after 1990 its contribution leveled off as a result of the safety concerns triggered by the three mile island incident.
chapter 12 the south expands slavery and society 1800 1860 and women.
these middling planters owned almost 40 percent of the enslaved laborers and produced more than 30 percent of the cotton.
often they pursued dual careers as skilled artisans or professional men.
thus some of the fifteen slaves owned by georgian samuel l moore worked in his brick factory while others labored on his farm.
dr thomas gale used the income from his medical practice to buy a mississippi plantation that annually produced 150 bales of cotton.
in alabama lawyer benjamin fitzpatrick used his legal fees to buy ten slaves.
like fitzpatrick lawyers acquired wealth by managing the affairs of the slave owning elite representing planters and merchants in suits for debt and helping smallholders and tenants register their deeds and contracts.
standing at the legal crossroads of their small towns they rose to prominence and regularly won election to public office.
less than 1 percent of the male population in 1828 lawyers made up 16 percent of the alabama legislature and an astounding 26 percent in 1849 the inherent brutality of slavery like all systems of forced labor american racial slavery relied ultimately on physical coercion.
slave owners and overseers routinely whipped slaves who worked slowly or defied their orders.
on occasion they applied the whip with such ferocity that the slave was permanently injured or killed.
this photograph of a mississippi slave named gordon taken after he fled to the union army in louisiana in 1863 and published in harpers weekly stands as graphic testimony to the inherent brutality of the system.
library of congress.
planter elites a privileged minority of 395 000 southern families owned slaves in 1860 their ranks divided into a strict hierarchy.
the top one fifth of these families owned twenty or more slaves.
this elite just 5 percent of the souths white population dominated the economy owning over 50 percent of the entire slave population of 4 million and growing 50 percent of the souths cotton crop.
the average wealth of these planters was 56 000 about 1 6 million in purchasing power today by contrast a prosperous southern yeoman or northern farmer owned property worth a mere 3 200.
substantial proprietors another fifth of the slaveowning population held title to six to twenty bondsmen smallholding planters and yeomen smallholding slave owners were much less visible than the wealthy grandees and the middling lawyer planters.
these planters held from one to five black laborers in bondage and owned a few hundred acres of land.
some smallholders were well connected young men who would rise to wealth when their fathers death blessed them with more land and slaves.
others were poor but ambitious men trying to pull themselves up by their bootstraps often encouraged by elite planters and proslavery advocates.
ours is a proslavery form of government and the proslavery element should be increased declared a georgia newspaper.
we would like to see every white man at the south the owner of a family of negroes some aspiring planters achieved modest prosperity.
a german settler reported from alabama in 1855 that nearly all his countrymen who emigrated with him were slaveholders.
they were poor on their arrival in the country but no sooner did they realize a little money than they invested it in slaves bolstered by the patriarchal ideology of the planter class yeomen farmers ruled their smallholdings with a firm hand.
the male head of the household had legal authority understand over all the dependents wives points of view children and slaves and accord by 1860 what different groups made up ing to one south carolina judge the souths increasingly the right on his property to be complex society.
how did as churlish as he pleases yeomen these groups interact.
wives had little power like women part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 in the north they lost their legal identity when they married.
to express their concerns many southern women joined churches where they usually outnumbered men by a margin of two to one.
women especially welcomed the message of spiritual equality preached in evangelical baptist and methodist churches and they hoped that the church community would hold their husbands to the same standards of christian behavior to which they conformed.
however most churches supported patriarchal rule and told female members to remain in wifely obedience whatever the actions of their husbands.
whatever their authority within the household most southern yeomen lived and died as hardscrabble farmers.
they worked alongside their slaves in the fields struggled to make ends meet as their families grew and moved regularly in search of opportunity.
thus in 1847 james buckner barry left north carolina with his new wife and two slaves to settle in bosque county texas.
there he worked part time as an indian fighter while his slaves toiled on a drought ridden farm that barely kept the family in food.
in south carolina w j simpson struggled for years as a smallholding cotton planter and then gave up.
he hired out one of his two slaves and went to work as an overseer on his fathers farm.
less fortunate smallholders fell from the privileged ranks of the slave owning classes.
selling their land and slaves to pay off debts they joined the mass of propertyless tenants who farmed the estates of wealthy landlords.
in 1860 in hancock county georgia there were 56 slave owning planters and 300 propertyless white farm laborers and factory workers in nearby hart county 25 percent of the white farmers were tenants.
across the south about 40 percent of the white population worked as tenants or farm laborers as the southern cultivator observed they had no legal right nor interest in the soil and no homes of their own poor freemen propertyless whites suffered the ill consequences of living in a slave society that accorded little respect to hardworking white laborers.
nor could north carolina emigrants poor white folks completed in 1845 james henry beards 1811 1893 painting depicts a family moving north to ohio.
unlike many optimistic scenes of emigration the picture conveys a sense of resigned despair.
the family members led by a sullen disheveled father pause at a water trough while their cow drinks and their dog chews a bone.
the mother looks apprehensively toward the future as she cradles a child two barefoot older children listlessly await their fathers command.
new york writer charles briggs interpreted the painting as an eloquent sermon on anti slavery.
the blight of slavery has paralyzed the strong arm of the man and destroyed the spirit of the woman although primarily a portrait painter beard questioned the ethics and optimism of american culture in ohio land speculator 1840 and the last victim of the deluge 1849 as well as in poor white folks.
cincinnati art museum ohio usa gift of the proctor gamble company the bridgeman art library.
chapter 29 the search for order in an era of limits 1973 1980 percentage of increase 1960 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 figure 29 2 the inflation rate 1960 2000 the impact of the oil crisis of 1973 on the inflation rate appears all too graphically in this figure.
the dip in 1974 reflects the sharp recession that began that year after which the inflation rate zoomed up to a staggering 14 percent in 1980 the return to normal levels after 1980 stemmed from very harsh measures by the federal reserve board which while they succeeded came at the cost of a painful slowdown in the economy.
war ii u s steel producers had enjoyed an open hugely profitable market.
but lack of serious competition left them without incentives to replace outdated plants and equipment.
when west germany and japan rebuilt their steel industries these facilities incorporated the latest technology.
foreign steel flooded into the united states during the 1970s and the american industry was simply overwhelmed.
formerly titanic steel companies began a massive dismantling virtually the entire pittsburgh region once a national hub of steel production lost its heavy industry in a single generation.
by the mid 1980s downsizing automation and investment in new technologies made the american steel industry competitive again but it was deindustrialization increasing economic competition from overseas created hard times for american industry in the 1970s and 1980s.
many of the nations once proud core industries such as steel declined precipitously in these decades.
this photo shows a steel mill in pittsburgh pennsylvania being demolished in 1982 once the center of american steel production pittsburgh suffered hard times in the 1970s and 1980s.
the result of such closures was the creation of the so called rust belt in the northeast and midwest map 29 1.
lynn johnson national geographic getty images.
96 98 part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 a shadow of its former self and it continues to struggle to this day.
the steel industry was the what major developments prime example of what became shaped the american known as deindustrialization.
economy in the 1970s and the country was in the throes of contributed to its transforan economic transformation that mation.
left it largely stripped of its industrial base.
steel was hardly alone.
a swath of the northeast and midwest the countrys manufacturing heartland became the nations rust belt map 29 1 strewn with abandoned plants and distressed communities.
the automobile tire textile and other consumer durable industries appliances electronics furniture and the like all started shrinking in the place events in context 1970s.
in 1980 business week bemoaned plant closings across the continent and called for the reindustrialization of america organized labor in decline deindustrialization threw many tens of thousands of blue collar workers out of well paid union jobs.
one study followed 4 100 steelworkers left jobless by the 1977 shutdown of the campbell works of the youngstown sheet tube co two years later 35 percent had retired early at half pay 10 percent had moved 15 percent were still jobless with unemployment benefits long gone and 40 percent had found local work but mostly in low paying service sector jobs.
in another instance between 1978 and 1981 eight los angeles companies including canada wash maine vt montana oregon north dakota minn wis south dakota idaho mich r i wyoming nebraska nevada ill mo.
kansas conn pa iowa utah colorado n h mass.
new york ind.
n j ohio w va va del.
ky calif n n c tenn oklahoma arizona s c ark.
new mexico s miss.
p aci f i c oce an ga a tla nti c oc ea n fla population growth 1940 2000 over 200 percent 101 200 percent 51 100 percent 26 50 percent 25 percent or less ala la.
texas gulf of mexico mexico e w 500 miles 500 kilometers map 29 1 from rust belt to sunbelt 1940 2000 one of the most significant developments of the post world war ii era was the growth of the sunbelt.
sparked by federal spending for military bases the defense industry and the space program states of the south and southwest experienced an economic boom in the 1950s.
this growth was further enhanced in the 1970s as the heavily industrialized regions of the northeast and midwest declined and migrants from what was quickly dubbed the rust belt headed to the south and west in search of jobs.
chapter 29 midnight cowboy in the mid 1970s the movie industry embraced the sexual revolution and pushed the boundaries of middle class taste.
movies such as midnight cowboy 1975 starring dustin hoffman and jon voight were part of a larger shift in american culture in which frank sexual discussions and the portrayal of sexual situations in various media grew more acceptable.
john springer collection corbis.
advertising revenue moderated the portrayal of sex in the early 1970s.
however in the second half of the decade networks both exploited and criticized the new sexual ethic.
in frivolous lighthearted shows such as the popular charlies angels threes company and the love boat heterosexual couples explored the often confusing and usually comical landscape of sexual morality.
at the same time between 1974 and 1981 the major networks produced more than a dozen madefor tv movies about children in sexual danger a sensationalized warning to parents of the potential threats to children posed by a less strict sexual morality.
middle class marriage many americans worried that the sexual revolution threatened marriage itself.
the notion of marriage as romantic companionship had defined middle class norms since the late nineteenth century.
it was also quite common throughout most of the twentieth century for americans to see sexual satisfaction as a healthy part of the marriage bond.
the search for order in an era of limits 1973 1980 but what defined a healthy marriage in an age of rising divorce rates changing sexual values and feminist critiques of the nuclear family.
only a small minority of americans rejected marriage outright most continued to create monogamous relationships codified in marriage.
but many came to believe that they needed help as marriage came under a variety of economic and psychological stresses.
a therapeutic industry arose in response.
churches and secular groups alike established marriage seminars and counseling services to assist couples in sustaining a healthy marriage.
a popular form of 1960s psychotherapy the encounter group was adapted to marriage counseling couples met in large groups to explore new methods of communicating.
one of the most successful of these organizations marriage encounter was founded by the catholic church.
it expanded into protestant and jewish communities in the 1970s and became one of the nations largest counseling organizations.
such groups embodied another long term shift in how middle class americans understood marriage.
spurred by both feminism and psychotherapeutic models that stressed self improvement americans increasingly defined marriage not simply by companionship and sexual fidelity but also by the deeply felt emotional connection between two people.
religion in the 1970s the fourth great awakening for three centuries american society has been punctuated by intense periods of religious revival what historians have called great awakenings chapter.
jeffrey hadden and anson shupe televangelism power and politics on gods frontier 1988.
a thought provoking analysis of christian broadcasting.
rick perlstein nixonland the rise of a president and the fracturing of america 2008.
an excellent overview of the era.
daniel horowitz jimmy carter and the energy crisis of the 1970s 2005.
analysis and documents.
kirkpatrick sale the green revolution the american environmental movement 1962 1992 1993.
a balanced account of environmentalism.
n e h hull and peter charles hoffer roe v wade the abortion rights controversy in american history 2001.
a sweeping treatment of the controversial decision.
the oyez project at northwestern university at oyez org oyez frontpage is an invaluable resource for more than one thousand supreme court cases with audio transcripts voting records and summaries.
chapter 13 this process of expansion and state building combined with the arrival of millions of immigrants created new systems of racial and ethnic conflict.
in the east irish catholics and german speaking migrants organized politically to protect their churches saloons and cultural identity prompting a sharp reaction among native born protestants.
in the west the u s government fought wars against cheyennes sioux and comanches on the great plains as it sought to integrate the region into the national economy.
in the conquered mexican territories newly arriving whites jostled uneasily with hispanic residents and despised chinese immigrants.
in an era of rapid economic development western disputes often centered on access to land jobs and natural resources.
for these conflicts see chapter 14 part 5 creating and preserving a continental nation 1844 1877 creating and preserving a continental nation 1844 1877 national power and consolidation thematic understanding the civil war increased national authority.
three republican sponsored constitutional amendments limited the powers of the states and imposed definitions of citizenship prohibiting slavery mandating suffrage for black men and forbidding state action that denied people equal protection under the law.
the u s army remained a significant force enforcing reconstruction in the south as late as 1877 while suppressing indian uprisings and extending national control in the west.
the civil war created a powerful american state as the union government mobilized millions of men and billions of dollars.
it created a modern fiscal system an elaborate network of national banks and for the first time in american history a significant national bureaucracy.
inspired by whig ideology republicanrun congresses intervened forcefully to integrate the national economy and promote industrialization granting subsidies to railroad companies protecting industries and workers through protective tariffs and distributing western lands to farmers and cattlemen.
in the 1850s and 1860s u s officials also intervened aggressively in japan and then built coaling stations that enabled u s steamships to carry products to asia and bring chinese workers to the united states.
the nations dynamic postwar economy had set the nation on a course toward global power.
chapter 25.
however conservatives failed to devise policies that could win the allegiance of american voters in the two decades after world war ii.
republicans by and large continued to favor party moderates such as dwight eisenhower thomas dewey and nelson rockefeller.
these were politicians often called liberal republicans who supported much of the new deal endorsed the containment policy overseas and steered a middle course through the volatile social and political changes of the postwar era.
the conservative faction held out hope however that it might one day win the loyalty of a majority of republicans and remake the party in its image.
in the 1960s and 1970s these conservatives invested their hopes for national resurgence in two dynamic figures barry goldwater and ronald reagan.
together the two carried the conservative banner until the national mood grew more receptive to right wing appeals.
barry goldwater and ronald reagan champions of the right the personal odyssey of ronald reagan embodies the story of new right republican conservatism.
before world war ii reagan was a well known movie actor as well as a new deal democrat and admirer of roosevelt.
however he turned away from liberalism partly from self interest he disliked paying high taxes and partly on principle.
as head of the screen actors guild from 1947 to 1952 reagan had to deal with its communist members who formed the understand extreme left wing of the american points of view labor movement.
dismayed by why was the new right their hard line tactics and goals disappointed with the he became a militant anticommrepublican party in the unist.
after nearly a decade as a decades after world spokesperson for the general elecwar ii.
tric corporation reagan joined barry goldwater barry goldwater was a three term senator from arizona before he ran for the presidency in 1964 this photo was taken during the campaign.
goldwaters conservative influence on the republican party was considerable and laid the political groundwork for the rise of ronald reagan a decade and a half later.
everett collection inc alamy.
the republican party in the early 1960s and began speaking for conservative causes and candidates.
one of those candidates was archconservative barry goldwater a republican senator from arizona.
confident in their power centrist republicans did not anticipate that grassroots conservatives could challenge the partys old guard and nominate one of their own for president goldwater himself.
understanding how they did so in 1964 brings us closer to comprehending the forces that propelled reagan to the presidency a decade and a half later.
indeed reagan the politician came to national attention in 1964 with a televised speech at the republican convention supporting goldwater for the presidency.
in a dramatic speech titled a time for choosing reagan warned that if we trade our freedom for the soup kitchen of the welfare state the nation would take the first step into a thousand years of darkness the conscience of a conservative like reagan goldwater came from the sunbelt where citizens chapter 11.
birney garnered less than 3 percent of the national vote but took enough whig votes in new york to cost clay that state and the presidency.
following polks narrow victory congressional democrats called for immediate texas statehood.
however they lacked the two thirds majority in the senate needed to ratify a treaty of annexation.
so the democrats admitted texas using a joint resolution of congress which required just a majority vote in each house and texas became the twenty eighth state in december 1845 polks strategy of linking texas and oregon had put him in the white house and texas in the union.
shortly it would make the expansion of the south and its system of slavery the central topic of american politics.
war expansion and slavery 1846 1850 the acquisition of texas whetted polks appetite for the mexican lands between texas and the pacific ocean.
if necessary he was ready to go to war for them.
what he and many democrats consciously ignored was the domestic crisis that a war of conquest to expand slavery would unleash.
the war with mexico 1846 1848 since gaining independence in 1821 mexico had not prospered.
its civil wars and political instability produced a stagnant economy a weak government and modest tax revenues which a bloated bureaucracy and debt payments to european bankers quickly devoured.
although the distant northern provinces of california and new mexico remained undeveloped and sparsely settled with a spanish speaking population of only 75 000 in 1840 mexican officials vowed to preserve their nations historic boundaries.
when its breakaway province of texas prepared to join the american union mexico suspended diplomatic relations with the united states.
polks expansionist program president polk now moved quickly to acquire mexicos other northern provinces.
he hoped to foment a revolution in california that like the 1836 rebellion in texas would lead to annexation.
in october 1845 secretary of state james buchanan told merchant thomas oliver larkin now the u s consul for the mexican province to encourage influential californios to seek independence and union with the united states.
to add military muscle to this scheme polk ordered american naval commanders to seize san francisco bay and californias coastal towns in case of war with mexico.
the president also instructed the war department to dispatch captain john c frmont and an exploring party of soldiers into mexican territory.
by december 1845 frmonts force had reached californias sacramento river valley.
chapter 30 declared bankruptcy and was forced to sell a majority stake to the italian company fiat.
if iacocca symbolized a resurgent corporate america high profile financial wheeler dealers also captured americans imagination.
one was ivan boesky a white collar criminal convicted of insider trading buying or selling stock based on information from corporate insiders.
i think greed is healthy boesky told a business school graduating class.
boesky inspired the fictional film character gordon gekko who proclaimed greed is good in 1987s wall street.
a new generation of wall street executives of which boesky was one example pioneered the leveraged buyout lbo.
in a typical lbo a financier used heavily leveraged borrowed capital to buy a company quickly restructured that company to make it appear spectacularly profitable and then sold it at a higher price.
to see a movie still from wall street along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
americans had not set aside the traditional work ethic but the reagan era public was fascinated with money and celebrity.
the documentary television show lifestyles of the rich and famous began its run in 1984.
one of the most enthralling of the eras money moguls was donald trump a real estate developer who craved publicity.
in 1983 the flamboyant trump built the equally flamboyant trump towers in new york city.
at the entrance of the 200 million apartment building stood two enormous bronze ts a display of self promotion reinforced by the media.
calling him the donald a nickname used by trumps first wife tv reporters and magazines commented relentlessly on his marriages divorces and glitzy lifestyle.
the computer revolution while trump grabbed headlines and made splashy real estate investments a handful of quieter less flashy entrepreneurs was busy changing the face of the american economy.
bill gates paul allen steve jobs and steve wozniak were four entrepreneurs who pioneered the computer revolution in the late 1970s and 1980s thinking like a historian p 990.
they took a technology that had been used exclusively for large scale enterprises the military and multinational corporations and made it accessible to individual consumers.
scientists had devised the first computers for military purposes during world war ii.
cold war military research subsequently funded the construction of large mainframe computers.
but government and private sector conservative america in the ascent 1980 1991 first generation computers were bulky cumbersome machines that had to be placed in large air conditioned rooms.
between the 1950s and the 1970s concluding with the development of the microprocessor in 1971 each generation of computers grew faster and smaller.
by the mid 1970s a few microchips the size of the letter o on this page provided as much processing power as a world war ii era computer.
the day of the personal computer pc had arrived.
working in the san francisco bay area jobs and wozniak founded apple computers in 1976 and within a year were producing small individual computers that could be easily used by a single person.
when apple enjoyed success other companies scrambled to get into the market.
international business machines ibm offered its first personal computer in 1981 but apple corporations 1984 macintosh computer later shortened to mac became the first understand runaway commercial success for a points of view personal computer.
in what ways did american meanwhile two former high society embrace economic school classmates gates age nine success and individualism teen and allen age twenty one in the 1980s.
had set a goal in the early 1970s of putting a personal computer on every desk and in every home they recognized that software was the key.
in 1975 they founded the microsoft corporation whose ms dos and windows operating systems soon dominated the software industry.
by 2000 the companys products ran nine out of every ten personal computers in the united states and a majority of those around the world.
gates and allen became billionaires and microsoft exploded into a huge company with 57 000 employees and annual revenues of 38 billion.
in three decades the computer had moved from a few military research centers to thousands of corporate offices and then to millions of peoples homes.
ironically in an age that celebrated free market capitalism government research and government funding had played an enormous role in the development of the most important technology since television.
the end of the cold war ronald reagan entered office determined to confront the soviet union diplomatically and militarily.
backed by republican and democratic hard liners alike reagan unleashed some of the harshest cold war rhetoric since the 1950s labeling the soviet union an evil thinking like a historian personal computing a technological revolution considered historically computers are a strikingly new phenomenon.
the ancestors of the first computers were developed in the 1940s using vacuum tubes and transistors.
integrated circuits were introduced in the 1950s and the first microprocessor in the 1970s.
prior to the decade of the 1980s only the federal government and large corporations and institutions used computers which were massive in size and expensive to purchase.
in the 1980s inventors and entrepreneurs developed the first personal computers which could fit on desks or tables and were soon within the price range of ordinary families.
the computers we know today date from that decade.
another enormous change came in the mid 1990s when the internet whose forerunner was a u s defense department computer network became widely available to the public for the first time.
1 moores law 1965 in 1965 the electronics engineer gordon moore calculated that the number of transistors on an integrated circuit doubled roughly every two years meaning that the power of computers was increasing at that rate.
the complexity for minimum component costs has increased at a rate of roughly a factor of two per year.
certainly over the short term this rate can be expected to continue if not increase.
that means by 1975 the number of components per integrated circuit for minimum cost will be 65 000 i believe that such a large circuit can be built on a single wafer.
2 scene from 2001 a space odyssey 1968 in this scene from an acclaimed science fiction film a space stations computer system named hal defends itself against an astronaut who is determined to shut down the computer.
dave bowman hello hal.
do you read me hal.
hal affirmative dave.
i read you.
db open the pod bay doors hal.
hal im sorry dave.
im afraid i cant do that.
db whats the problem.
hal i think you know what the problem is just as well as i do.
db what are you talking about hal.
hal this mission is too important for me to allow you to jeopardize it.
db i dont know what youre talking about hal.
hal i know that you and frank were planning to disconnect me and im afraid thats something i cannot allow to happen.
db where the hell did you get that idea hal.
hal dave although you took very thorough precautions in the pod against my hearing you i could see your lips move.
db alright hal.
ill go in through the emergency airlock.
hal without your space helmet dave.
youre going to find that rather difficult.
db hal i wont argue with you anymore.
open the door.
hal dave this conversation can serve no purpose anymore.
3 neil ardley world of tomorrow school work and play 1981 in this book written for teenagers neil ardley speculated about the future of computers.
imagine you are living in the future and are doing a project on halleys comet.
its quite some time since it last appeared in 1986 and you want to find out when it will again be seen from earth.
you also want to know the results of a space mission to the comet and find out what the comet is made of.
in the days when the last comet appeared you would have had to look up halleys comet in an encyclopedia or a book on astronomy.
if you didnt possess these books you would have gone to the library to get the information.
people still collect books as valuable antiques or for a hobby but you get virtually all the information you need from the viewscreen of your home computer.
the computer is linked to a library not a library of books but an electronic library where information on every subject is stored in computer memory banks.
computers will make the world of tomorrow a much safer place.
they will do away with cash so that you need 5 interview with steve jobs february 1 1985 apple founder steve jobs one of the pioneers of the personal computer discusses the future of computers and computer networks.
question why should a person buy a computer.
steve jobs there are different answers for different people.
in business that question is easy to answer you can really prepare documents much faster and at a higher quality level and you can do many things to increase office productivity.
a computer frees people from much of the menial work.
remember computers are tools.
tools help us do our work better.
in education computers are the first thing to come along since books that will sit there and interact with you endlessly without judgment.
question what will change.
steve jobs the most compelling reason for most people to buy a computer for the home in the future will be to link it into a nationwide communications network.
were just in the beginning stages of what will be a truly remarkable breakthrough for most people as remarkable as the telephone.
reese there was a war.
a few years from now.
nuclear war.
the whole thing.
all this his gesture includes the car the city the world.
everything is gone.
there were survivors.
nobody knew who started it.
pause it was the machines.
sarah i dont understand.
reese defense network computer.
hooked into everything.
trusted to run it all.
they say it got smart.
a new order of intelligence.
then it saw all people as a threat not just the ones on the other side.
decided our fate in a microsecond.
extermination.
4 scene from terminator 1984 a national defense computer network called skynet decides to exterminate humanity in the film terminator.
6 percentage of americans using the internet.
no longer fear being attacked for your money.
in addition you need not worry that your home will be burgled or your car stolen.
the computers in your home and car will guard them allowing only yourself to enter or someone with your permission.
sources 1 g e moore cramming more components onto integrated circuits electronics april 19 1965 114 2 2001 a space odyssey screenplay by stanley kubrick and arthur c clarke hawk films ltd and mgm studios 1967 3 neil ardley world of tomorrow school work and play new york franklin watts 1981 20 27 4 terminator screenplay by james cameron and gale anne hurd fifth draft pacific western productions inc march 11 1984 134 5 playboy february 1 1985 52 analyzing the evidence 1 compare sources 2 and 4 anxiety about the extraordinary power of computers has been a regular feature of science fiction both in writing and in film since the late 1950s.
what do the scenes from these two films tell us about the cultural reactions to computers early in their development.
2 how does source 3 offer a different vision of a future with computers.
why do you think cultural responses to computers tend to swing between extreme anxiety and equally extreme optimism.
3 how does steve jobss assessment of computers in source 5 compare with those in the other documents.
should we trust his judgment more because he is closer to their actual development.
why or why not.
putting it all together drawing on the history of personal computers discussed in this chapter 11 proclaimed him a saint awaiting his martyrdom the slaveholding states looked to the future with terror.
the aim of the present black republican organization is the destruction of the social system of the southern states warned one newspaper.
once republicans came to power another cautioned they would create insurrection and servile war in the south they would put the torch to our dwellings and the knife to our throats nor could the south count any longer on the democratic party to protect its interests.
at the partys convention in april 1860 northern democrats rejected jefferson daviss proposal to protect slavery in the territories and delegates from eight southern states quit the meeting.
at a second democratic convention northern and midwestern delegates nominated stephen douglas for president meeting separately southern democrats nominated the sitting vice president john c breckinridge of kentucky.
the election of 1860 with the democrats divided the republicans sensed victory.
they courted white voters with a free soil platform that opposed both slavery and racial equality missouri for white men and white men for missouri declared that states republican platform.
the national republican convention chose lincoln as its presidential candidate because he was more moderate on slavery than the best known republicans senators william seward of new york and salmon chase of ohio.
lincoln also conveyed a compelling egalitarian image that appealed to smallholding farmers wage earners and midwestern voters.
the republican strategy worked.
although lincoln received less than 1 percent of the popular vote in the south and only 40 percent of the national poll he won every northern and western state except new jersey giving him 180 of 303 electoral votes and an absolute chapter 31 tunisia malta mediterranean sea unimaginable at the beginning of the twentieth century.
perhaps most important global financial markets became integrated to an unprecedented extent allowing investment capital to flow into and out of nations and around the world in a matter of moments.
turkey cyprus explain consequences what were the major consequences for the united states of the economic rise of china and the european union.
international organizations and corporations international organizations many of them created in the wake of world war ii set the rules for capitalisms worldwide expansion.
during the final decades of the cold war the leading capitalist industrial nations formed the group of seven g7 to manage global economic policy.
russia joined in 1997 creating the group of eight g8.
the g8 nations the united states britain germany france italy japan canada and russia largely controlled the major international financial organizations the world bank the international monetary fund imf and the general agreement on tariffs and trade gatt.
in 1995 gatt evolved into the world trade organization wto with nearly 150 participating nations that regulate and formalize trade agreements with member states.
part 9 global capitalism and the end of the american century 1980 to the present compare and contrast what were the potential benefits and risks of globalization to the united states and other countries.
as globalization accelerated so did the integration of regional economies.
to offset the economic clout of the european bloc in 1993 the united states canada and mexico signed the north american free trade agreement nafta.
this treaty as ratified by the u s congress envisioned the eventual creation of a free trade zone covering all of north america.
in east asia the capitalist nations of japan south korea taiwan and singapore consulted on economic policy as china developed a quasi capitalist economy and became a major exporter of manufactures its communist led government joined their deliberations.
international organizations set the rules but globalization was made possible by the proliferation of multinational corporations mncs.
in 1970 there were 7 000 corporations with offices and factories in multiple countries by 2000 the number had exploded to 63 000 many of the most powerful mncs were and continue to be based in the united states.
walmart the biggest american retailer is also one of the worlds largest corporations with 1 200 stores in other nations and more than 400 billion in sales.
apple maker of the iphone and ipad grew spectacularly in the 2000s and now has more than 60 billion annually in global sales.
the mcdonalds restaurant chain had 1 000 outlets outside the united states in 1980 twenty years later there were nearly 13 000 and mcworld had become a popular shorthand term for globalization.
globalization was driven by more than a quest for new markets.
corporations also sought ever cheaper sources of labor.
many american mncs closed their factories in the united states and outsourced manufacturing jobs to plants in mexico eastern europe a nike factory in china in 2005 nike produced its shoes and sportswear at 124 plants in china additional factories were located in other low wage countries.
most of the chinese plants were run by subcontractors who housed the workers mostly women between the ages of sixteen and twenty five in crowded dormitories.
the wages were low about 3 a day but more than the women could earn if they remained in their rural villages.
chapter 14 unorg.
nebraska territory mexico 400 miles 400 kilometers pennsylvania conn md.
indiana ohio n n j missouri e w virginia indian territory texas illinois kansas territory new mexico territory n y michigan this map records the votes for and against secession in iowa each county or parish.
the states colored orange practiced slavery before and during the civil war but did not secede from the union.
was it the presence of federal troops.
or was it because there were relatively few slaves and slaveholders in those states.
wis minn two societies at war 1861 1865 s kentucky tennessee north carolina south carolina georgia the numbers show the miss.
chronological sequence alabama of secession of the confederate states.
did a states place in the sequence florida reflect the unanimity of its vote.
louisiana arkansas for secession against secession delegation divided no returns border states that did not secede numbers indicate order of secession northern limit of secession before ft sumter northern limit of secession after ft sumter map 14 1 the process of secession 1860 1861 the states of the lower south had the highest concentration of slaves and they led the secessionist movement.
after the attack on fort sumter in april 1861 the states of the upper south joined the confederacy.
yeomen farmers in tennessee and the backcountry of alabama georgia and virginia opposed secession but except in the future state of west virginia initially rallied to the confederate cause.
consequently the south entered the civil war with its white population relatively united.
would unleash new imperialist adventures.
i want cuba senator albert g brown of mississippi had candidly stated in 1858.
i want tamaulipas potosi and one or two other mexican states.
for the planting or spreading of slavery in 1787 1821 and 1850 the north and south had resolved their differences over slavery.
in 1861 there would be no compromise.
in his march 1861 inaugural address lincoln carefully outlined his positions.
he promised to safeguard slavery where it existed but vowed to prevent its expansion.
equally important the republican president declared that the union was perpetual consequently the secession of the confederate states was illegal.
lincoln asserted his intention to hold occupy and possess federal property in the seceded states and to collect duties and imposts there.
if military force was necessary to preserve the union lincoln like democrat andrew jackson during the nullification crisis would use it.
the choice was the souths return to the union or face war.
the upper south chooses sides the souths decision came quickly.
when lincoln dispatched an unarmed ship to resupply fort sumter jefferson davis and his associates in the provisional government of the confederate states decided to seize the fort.
the confederate forces opened fire on april 12 with ardent fire eater edmund ruffin supposedly firing the first cannon.
two days later the union part 5 creating and preserving a continental nation 1844 1877 defenders capitulated.
on april 15 lincoln called 75 000 state militiamen into federal service for how important was the ninety days to put down an insurconflict at fort sumter and rection too powerful to be supwould the confederacy pressed by the ordinary course of or the union have gone judicial proceedings to war without it.
northerners responded to lincolns call to arms with wild enthusiasm.
asked to provide thirteen regiments of volunteers republican governor william dennison of ohio sent twenty.
many northern democrats also lent their support.
every man must be for the united states or against it democratic leader stephen douglas declared.
there can be no neutrals in this war only patriots or traitors how then could the democratic party function as a loyal opposition supporting the union while challenging certain republican policies.
it would not be an easy task.
whites in the middle and border south now had to choose between the union and the confederacy and their decision was crucial.
those eight states accounted for two thirds of the whites in the slaveholding states three fourths of their industrial production and well over half of their food.
they were home to many of the nations best military leaders including colonel robert e lee of virginia a career officer whom veteran general winfield scott recommended to lincoln to lead the new union army.
those states were also geographically strategic.
kentucky with its 500 mile border on the ohio river was essential to the movement of troops and supplies.
maryland was vital to the unions security because it bordered the nations capital on three sides.
the weight of its history as a slave owning society decided the outcome in virginia.
on april 17 1861 a convention approved secession by a vote of 88 to 55 with the dissenters concentrated in the states yeomendominated northwestern counties.
elsewhere virginia whites embraced the confederate cause.
the north was the aggressor declared richmond lawyer william poague as he enlisted.
the south resisted her invaders refusing general scotts offer of the union command robert e lee resigned from the u s army.
save in defense of my native identify causes state lee told scott i never per figure 14 1 was slave desire again to draw my sword ownership in a state the arkansas tennessee and north main cause of early secescarolina quickly joined virginia sion.
what other factors in the confederacy.
drove the secession movelincoln moved aggressively ment.
to hold strategic areas where place events in context original confederate states confederate border states union border states whites who are members of slave owning families share of population who are slaves 38 47 24 32 14 15 figure 14 1 slavery and secession as the pie charts indicate slave labor dominated the economies of the confederate states that initially seceded from the union but it was much less important in confederate states further to the north that seceded later.
relatively few whites owned slaves figure 14 1.
to secure the railway line connecting washington to the ohio river valley the president ordered general george b mcclellan to take control of northwestern virginia.
in october 1861 yeomen there voted overwhelmingly to create a breakaway territory west virginia.
unwilling to act like madmen and cut our own throats merely to sustain.
a most unwarrantable rebellion west virginia joined the union in 1863 unionists also carried the day in delaware.
in maryland where slavery was still entrenched a proconfederate mob attacked massachusetts troops traveling through baltimore causing the wars first combat deaths four soldiers and twelve civilians.
when maryland secessionists destroyed railroad bridges and telegraph lines lincoln ordered union troops to occupy the state and arrest confederate sympathizers including legislators.
he released them only in november 1861 after unionists had secured control of marylands government.
lincoln was equally energetic in the mississippi river valley.
to win control of missouri and the adjacent missouri and upper mississippi rivers lincoln mobilized the states german american militia which strongly opposed slavery.
in july the german americans defeated a force of confederate sympathizers commanded by the states governor.
despite continuing chapter 30.
in what federal government into debt.
by ways was he not.
2006 federal expenditures had jumped 33 percent at a faster clip than under any president since lyndon johnson.
huge increases in healthcare costs were the main culprit.
two of the largest federal programs medicare and medicaid health care for the elderly and the poor respectively could not contain runaway medical costs.
midway through bushs second term the national debt stood at over 8 trillion much of it owned by foreign investors who also financed the nations huge trade deficit.
on top of that staggering social security and medicare obligations were coming due for retiring baby boomers.
it seemed that these burdens would be passed on to future generations figure 31 6.
september 11 2001 how bushs presidency might have fared in normal times is another of those unanswerable questions of history.
as a candidate in 2000 george w bush had said little about foreign policy.
he had assumed that his administration would rise or fall on his domestic program.
but nine months into his presidency an altogether different political scenario unfolded.
on a sunny september morning nineteen islamic terrorists from al qaeda hijacked four commercial jets and flew two of them into new york citys world trade center destroying its twin towers and killing more than 2 900 people.
a third plane crashed into the pentagon near washington d c the fourth presumably headed for the white house or possibly the u s capitol crashed in pennsylvania when the passengers fought back and thwarted the hijackers.
as an outburst of patriotism swept the united states in the wake of the september 11 attacks george w bush proclaimed a war on terror and vowed to carry the battle to al qaeda.
table 31 1 impact of the bush tax cuts 2001 2003 taxpayers less than 50 000 92 093 452 19 521 435 48 474 2 50 000 to 100 000 26 915 091 70 096 1 656 21 6 417 100 000 to 200 000 8 878 643 131 797 3 625 17 18 281 200 000 to 500 000 1 999 061 288 296 7 088 10 60 464 500 000 to 1 000 000 356 140 677 294 22 479 12 169 074 1 000 000 to 10 000 000 175 157 2 146 100 84 666 13 554 286 6 126 25 975 532 1 019 369 15 5 780 926 10 000 000 or more source new york times april 5 2006 gross income total tax cut change in tax bill income in 2003 tax bill tax rate chapter review review questions answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapters main ideas.
1 what connections do you see between globaliza tion and the culture wars of the 1990s.
2 in what ways has the united statess role in the world changed since the end of the cold war.
in what ways has it remained the same.
3 how did immigration to the united states in the last two decades of the twentieth century and the first decade of the twenty first benefit the american economy but produce political backlash.
making connections events included on the thematic timeline on page 971 in what ways does the period between 1992 bill clintons election and 2012 barack obamas reelection suggest a postliberal era in american politics.
in what ways was the conservative resurgence under reagan preserved and in what ways was it not.
recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapter review ask yourself why this chapter 16 pacific time zone mountain time zone seattle c a n a d a central time zone eastern time zone uperior l s portland l boston i nt a r l obuffalo o l michigan chicago ron hu minneapolisst.
paul salt lake city conquering a continent 1854 1890 detroit l ie er cleveland new york pittsburgh omaha denver san francisco cincinnati kansas city washington d c st louis memphis los angeles atlanta atlantic ocean charleston dallas pacific ocean n el paso new orleans railroad growth between 1870 1890 major rail lines in 1870 major rail lines added 1870 1890 e w gulf of me x i co mexico 400 miles 400 kilometers map 16 1 expansion of the railroad system 1870 1890 in 1860 the nation had 30 000 miles of rail track by 1890 it had 167 000 miles.
the tremendous burst of construction during the last twenty years of that period essentially completed the nations rail network although there would be additional expansion for the next two decades.
the main areas of growth were in the south and in lands west of the mississippi.
time zones introduced by the railroad companies in 1883 are marked by the gray lines.
not levy income taxes tariffs provided the bulk of treasury revenue.
the civil war had left the union with a staggering debt of 2 8 billion.
tariff income erased that debt and by the 1880s generated huge budget surpluses a circumstance hard to imagine today.
as reconstruction faltered tariffs came under political fire.
democrats argued that tariffs taxed american consumers by denying them access to lowcost imported goods and forcing them to pay subsidies to u s manufacturers.
republicans claimed conversely that tariffs benefitted workers because they created jobs blocked low wage foreign competition and safeguarded america from the kind of industrial poverty that had arisen in europe.
according to this argument tariffs helped american men earn enough to support their families wives could devote themselves to homemaking and children could go to school not the factory.
for protectionist republicans high tariffs were akin to the abolition of slavery they protected and uplifted the most vulnerable workers.
in these fierce debates both sides were partly right.
protective tariffs did play a powerful role in economic growth.
they helped transform the united states into a global industrial power.
eventually though even protectionist republicans had to admit that democrats had a point tariffs had not prevented industrial poverty in the united states.
corporations accumulated massive benefits from tariffs but failed to pass them along to workers who often toiled long hours for low wages.
furthermore tariffs helped foster trusts corporations that dominated whole sectors of the economy and wielded near monopoly power.
the rise of large private corporations and trusts generated enduring political problems.
s america c o m pa r e d this map based on an 1885 travelers guide published by the atchison topeka and santa fe railroad includes the companys u s lines and also those of its mexican central railroad an atsf subsidiary that crossed the border and terminated at guaymas and mexico city mexico.
the dots represent the many stops that the trains made along the routes between major cities.
most mexican railroads in this era were built and operated by u s companies.
as you analyze this map consider how residents of the two countries may have experienced the railroads arrival in different ways.
the santa fe railroad in mexico and the united states map 16 2 the santa fe railroad system 1885 questions for analysis ogden reno salt lake city sacramento denver pueblo grand junction san visalia francisco kansas city dodge city winslow los angeles las vegas nm san diego united states tucson 1 in what directions could passengers and freight travel on atsf lines in each country.
what does this suggest about the objectives of railroad companies like this one.
2 based on this evidence how might mexicans have experienced the arrival of railroads differently from residents of the western united states.
el paso pacific ocean chihuahua guaymas mexico n w e gulf of mexico s lines of the sante fe railroad with selected stops railroad stop 300 miles 300 kilometers mexico city the role of courts while fostering growth most historians agree republicans did not give government enough regulatory power over the new corporations.
state legislatures did pass hundreds of regulatory laws after the civil war but interstate companies challenged them in federal courts.
in munn v illinois 1877 the supreme court affirmed that states could regulate key businesses such as railroads and grain elevators that were clothed in the public interest however the justices feared that too many state and local regulations would impede business and fragment the national marketplace.
starting in the 1870s they interpreted the due process clause of the new fourteenth amendment which dictated that no state could deprive any person of life liberty or property without due process of law as shielding corporations from excessive regulation.
ironically the court refused to use the same amendment to protect the rights of african americans.
chapter 17 while the old values of thrift piety and domesticity never entirely faded they faced challenges in the era of industrialization.
women asserted more independent roles in public life.
the new model for men was an aggressive masculinity embodied in the rise of sports.
widespread acceptance of charles darwins theory of evolution prompted influential thinkers to justify economic inequality as a law of nature.
in culture the rise of literary realism and abstract art marked decisive innovations.
responding to these upheavals people of religious faith reshaped their institutions.
some accepted modernity while others called for a return to christian fundamentals see chapters 18 and 19 part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 reform initiatives political debates in this era centered on the scope of government power as reformers called for regulation of corporations and other measures to blunt the impact of industrialization.
after the 1880s republicans increasingly defended big business.
though republican theodore roosevelt championed landmark legislation during his presidency 1901 1909 much reform energy passed to other parties.
democrats who had long called for limited government began to advocate stronger federal intervention to fight poverty and restrain big business.
by the 1910s during the presidency of democrat woodrow wilson 1913 1921 the party enacted an impressive slate of laws.
meanwhile the populist socialist and progressive parties proposed more radical responses to industrialization and concentrated wealth.
while none of these parties won national power their ideas helped shape the course of reform.
progressive era reformers a diverse group who were not at all united sought to enhance democracy rein in the power of corporations uphold labor rights protect the environment and promote public health and safety.
they faced formidable obstacles especially from supreme court rulings.
nonetheless by 1917 national state and local governments enacted a range of new laws representing the early emergence of the modern state.
chapter 17 industrial america corporations and conflicts 1877 1911 production and sales after chicagos union stock yards opened in 1865 middlemen shipped cows by rail from the great plains to chicago and from there to eastern cities where slaughter took place in local butchertowns.
such a system a national livestock market with local processing could have lasted as it did in europe.
but gustavus swift a shrewd chicago cattle dealer saw that local slaughterhouses lacked the scale to utilize waste by products and cut labor costs.
to improve productivity swift invented the assembly line where each wageworker repeated the same slaughtering task over and over.
swift also pioneered vertical integration a model in which a company controlled all aspects of production from raw materials to finished goods.
once his engineers designed a cooling system swift invested in a fleet of refrigerator cars to keep beef fresh as he shipped it eastward priced below what local butchers could afford.
in cities that received his chilled meat swift built branch houses and fleets of delivery wagons.
he also constructed factories to make fertilizer and chemicals from the by products of slaughter and he developed marketing strategies for those products as well.
other chicago packers followed swifts lead.
by 1900 five firms all vertically integrated produced nearly 90 percent of the meat shipped in interstate commerce.
swift co s packing house chicago c 1906 this photograph shows the processing system that enabled swift and other large packers to save money through high volume and deskilled labor.
the overhead pulley system shown in the upper right moved carcasses from place to place for completion of different tasks.
auto manufacturer henry ford who won fame for his moving assembly line claimed he got the idea after visiting a meat packing plant such as this.
library of congress.
big packers invented new identify causes sales tactics.
for example swift why did large corporacompany periodically slashed tions arise in the late prices in certain markets to below nineteenth century and production costs driving inde how did leading induspendent distributors to the wall.
trialists consolidate their with profits from its sales else power.
where a large firm like swift could survive temporary losses in one locality until competitors went under.
afterward swift could raise prices again.
this technique known as predatory pricing helped give a few firms unprecedented market control.
standard oil and the rise of the trusts no one used ruthless business tactics more skillfully than the king of petroleum john d rockefeller.
after inventors in the 1850s figured out how to extract kerosene a clean burning fuel for domestic heating and lighting from crude oil enormous oil deposits were discovered at titusville pennsylvania.
just then the civil war severely disrupted whaling forcing whale oil customers to look for alternative lighting sources.
overnight a forest of oil wells sprang up around titusville.
connected to these pennsylvania oil fields by rail in 1863 cleveland ohio became a refining part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 center.
john d rockefeller was then an up and coming cleveland grain dealer.
he like carnegie and most other budding tycoons hired a substitute to fight for him in the civil war.
rockefeller had strong nerves a sharp eye for able partners and a genius for finance.
he went into the kerosene business and borrowed heavily to expand.
within a few years his firm standard oil of ohio was clevelands leading refiner.
like carnegie and swift rockefeller succeeded through vertical integration to control production and sales all the way from the oil well to the kerosene lamp he took a big stake in the oil fields added pipelines and developed a vast distribution network.
rockefeller allied with railroad executives who like him hated the oil markets boom and bust cycles.
what they wanted was predictable high volume traffic and they offered rockefeller secret rebates that gave him a leg up on competitors.
rockefeller also pioneered a strategy called horizontal integration.
after driving competitors to the brink of failure through predatory pricing he invited them to merge their local companies into his conglomerate.
most agreed often because they had no choice.
through such mergers standard oil wrested control of 95 percent of the nations oil refining capacity by the 1880s.
in 1882 rockefellers lawyers created a new legal form the trust.
it organized a small group of associates the board of trustees to hold stock from a group of combined firms managing them as a single entity.
rockefeller soon invested in mexican oil fields and competed in world markets against russian and middle eastern producers.
other companies followed rockefellers lead creating trusts to produce such products as linseed oil sugar and salt.
many expanded sales and production overseas.
as early as 1868 singer manufacturing company established a factory in scotland to produce sewing machines.
by world war i such brands as ford and general electric had become familiar around the world.
distressed by the development of near monopolies reformers began to denounce the trusts a term that in popular usage referred to any large corporation that seemed to wield excessive power.
some states outlawed trusts as a legal form.
but in an effort to attract corporate headquarters to its state new jersey broke ranks in 1889 passing a law that permitted the creation of holding companies and other combinations.
delaware soon followed providing another legal haven for consolidated corporations.
a wave of mergers further concentrated corporate power during the depression of the 1890s as weaker firms succumbed to powerful rivals.
by 1900 americas largest one hundred companies controlled a third of the nations productive capacity.
purchasing several steel companies in 1901 including carnegie steel j p morgan created u s steel the nations first billion dollar corporation.
such familiar firms as dupont and eastman kodak assumed dominant places in their respective industries.
assessing the industrialists the work of men like swift rockefeller and carnegie was controversial in their lifetimes and has been ever since.
opinions have tended to be harsh in eras of economic crisis when the shortcomings of corporate america appear in stark relief.
during the great depression of the 1930s a historian coined the term robber barons which is still used today.
in periods of prosperity both scholars and the public have tended to view early industrialists more favorably calling them industrial statesmen.
some historians have argued that industrialists benefitted the economy by replacing the chaos of market competition with a visible hand of planning and expert management.
but one recent study of railroads asserts that the main skills of early tycoons as well as those of today were cultivating political friends defaulting on loans and lying to the public.
whether we consider the industrialists heroes villains or something in between it is clear that the corporate economy was not the creation of just a few individuals however famous or influential.
it was a systemic transformation of the economy.
a national consumer culture as they integrated vertically and horizontally corporations innovated in other ways.
companies such as bell telephone and westinghouse set up research laboratories.
steelmakers invested in chemistry and materials science to make their products cheaper better and stronger.
mass markets brought an appealing array of goods to consumers who could afford them.
railroads whisked florida oranges and other fresh produce to the shelves of grocery stores.
retailers such as f w woolworth and the great atlantic and pacific tea company a p opened chains of stores that soon stretched nationwide.
the department store was pioneered in 1875 by john wanamaker in philadelphia.
these megastores displaced small retail shops tempting customers with large show windows and christmas displays.
like industrialists department store magnates developed economies of scale that enabled them to slash prices.
an 1898 newspaper advertisement for macys department store urged shoppers to read our books cook in our saucepans dine off our china wear our silks get chapter 17 1871 1880 200 400 miles 1901 1910 200 400 miles 0 200 400 kilometers 0 200 400 kilometers n n w w e a tl a n tic oc ea n norway scotland north sea denmark ireland netherlands england germany belgium norway sweden scotland north sea denmark ireland netherlands england germany belgium sweden russia caspian sea austriafrance hungary switzerland portugal e s s atlan tic ocean industrial america corporations and conflicts 1877 1911 russia caspian sea austriafrance switzerland hungary black sea italy portugal spain spain ottoman empire italy romania black sea bulgaria serbia ottoman empire greece m e d i t e r r a n e a n se a m e d i t e rra n e a n s e a number of immigrants per decade to the united states to 10 000 100 000 500 000 500 000 1 000 000 1 000 000 2 000 000 over 2 000 000 approximate area of immigrants to the united states claiming polish ancestry.
poland was not an independent country at this time.
map 17 2 sources of european immigration to the united states 1871 1910 around 1900 americans began to speak of the new immigration.
they meant the large numbers of immigrants arriving from eastern and southern europe poles slovaks and other slavic peoples yiddish speaking jews italians who overwhelmed the still substantial number of immigrants from the british isles and northern europe.
canadians moved to new england in search of textile jobs many families with hopes of scraping together enough savings to return to quebec and buy a farm.
thousands of men came alone especially from ireland italy and greece.
many single irishwomen also immigrated.
but some would be sojourners ended up staying a lifetime while immigrants who had expected to settle permanently found themselves forced to leave by an accident or sudden economic depression.
one historian has estimated that a third of immigrants to the united states in this era returned to their home countries.
along with italians and greeks eastern european jews were among the most numerous arrivals.
the first american jews who numbered around 50 000 in 1880 had been mostly of german jewish descent.
in the next four decades more than 3 million poverty stricken jews arrived from russia ukraine poland and other parts of eastern europe transforming the jewish presence in the united states.
like other immigrants they sought economic opportunity but they also came to escape religious repression american voices p 562.
wherever they came from immigrants took a considerable gamble in traveling to the united states.
some prospered quickly especially if they came with education money or well placed business contacts.
others by toiling many years in harsh conditions succeeded in securing a better life for their children or grandchildren.
still others met with catastrophe or early death.
one polish man who came with his parents in 1908 summed up his life over the next thirty years as a mere struggle for bread he added sometimes i think life isnt worth a damn for a man america c o m pa r e d emigrants and destinations 1881 1915 the united states received more new residents than any other nation during the era of industrialization but it was not the only place where emigrants those departing became immigrants those arriving.
the graph below shows six major destinations for emigrants from four european countries.
british emigrants excluding ireland united states 57 german emigrants canada 22 united states 95 oceania 13 africa 1 oceania 1 africa 8 italian emigrants united states 55 brazil 2 canada 1 argentina 1 swedish emigrants argentina 23 united states 100 brazil 16 oceania 1 africa 3 canada 2 primarily to australia and new zealand figure 17 2 major destinations for emigrants 1881 1915 questions for analysis 1 what might account for the different emigration patterns shown here.
2 what choices and limitations might each group of emigrants have faced in choosing the country to which they like me.
look at my wife and kids undernourished seldom have a square meal but an orthodox russian jewish woman told an interviewer that she thanked god for america where she had married raised three children and made a good life.
she liked everything about this country especially its leniency toward the jews emigrated.
do these figures suggest anything about the conditions various groups may have encountered in different countries upon arrival.
asian americans and exclusion compared with europeans newcomers from asia faced even harsher treatment.
the first chinese immigrants had arrived in the late 1840s during the california gold rush.
after the civil war the burlingame treaty between the united states and china opened chapter 22.
to enforce the law congress and the courts gave what were the long term sweeping new powers to immiconsequences of the chigration officials transforming the nese exclusion act for u s chinese into americas first illegal immigration policy.
immigrants.
drawn like others by the promise of jobs in americas expanding economy chinese men stowed away on ships or walked across the borders.
disguising themselves as mexicans who at that time could freely enter the united states some perished in the desert as they tried to reach california.
some would be immigrants known as paper sons relied on chinese residents in the united states who generated documents falsely claiming the newcomers as american born children.
paper sons memorized pages of information about their supposed relatives and hometowns.
the san francisco earthquake of 1906 helped their cause by destroying all the ports records.
that was a big chance for a lot of chinese remembered one immigrant.
they forged themselves certificates saying they could go back to china and bring back four or five sons just like that such persistence explain consequences ensured that despite the harsh policies of chinese exclusion the flow of asian immigrants never fully ceased.
labor gets organized in the american political system labor has typically been weak.
industrial workers cluster in cities near factories and jobs compared with small towns and rural areas urban areas have been underrepresented in bodies such as the u s senate and the presidential electoral college in which representation is calculated by state rather than or in addition to individuals.
this problem became acute in the era of industrialization and it has lingered.
even today the twenty two u s senators elected from alaska idaho iowa maine mississippi montana new mexico north dakota vermont west virginia and wyoming represent a smaller number of people combined than the two u s senators who represent heavily urban california.
faced with this obstacle labor advocates could adopt one of two strategies.
first they could try to make political alliances with sympathetic rural voters anti chinese racism this cartoon from the magazine puck drawn by james a wales during the 1880 presidential campaign offers vivid evidence of the widespread and virulent american prejudice against chinese immigrants.
republican candidate james garfield on the left and democratic candidate winfield scott hancock on the right both nail up their partys planks in favor of restricting chinese immigration.
asian immigrants were not permitted to apply for naturalization as u s citizens they thus had no vote and no power in politics.
congress passed the chinese exclusion act with bipartisan support soon after garfields victory.
library of congress.
chapter 17 industrial america corporations and conflicts 1877 1911 who shared their problems.
second they could reject politics and create narrowly focused trade unions to negotiate directly with employers.
in general labor advocates emphasized the first strategy between the 1870s and the early 1890s and the latter in the early twentieth century.
across this era while industrialization made america increasingly rich and powerful it also brought large scale conflict between labor and capital.
the emergence of a labor movement the problem of industrial labor entered americans consciousness dramatically with the great railroad strike of 1877 protesting steep wage cuts amid the depression that had begun in 1873 thousands of railroad workers walked off the job.
broader issues were at stake.
the officers of the road reported strike leader barney donahue in upstate new york were bound to break the spirit of the men and any or all organizations they belonged to he believed railroad companies wanted to block workers from all fellowship for mutual aid the strike brought rail travel and commerce to a halt.
thousands of people poured into the streets of buffalo pittsburgh and chicago to protest the economic injustice wrought by railroads as well as fires caused by stray sparks from locomotives and injuries and deaths on train tracks in urban neighborhoods.
when pennsylvanias governor sent state militia to break the strike pittsburgh crowds reacted by burning railroad property and overturning locomotives.
similar clashes between police and protesters occurred in other cities across the country from galveston texas to san francisco.
the 1877 strike left more than fifty people dead and caused 40 million worth of damage primarily to railroad property.
it seemed as if the whole social and political structure was on the very brink of ruin wrote one journalist.
for their role in the strike many railroad workers were fired and blacklisted railroad companies circulated their names on a do not hire list to prevent them from getting any work in the industry.
in the aftermath of the strike the u s government created the national guard intended not to protect americans against foreign invasion but to enforce order at home.
watching the upheavals of industrialization some radical thinkers pointed out its impact on workers.
among the most influential was henry george whose book progress and poverty 1879 was a best seller for decades after publication.
george warned that americans had been too optimistic about the impact of railroads and manufacturing which they hoped would after an initial period of turmoil bring prosperity to all.
george believed the emerging industrial order meant permanent poverty.
industrialization he wrote was driving a wedge through society lifting the fortunes of professionals and the middle class but pushing the working class down by forcing them into deskilled dangerous and low paid labor.
georges proposed solution a federal single tax on landholdings did not win widespread support but his insightful diagnosis of the problem helped encourage radical movements for economic reform.
many rural people believed they faced the same problems as industrial workers.
in the new economy they found themselves at the mercy of large corporations from equipment dealers who sold them harvesters and plows to railroads and grain elevators that shipped and stored their products.
though farmers appeared to have more independence than corporate employees many felt trapped in a web of middlemen who chipped away at their profits while international forces robbed them of decision making power.
farmers denounced not only corporations but also the previous two decades of government efforts to foster economic development policies that now seemed wrongheaded.
farmers advocates argued that high tariffs forced rural families to pay too much for basic necessities while failing to protect americas great export crops cotton and wheat.
at the same time they charged republican financial policies benefitted banks not borrowers.
farmers blamed railroad companies for taking government grants and subsidies to build but then charging unequal rates that privileged big manufacturers.
from the farmers point of view public money had been used to build giant railroad companies that turned around and exploited ordinary people.
the most prominent rural protest group of the early postwar decades was the national grange of the patrons of husbandry founded in 1867 like industrial workers grange farmers sought to counter the rising power of corporate middlemen through cooperation and mutual aid.
local grange halls brought farm families together for recreation and conversation.
the grange set up its own banks insurance companies and grain elevators and in iowa even a farm implement factory.
many grange members also advocated political action building independent local parties that ran on anticorporate platforms.
during the 1870s depression grangers labor advocates and local workingmens parties forged a national political movement the greenback labor part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 houstons cotton depot c 1909 after the civil war cotton agriculture blossomed on the rich lands of east texas and houston simultaneously blossomed as the regions commercial center.
this tinted photograph from the 1890s reveals the tremendous volume of traffic that came through houston where texas cotton was compacted in steam powered cotton presses loaded onto railcars and shipped to cotton mills in the southeast and britain to be made into cloth.
university of houston libraries special collections george fuerman collection.
compare and contrast party.
in the south greenbackers protested the collapse of reconstruction and urged that every how did the methods mans vote be protected.
across used by railroad workers the country greenbackers advoto protest their working cated laws to regulate corporaconditions compare with tions and enforce an eight hour the tactics employed by workday to reduce long grueling the greenbackers who work hours.
they called for the also sought reform.
federal government to print more greenback dollars and increase the amount of money in circulation this they argued would stimulate the economy create jobs and help borrowers by allowing them to pay off debts in dollars that over time slowly decreased in value.
greenbackers like many industrial labor leaders subscribed to the ideal of producerism they dismissed middlemen bankers lawyers and investors as idlers who lived off the sweat of people who worked with their hands.
as a pittsburgh worker put it in an 1878 poem it was not the money handlers or executives at the top but the noble sons of labor.
who with bone and brain and fiber make the nations wealth the greenback movement radicalized thousands of farmers miners and industrial workers.
in alabamas coal mining regions black and white miners cooperated in the party.
texas boasted seventy african american greenback clubs.
in 1878 greenback labor candidates won more than a million votes and the party elected fifteen congressmen nationwide.
in the midwest greenback pressure helped trigger a wave of economic regulatory actions known as granger laws.
by the early 1880s twenty nine states had created railroad commissions to supervise railroad rates and policies others appointed commissions to regulate insurance and utility companies.
such early regulatory efforts were not always effective but they were crucial starting points for reform.
while short lived the greenback movement created the foundation for more sustained efforts to regulate big business.
chapter 20.
what gompers gave up most crucially in the meantime was the inclusiveness of the knights.
by comparison the afl was far less welcoming to women and blacks it included mostly skilled craftsmen.
there was little room in the afl for department store clerks and other service workers much less the farm tenants and domestic servants whom the knights had organized.
despite the afls success among skilled craftsmen the narrowness of its base was a problem that would come back to haunt the labor movement later on.
gompers however saw that corporate titans and their political allies held tremendous power and he chapter 9 before the family moved west to take advantage of new opportunities.
what similarities and differences might they see in their various experiences of work.
what does this tell us about changes in workers lives over these decades.
across time and place return to the chapters founded soup kitchens and free libraries.
they introduced a german educational innovation the kindergarten.
they investigated prison conditions.
though she did not persuade most prohibitionists to follow her a plea for temperance 1874 the origins of the womans christian temperance union lay in spontaneous prayer meetings held by women outside local saloons where they appealed for men to stop drinking and liquor sellers to destroy their product.
a string of such meetings in ohio won national attention as in this image from a popular magazine the daily graphic.
who will win asked the artist.
the answers varied.
a few saloon owners struck with remorse over the damage caused by alcohol abuse smashed their beer kegs and poured their liquor into the gutters.
far more refused but in the 1880s temperance women succeeded in organizing the largest grassroots movement of their day to build support for outlawing liquor sales.
the granger collection new york.

chapter individualism also helped to inspire the expansion of democracy.
ownership of ones self rather than ownership of property now made a person capable of exercising the right to vote.
looking back from the 1880s emerson would recall the era before the civil war as a time when social existence gave way to the enlargement and independency of the individual.
driven to find all his resources hopes rewards society and deity within himself in his own life thoreau illustrated emersons point about the primacy of individual conscience in matters political social and personal and the need to find ones own way rather than following the crowd.
like other transcendentalists he did not approve of the way individuals in a market economy engaged in this pursuit of happiness.
thoreau became persuaded that modern society stifled individual judgment by making men tools of their tools trapped in stultifying jobs by their obsession with acquiring wealth.
even in this comparatively free country he wrote most persons were so preoccupied with material things that they had no time to contemplate the beauties of nature.
to escape this fate thoreau retreated for two years to a cabin on walden pond near concord where he could enjoy the freedom of isolation from the economical and moral tyranny he believed ruled american society.
he subsequently published walden 1854 an account of his experiences and a critique of how the market revolution was in his opinion degrading both americans values and the natural environment.
an area that had been covered with dense forest in his youth he observed had been so how did the meanings of american freedom change in this period.
transformed by woodcutters and farmers that it had become almost completely devoid of trees and wild animals.
in one famous passage thoreau noted how his enjoyment of nature was disturbed by the distant sound of a locomotive whistle a symbol of how it seemed impossible to escape the market revolution.
thoreau appealed to americans to simplify their lives rather than become obsessed with the accumulation of wealth.
genuine freedom he insisted lay within.
the second great awakening the popular religious revivals that swept over the country during the second great awakening added a religious underpinning to the celebration of personal self improvement self reliance and self determination.
these revivals which began at the turn of the century were originally organized by established religious leaders alarmed by low levels of church attendance in the young republic perhaps as few as 10 percent of white americans regularly attended church during the 1790s.
but they quickly expanded far beyond existing churches.
they reached a crescendo in the 1820s and early 1830s when the reverend charles grandison finney held months long revival meetings in upstate new york and new york city.
the son of connecticut farmers finney had been inspired to preach after attending a religious revival in 1821 like the evangelists traveling preachers of the first great awakening of the mid eighteenth century discussed in chapter 4 finney warned of hell in vivid language while offering the promise of salvation to converts who abandoned their sinful ways.
he became a national celebrity after his success in oneida county in upstate new york.
after finneys preaching according to one report the area had religious camp meeting a watercolor from the late 1830s depicting an evangelical preacher at a revival meeting.
some of the audience members seem inattentive while others are moved by his fiery sermon.
9 the market revolution 1800 1840 the free individual das neue jerusalem the new jerusalem an early nineteenth century watercolor in german illustrates the narrow gateway to heaven and the fate awaiting sinners in hell.
these were common themes of preachers in the second great awakening.
been completely overthrown by the holy ghost so that the theater has been deserted the tavern sanctified.
and far higher and purer enjoyment has been found in exercises of devotion the second great awakening democratized american christianity making it a truly mass enterprise.
at the time of independence fewer than 2 000 christian ministers preached in the united states.
in 1845 they numbered 40 000 evangelical denominations like the methodists and baptists enjoyed explosive growth in membership and smaller sects proliferated.
by the 1840s methodism with more than 1 million members had become the countrys largest denomination.
deism a form of religious belief hostile to organized churches had been prominent among the generation of the founding fathers.
it now waned and christianity became even more central to american culture.
americans wrote tocqueville combine the notions of christianity and of liberty so intimately in their minds that it is impossible to make them conceive the one without the other new religious prophets seemed to appear regularly in early nineteenthcentury america determined in novelist herman melvilles phrase to gospelize the world anew at large camp meetings especially prominent on the frontier fiery revivalist preachers rejected the idea that man is a sinful creature with a preordained fate promoting instead the doctrine of human free will.
at these gatherings rich and poor male and female and in some instances whites and blacks worshiped alongside one another and pledged to abandon worldly sins in favor of the godly life.
the awakening s impact even more than its predecessor of several decades earlier the second great awakening stressed the right of private judgment in spiritual matters and the possibility of universal salvation through faith and good works.
every visions of freedom official seal of arkansas and title page of walden.
these images offer two responses to the market revolution.
the official seal of arkansas 1836 juxtaposes a woman holding a cap of liberty with symbols of technological progress an iron plow and a steamboat and material prosperity horns of plenty.
the sketch of henry david thoreaus cabin on walden pond illustrates his belief that americans could enjoy what he called absolute freedom by rejecting market society and retreating into the wilderness.
only in this way he insisted could they preserve both individual independence and the natural environment.
questions 1 what does each vision of freedom offer that the other lacks.
2 why do you think that the seal of arkansas a slave state includes no image of slavery.
9 the market revolution 1800 1840 the limits of prosperity person finney insisted was a moral free agent that is a person free to choose between a christian life and sin.
sinners could experience a change of heart and embrace spiritual freedom defined in the words of evangelical minister jonathan blanchard as christ ruling in and over rational creatures who are obeying him freely and from choice revivalist ministers seized the opportunities offered by the market revolution to spread their message.
they raised funds embarked on lengthy preaching tours by canal steamboat and railroad and flooded the country with mass produced inexpensive religious tracts.
the revivals opening of religion to mass participation and their message that ordinary americans could shape their own spiritual destinies resonated with the spread of market values.
to be sure evangelical preachers can hardly be described as cheerleaders for a market society.
they regularly railed against greed and indifference to the welfare of others as sins.
finney called selfishness an extreme form of individualism encouraged by the scramble for wealth produced by the market revolution the law of satans empire not gods.
yet the revivals thrived in areas caught up in the rapid expansion of the market economy such as the region of upstate new york along the path of the erie canal.
most of finneys converts here came from the commercial and professional classes.
evangelical ministers promoted what might be called a controlled individualism as the essence of freedom.
in stressing the importance of industry sobriety and self discipline as examples of freely chosen moral behavior evangelical preachers promoted the very qualities necessary for success in a market culture.
the limits of prosperity liberty pat lyon at the forge an 1826 1827 painting of a prosperous blacksmith.
proud of his accomplishments as a selfmade man who had achieved success through hard work and skill rather than inheritance lyon asked the artist to paint him in his shop wearing his work clothes.
and prosperity as the market revolution progressed the right to compete for economic advancement became a touchstone of american freedom.
the whole question of freedom or slavery for man argued henry c carey perhaps the eras most prominent economist was bound up with economic achievement.
official imagery linked the goddess of liberty ever more closely to emblems of material wealth.
new jersey whose official seal adopted in 1776 had paired liberty with ceres the roman goddess of agriculture in 1821 added the motto liberty and prosperity the state seal of arkansas admitted to the union in 1836 pictured liberty atop an image of a steamboat and two overflowing horns of plenty.
many enterprising americans seized the opportunities offered by the market revolution to enrich themselves.
john jacob astor the son of a poor german butcher who emigrated to the united states at the end of the war of independence earned large profits in the early nineteenth century by shipping furs to china and importing teas and silk.
astor invested his wealth in manhattan real estate which was rapidly rising in value and built astor house which quickly became the nations most famous hotel.
he died in 1848 the richest man in the united states leaving a fortune of perhaps 10 million the equivalent of hundreds of millions of dollars today.
astors story seemed to exemplify the opportunities open to the selfmade man a term that came into use during his lifetime.
according to this how did the market revolution affect the lives of workers women and african americans.
idea those who achieved success in america did so not as a result of hereditary privilege or government favoritism as in europe but through their own intelligence and hard work.
in the extent of his wealth of course astor was hardly typical.
but the market revolution and the quickening of commercial life enriched numerous bankers merchants industrialists and planters.
it produced a new middle class an army of clerks accountants and other office employees who staffed businesses in boston new york and elsewhere.
it created new opportunities for farmers who profited from the growing demand at home and abroad for american agricultural products and for skilled craftsmen like thomas rodgers a machine builder who established a successful locomotive factory in paterson new jersey.
new opportunities for talented men opened in professions like law medicine and teaching.
by the early 1820s there were an estimated 10 000 physicians in the united states.
race and opportunity the market revolution affected the lives of all americans.
but not all were positioned to take advantage of its benefits.
most blacks of course were slaves but even free blacks found themselves excluded from the new economic opportunities.
the 220 000 blacks living in the free states on the eve of the civil war less than 2 percent of the norths population suffered discrimination in every phase of their lives.
although virtually every northern county east of the mississippi river reported some black residents the majority of blacks lived in the poorest unhealthiest sections of cities like new york philadelphia and cincinnati.
and even these neighborhoods were subjected to occasional violent assault by white mobs like the armed bands that attacked blacks and destroyed their homes and businesses in cincinnati in 1829 barred from schools and other public facilities free blacks laboriously constructed their own institutional life centered on mutual aid and educational societies as well as independent churches most notably the african methodist episcopal church.
richard allen of philadelphia a methodist preacher had been spurred to found the church after being forcibly removed from his former church for praying at the altar rail a place reserved for whites.
while many white americans could look forward to a life of economic accumulation and individual advancement large numbers of free blacks experienced downward mobility.
as noted in chapter was entitled how to endure poverty.
child supported her family by her writing and became a prominent advocate of antislavery and of greater rights for women.
her diary reveals that in a single year she also sewed thirty six pieces of clothing prepared more than 700 meals and spent much time supervising household help.
by any reasonable definition child worked at home and as a writer.
but discussions of labor rarely mentioned housewives domestic servants and female outworkers except as an indication of how the spread of capitalism was degrading men.
the idea that the male head of household should command a family wage that enabled him to support his wife and children became a popular definition of social justice.
it sank deep roots no more grinding the poor but liberty and the rights of man a labor movement cartoon of the 1830s.
the devil and a millionaire conspire to buy an election with money in the box at the lower left while an honest workingman hands his ballot to a female figure of liberty.
the workers motto is liberty equity justice and the rights of man how did the market revolution affect the lives of workers women and african americans.
not only among middle class americans but among working class men as well.
capitalism said the newspaper workingmans advocate tore women from their role as happy and independent mistresses of the domestic sphere and forced them into the labor market thereby undermining the natural order of the household and the authority of its male head.
the e a r ly labor movement as this complaint suggests although many americans welcomed the market revolution others felt threatened by its consequences.
surviving members of the revolutionary generation feared that the obsession with personal economic gain was undermining devotion to the public good.
commerce luxury and avarice warned john adams have destroyed every republican government in the 1820s as he neared the end of his life jefferson was denouncing stockjobbers financiers speculators and others for leading the nation away from his idealized virtuous agrarian republic.
many americans experienced the market revolution not as an enhancement of the power to shape their own lives but as a loss of freedom.
the period between the war of 1812 and 1840 witnessed a sharp economic downturn in 1819 a full fledged depression starting in 1837 and numerous ups and downs in between during which employment was irregular and numerous businesses failed.
for every aspiring american who rode the tide of economic progress another seemed to sink beneath the waves.
the economic transformation produced an explosive growth in the nations output and trade and a rise in the general standard of living.
but especially in the growing cities of the northeast it significantly widened the gap between wealthy merchants and industrialists on the one hand and impoverished factory workers unskilled dockworkers and seamstresses laboring at home on the other.
in massachusetts the most industrialized state in the country the richest 5 percent of the population owned more than half the wealth.
inequality was even more pronounced in philadelphia where the top 1 percent possessed more wealth than the rest of the population combined.
bankruptcy was a common fact of life and men unable to pay their debts filled the prisons of major cities.
alarmed at the erosion of traditional skills and the threat of being reduced to the status of dependent wage earners skilled craftsmen in the late 1820s created the worlds first workingmens parties short lived political organizations that sought to mobilize lower class support for candidates who would press for free public education an end to imprisonment for debt and legislation limiting work to ten hours per day.
in the 1830s a time of rapidly rising prices union organization spread and strikes became commonplace.
along with demands for higher wages and shorter hours the early labor movement called for free homesteads for settlers on public land and an end to the imprisonment of union leaders for conspiracy.
the shoemakers strike in lynn procession in the midst of a snowstorm of eight hundred women operatives an engraving from frank leslies illustrated newspaper march 17 1860 the striking women workers carry a banner comparing their condition to that of slaves.
9 the market revolution 1800 1840 the liberty the limits of prosperity of living but over and above these specific issues workers language of protest drew on older ideas of freedom linked to economic autonomy public spirited virtue and social equality.
the conviction of twenty new york tailors in 1835 under the common law of conspiracy for combining to seek higher wages inspired a public procession marking the burial of liberty such actions and language were not confined to male workers.
the young mill women of lowell walked off their jobs in 1834 to protest a reduction in wages and again two years later when employers raised rents at their boardinghouses.
they carried banners affirming their rights as daughters of free men and addressing the factory owners they charged the oppressive hand of avarice greed would enslave us freedom noah websters american dictionary declared in 1828 was a state of exemption from the power or control of another the labor movement asked how many wage earners truly enjoyed such exemption some labor spokesmen like langdon byllesby of philadelphia went so far as to describe wage labor itself as the very essence of slavery since dependence on another person for ones economic livelihood was incompatible with freedom.
the idea that permanent wage work bore some resemblance to slavery was not confined to labor radicals.
in herman melvilles short story the tartarus of maids workers in a new england paper mill stand by their machines mutely and cringingly as the slave rooted in the traditions of the small producer and the identification of freedom with economic independence labors critique of the market economy directly challenged the idea that individual improvement emersons self trust self reliance self control self culture offered an adequate response to social inequality.
wealth and labor wrote orestes brownson in his influential essay the laboring classes 1840 were at war.
workers problems he went on must be understood as institutional not individual.
they had their root in the constitution of society and their solution required not a more complete individualism but a radical change in existing social arrangements so as to produce equality between man and man we are free wrote peter rdel an immigrant german shoemaker but not free enough.
we want the liberty of living here lay the origins of the idea which would become far more prominent in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries that economic security a standard of life below which no person would fall formed an essential part of american freedom.
thus the market revolution transformed and divided american society and its conceptions of freedom.
it encouraged a new emphasis on individualism and physical mobility among white men while severely limiting the options available to women and african americans.
it opened new opportunities for economic freedom for many americans while leading others to fear that their traditional economic independence was being eroded.
in a democratic society it was inevitable that the debate over the market revolution and its consequences for freedom would be reflected in american politics.
suggested reading suggested reading books arieli yehoshua.
individualism and nationalism in american ideology 1964.
a study of the rise of individualism and other key ideas in american thought.
boydston jeanne.
home and work housework wages and the ideology of work in the early republic 1990.
examines how the market revolution affected ideas relating to womens work.
butler jon.
awash in a sea of faith christianizing the american people 1990.
a history of american religion with emphasis on evangelical movements including the second great awakening.
clark christopher.
the roots of rural capitalism western massachusetts 1780 1860 1990.
considers how the market revolution transformed economic and social life in one region of the north.
deyle steven.
carry me back the domestic slave trade in american life 2005.
the most comprehensive history of the internal slave trade by which millions of slaves were transported to the deep south.
dublin thomas.
women at work the transformation of work in lowell massachusetts 1826 1860 1975.
a pioneering study of the working and nonworking lives of lowell factory girls faragher john m sugar creek life on the illinois prairie 1986.
traces the growth of a frontier community from early settlement to market society.
harris leslie.
in the shadow of slavery african americans in new york city 1626 1863 2003.
a study that emphasizes the exclusion of african americans from the economic opportunities offered by the market revolution.
howe daniel w what hath god wrought the transformation of america 1815 1848 2007.
a comprehensive account of social and political changes in this era emphasizing the significance of the communications revolution.
johnson paul e a shopkeepers millennium society and revivals in rochester new york 1815 1837 1978.
explores the impact of religious revivals on a key city of upstate new york.
kasson john f civilizing the machine technology and republican values in america 1776 1900 1976.
examines how americans tried to incorporate the emerging factory system into their concepts of freedom and equality.
miller kerby a exiles and emigrants ireland and the irish exodus to north america 1985.
an examination of irish immigration over the course of american history.
ryan mary p cradle of the middle class the family in oneida county new york 1790 1865 1981.
examines how economic change helped to produce a new kind of middle class family structure centered on womens dominance of the household.
stansell christine.
city of women sex and class in new york 1789 1860 1986.
considers how gender conventions and economic change shaped the lives of working class women.
wilentz sean.
chants democratic new york city and the rise of the american working class 1788 1850 1984.
a study of the early labor movement in one of its key centers in antebellum america.
websites american transcendentalism erie canal time machine women in america 1820 1842 detoc fem home htm c hapter r eview review questions 1 identify the major transportation improvements in this period and explain how they influenced the market economy.
2 how did state and local governments promote the national economy in this period.
3 how did the market economy increase the nations sectional differences.
4 explain how the market economy promoted the growth of cities in the east and along the frontier.
5 what role did immigrants play in the new market society.
6 what were the main changes in american law during this period.
7 as it democratized american christianity the second great awakening both took advantage of the market revolution and criticized its excesses.
8 what was the cult of domesticity and how was it a result of the market revolution.
freedom questions 1 explain how the growth of the cotton kingdom benefited planters and other slaveowners but reduced the liberties of poorer southern farmers and africanamericans.
2 how did the growth of the factory system limit the traditional freedoms of american artisans and how did they respond.
3 the market revolution added new terminology to the american lexicon.
explain how each of the following concepts is related to a change in individual freedom wages clock time self made man privacy and middle class.
4 the 1828 edition of noah websters american dictionary defined freedom as a state of exemption from the power and control of another using this definition assess the impact of the market revolution on the freedoms of white women african americans immigrants and wage workers.
5 explain how the market revolution changed the meanings of american freedom both by reinforcing older ideas and creating new ones.
study and review at key terms turnpikes p 333 r e v i e w ta b l e landmarks of the market revolution erie canal p 334 event date accomplishment telegraph p 335 congress approves funds for a national road cumberland road reaches ohio river in 1818 and illinois in 1838 cotton kingdom p 339 robert fultons steamboat the clermont navigates the hudson river makes possible upstream commerce on the countrys major rivers slave coffles p 340 waltham textile mills open by 1850 the areas 52 mills employ 10 000 workers dartmouth college case court defines corporate charters issued by states as contracts erie canal completed connects new york city to the great lakes work begun on b o railroad the nations first commercial railroad national railroad network grows to 30 000 miles by 1860 invention of mccormick reaper and deere steel plow 1830s made mass production of grain crops possible commonwealth v hunt affirmed legality of workers unions and strikes telegraph put into commercial operation 50 000 miles of telegraph wire is strung by 1860 squatters p 337 cotton gin p 339 john deere steel plow p 342 cyrus mccormick reaper p 342 factory system p 343 american system of manufactures p 346 mill girls p 348 nativism p 350 gibbons v ogden p 351 charles river bridge case p 351 manifest destiny p 352 transcendentalists p 353 camp meetings p 358 self made man p 360 cult of domesticity p 362 c hapter 10 bank of the united states charter expires second bank of the united states established inauguration of james monroe panic of 1819 mcculloch v maryland missouri compromise monroe doctrine inauguration of john quincy adams tariff of abominations exposition and protest inauguration of andrew jackson 1830 nullification crisis indian removal act cherokee nation v georgia worcester v georgia tocquevilles democracy in america 1835 second seminole war inauguration of martin van buren 1837 panic of 1837 1838 trail of tears inauguration of william henry harrison dorr war democracy in america 1815 1840 the triumph of democracy property and democracy the dorr war tocqueville on democracy the information revolution the limits of democracy a racial democracy race and class nationalism and its discontents the american system banks and money the panic of 1819 the politics of the panic the missouri controversy the slavery question the nationalism of john quincy adams liberty is power martin van buren and the democratic party the election of 1828 the age of jackson the party system democrats and whigs public and private freedom politics and morality south carolina and nullification calhouns political theory the nullification crisis indian removal the supreme court and the indians nation section and party the bank war and after the united states and the latin american wars of independence the monroe doctrine the election of 1824 biddles bank the pet banks and the economy the panic of 1837 van buren in office the election of 1840 his accidency the house of representatives in 1822 in a painting by samuel f b morse who also invented the telegraph.
by this time most adult white men could vote for members of the house a far wider franchise than was known in europe at the time.
f ocus q uestions what were the social bases for the flourishing democracy of the early mid nineteenth century.
what efforts were made in this period to strengthen the economic integration of the nation and what major crises hindered these efforts.
what were the major areas of conflict between nationalism and sectionalism.
in what ways did andrew jackson embody the contradictions of democratic nationalism.
how did the bank war influence the economy and party competition.
l t he inauguration of andrew jackson on march 4 1829 made it clear that something had changed in american politics.
the swearing in of the president had previously been a small dignified event.
jacksons inauguration attracted a crowd of some 20 000 people who poured into the white house after the ceremony ruining furniture and breaking china and glassware in the crush.
it was the reign of king mob lamented justice joseph story of the supreme court.
jackson aroused powerful feelings pro and con.
his supporters viewed his election as the advent of genuine democracy the coming to power of the common man philip hone a new york political leader who kept a detailed diary for more than thirty years recorded that jackson was the most popular man we have ever known hone had voted for president john quincy adams in 1828 but he recognized that jacksons democratic bearing and beliefs suit the people exactly jacksons critics on the other hand considered him a tyrant.
they called him king andrew i and when they organized politically they borrowed their name the whig party from the opponents of royal power in eighteenth century england.
andrew jacksons career embodied the major developments of his era the market revolution the westward movement the expansion of slavery and the growth of democracy.
he was a symbol of the self made man.
unlike previous presidents jackson rose to prominence from a humble background reflecting his eras democratic opportunities.
born in 1767 on the south carolina frontier he had been orphaned during the american revolution.
early on jackson displayed the courage and impetuousness for which he would later become famous.
while still a youth he served as a courier for patriotic forces during the war of independence.
captured and imprisoned he was almost killed when a british officer struck him with a sword after jackson refused an order to polish the officers boots.
as a young man jackson moved to tennessee where he studied law became involved in local politics and in the 1790s won election to the house of representatives and the senate and became a judge on the state supreme court.
his military campaigns against the british and indians helped to consolidate american control over the deep south making possible the rise of the cotton kingdom.
he himself acquired a large plantation in tennessee.
but more than anything else to this generation of americans andrew jackson symbolized one of the most crucial features of national life the triumph of political democracy.
americans pride themselves on being the worlds oldest democracy.
new zealand whose constitution of 1893 gave women and maoris the native population the right to vote may have a better claim.
even in the nineteenth century when democracy meant male suffrage some latin american nations extended the right to vote to free blacks and the what were the social bases for the flourishing democracy of the early mid nineteenth century.
descendants of the indigenous population well before the united states.
europe lagged far behind.
britain did not achieve universal male suffrage until the 1880s.
france instituted it in 1793 abandoned it in 1799 reintroduced it in 1848 and abandoned it again a few years later.
more to the point perhaps democracy became part of the definition of american nationality and the american idea of freedom.
the triumph of democracy property and democracy the market revolution and territorial expansion were intimately connected with a third central element of american freedom political democracy.
the challenge to property qualifications for voting begun during the american revolution reached its culmination in the early nineteenth century.
not a single state that entered the union after the original thirteen required ownership of property to vote.
in the older states constitutional conventions during the 1820s and 1830s reconsidered democracys economic basis.
even as the expansion of industry and commercial agriculture increased the number of wage earners in cities and older rural areas men who could not meet property requirements insisted that they were as fit as others to exercise the rights of citizens.
their insistent pressure did much to democratize american politics.
owning property declared a petition by non freeholders landless men of richmond to the virginia constitutional convention of 1829 did not necessarily mean the possession of moral or intellectual endowments superior to those of the poor.
they alone deserve to be called free they continued who participate in the formation of their political institutions by this time only north carolina rhode island and virginia still retained property requirements.
the large slaveholders who dominated virginia politics successfully resisted demands for changes in voting qualifications in 1829 but a subsequent constitutional convention in 1850 eliminated the property requirement.
although the speed of the process varied from state to state by 1860 all but one had ended property requirements for voting although several continued to bar persons accepting poor relief on the grounds that they lacked genuine independence.
the personal independence necessary in the citizen now rested not on ownership of property but on ownership of ones self a reflection of the eras individualism.
the dorr war the lone exception to the trend toward democratization was rhode island which required voters to own real estate valued at 134 or rent property for at least 7 per year.
a center of factory production rhode island had a steadily growing population of propertyless wage earners an anti jackson cartoon from 1832 portrays andrew jackson as an aspiring monarch wielding the veto power while trampling on the constitution.
10 democracy in america 1815 1840 dorr liberation stock a certificate indicating that a person has helped to finance thomas dorrs appeal to the u s supreme court of his conviction for treason against the state of rhode island because of his role in the dorr war.
the court ruled against him and dorr served two years in prison.
the triumph of democracy unable to vote.
leaders of the states labor movement complained repeatedly about the absence of free suffrage in october 1841 proponents of democratic reform organized a peoples convention which drafted a new state constitution.
it enfranchised all adult white men while eliminating entirely blacks who previously could vote if they owned the required amount of property another illustration of how the expansion of white freedom sometimes went hand in hand with restrictions on the freedom of non whites.
when the reformers ratified their constitution in an extralegal referendum and proceeded to inaugurate thomas dorr a prominent rhode island lawyer as governor president john tyler dispatched federal troops to the state.
the movement collapsed and dorr subsequently served nearly two years in prison for treason.
the dorr war demonstrated the passions aroused by the continuing exclusion of any group of white men from voting.
and the legislature soon eliminated the property qualification for native born men black as well as white although it retained it for immigrants until 1888 tocqueville on democracy by 1840 more than 90 percent of adult white men were eligible to vote.
a flourishing democratic system had been consolidated.
american politics was boisterous highly partisan and sometimes violent and it engaged the energies of massive numbers of citizens.
in a country that lacked more traditional bases of nationality a powerful and menacing neighbor historic ethnic religious and cultural unity democratic political institutions came to define the nations sense of its own identity.
alexis de tocqueville the french writer who visited the united states in the early 1830s returned home to produce democracy in america a classic account of a society in the midst of a political transformation.
tocqueville had come to the united states to study prisons.
but he soon realized that to understand america one must understand democracy which as a person of aristocratic background he rather disliked.
his key insight was that democracy by this time meant far more than either the right to vote or a particular set of political institutions.
it was what scholars call a habit of the heart a culture that encouraged individual initiative belief in equality and an active public sphere populated by numerous voluntary organizations that sought to improve society.
democracy tocqueville saw had become an essential attribute of american freedom.
as tocqueville recognized the rise of democracy represented a profound political transformation.
the idea that sovereignty belongs to the mass of ordinary citizens was a new departure in western thought.
as long ago as aristotle political philosophers had warned that democracy inevitably degenerated into anarchy and tyranny.
for centuries doctrines of divine right and hierarchical authority had dominated political thought.
the founders of the republic who believed that government must rest on the what were the social bases for the flourishing democracy of the early mid nineteenth century.
consent of the governed also sought to shield political authority from excessive influence by ordinary people hence the electoral college supreme court and other undemocratic features of the constitution.
nonetheless thanks to persistent pressure from those originally excluded from political participation democracy for white males had triumphed by the age of jackson.
democracy reinforced a sense of equality among those who belonged to the political nation and it deepened the divide separating them from those who did not.
participation in elections and the pageantry surrounding them parades bonfires mass meetings party conventions helped to define the people of the united states.
the right to vote increasingly became the emblem of american citizenship.
in law voting was still strictly speaking a privilege rather than a right subject to regulation by the individual states.
but noah websters american dictionary noted that according to common usage and understanding in america but not in europe the term citizen had become synonymous with the right to vote.
the suffrage said one advocate of democratic reform was the first mark of liberty the only true badge of the freeman the information revolution the market revolution and political democracy produced a large expansion of the public sphere and an explosion in printing sometimes called the information revolution the application of steam power to newspaper printing led to a great increase in output and the rise of the mass circulation penny press priced at one cent per issue instead of the traditional six.
newspapers like the new york sun and new york herald introduced a new style of journalism appealing to a mass audience by emphasizing sensationalism crime stories and exposs of official misconduct.
by 1840 according to one estimate the total weekly circulation of newspapers in the united states whose population was 17 million exceeded that of europe with 233 million people.
thanks to low postal rates many newspapers circulated far beyond their places of publication.
indeed by the 1830s newspapers accounted for most postal traffic outstripping private letters.
the emergence of organized political parties also spurred newspaper publication.
each major party needed to have newspapers supporting its views in every part of the country and government printing contracts were essential to most newspapers survival.
the publication of all sorts of magazines travel guides advice manuals religious titles and other reading materials rose dramatically.
the reduction in the cost of printing also made possible the appearance of alternative newspapers in the late 1820s and early 1830s including freedoms journal the first black newspaper philadelphia mechanics advocate and other labor publications the abolitionist weekly the liberator and cherokee phoenix the first native american newspaper.
the growth of the reading public yet another facet of the democratization of american life opened the door for the rise of a new generation of women writers.
lydia maria child catharine maria sedgwick catharine beecher and others published stories poetry essays and guides to domestic life.
by the 1830s moreover through participation in religious and reform movements thousands of women would establish a public presence the american womans home a guide to domestic life by the sisters catharine beecher and harriet beecher stowe.
even though works like this were meant to instruct middle class women on how to meet their domestic responsibilities their popularity allowed talented women to take on a new public role as writers.
10 democracy in america 1815 1840 the triumph of democracy as will be described in chapter in the story of american freedom.
nearly a century would pass before the nation again tried to bring equal rights to the descendants of slaves.
the civil rights era of the 1950s and 1960s would sometimes be called the second reconstruction.
even while it lasted however reconstruction revealed some of the tensions inherent in nineteenth century discussions of freedom.
the policy of granting black men the vote while denying them the benefits of land ownership strengthened the idea that the free citizen could be a poor dependent laborer.
reconstruction placed on the national agenda a problem that would dominate political discussion for the next half century how in a modern society to define the economic essence of freedom.
suggested reading books carter dan t when the war was over the failure of self reconstruction in the south 1865 1867 1985.
a careful study of the south during the period of presidential reconstruction.
dubois ellen c feminism and suffrage the emergence of an independent womens movement in america 1848 1869 1978.
explores how the split over the exclusion of women from the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments gave rise to a movement for woman suffrage no longer tied to the abolitionist tradition.
suggested reading edwards laura.
gendered strife and confusion the political culture of reconstruction 1997.
considers how issues relating to gender relations affected the course of southern reconstruction.
fields barbara j slavery and freedom on the middle ground maryland during the nineteenth century 1985.
a study of slavery and emancipation in a key border state.
foner eric.
nothing but freedom emancipation and its legacy 1983.
includes a comparison of the emancipation experience in different parts of the western hemisphere.
foner eric.
reconstruction americas unfinished revolution 1863 1877 1988.
a comprehensive account of the reconstruction era.
hahn steven.
a nation under our feet black political struggles in the rural south from slavery to the great migration 2003.
a detailed study of black political activism stressing nationalist consciousness and emigration movements.
hyman harold m a more perfect union the impact of the civil war and reconstruction on the constitution 1973.
analyzes how the laws and constitutional amendments of reconstruction changed the constitution and the rights of all americans.
jung moon ho.
coolies and cane race labor and sugar in the age of emancipation 2006.
tells the story of chinese laborers brought to work in the sugar fields after the end of slavery.
litwack leon f been in the storm so long the aftermath of slavery 1979.
a detailed look at the immediate aftermath of the end of slavery and the variety of black and white responses to emancipation.
rable george c but there was no peace the role of violence in the politics of reconstruction 1984.
the only full scale study of violence in the reconstruction south.
richardson heather c west from appomattox 2007.
an account that fully integrates the west into the history of the reconstruction era.
rodrigue john c reconstruction in the cane fields from slavery to free labor in louisianas sugar parishes 1862 1880 2001.
a study of how an often neglected part of the south experienced the aftermath of slavery.
summers mark w railroads reconstruction and the gospel of prosperity aid under the radical republicans 1865 1877 1984.
a detailed look at southern governments efforts to promote economic development and the political corruption that sometimes accompanied it.
trefousse hans l the radical republicans lincolns vanguard for racial justice 1969.
an account of the political history of the radical republicans from the pre civil war period through the end of reconstruction.
websites after slavery race labor and politics in the post emancipation carolinas americas reconstruction people and politics after the civil war tory uh edu reconstruction index html freedmen and southern society project the andrew johnson impeachment trial ftrials impeach impeachmt htm c hapter r eview review questions 1 in 1865 former confederate general robert richardson remarked that the emancipated slaves own nothing because nothing but freedom has been given to them explain whether this would be an accurate assessment of reconstruction twelve years later.
2 the womens movement split into two separate national organizations in part because the fifteenth amendment did not give women the vote.
explain why the two groups split.
3 explain how important black families churches schools and other institutions were to the development of african american culture and political activism in this period.
4 why did ownership of land and control of labor become major points of contention between former slaves and whites in the south.
5 by what methods did southern whites seek to limit african american civil rights and liberties.
6 how did the failure of land reform and continued poverty lead to new forms of servitude for both blacks and whites.
7 what caused the confrontation between president johnson and congress over reconstruction policies.
8 what national issues and attitudes combined to bring an end to reconstruction by 1877.
9 by 1877 how did the condition of former slaves in the united states compare with that of freedmen around the globe.
freedom questions 1 after the civil war how did the definitions of freedom change for the nation for the freedmen and for southern whites.
2 identify and explain the key elements of freedom according to the former slaves.
3 in the text we see that reconstruction redrew the boundaries of american freedom how did these boundaries expand for some citizens but remain closed or restricted for others.
study and review at key terms r e v i e w ta b l e black families p 588 reconstruction constitutional amendments the freedmens bureau p 588 sharecropping p 594 crop lien system p 598 amendment date ratified provisions thirteenth ends slavery fourteenth guarantees federal protection of citizenship and equal rights under the law fifteenth prohibits voting restrictions based on race color or previous conditions of servitude black codes p 601 civil rights bill of 1866 p 603 fourteenth amendment p 603 swing around the circle p 604 waving the bloody shirt p 605 fifteenth amendment p 605 literacy tests p 606 bradwell v illinois p 609 carpetbaggers and scalawags p 614 enforcement acts p 618 civil rights act of 1875 p 620 slaughterhouse cases p 620 redeemers p 620 bargain of 1877 p 622 this page intentionally left blank part 4 toward a global presence 1870 1920 c b etween the era of reconstruction and the end of world war i the united states underwent a profound social and economic revolution that affected all aspects of americans lives.
by 1900 the country had emerged as the worlds major industrial power and thanks to the spanishamerican war of 1898 the possessor of a small overseas empire.
giant new corporations now dominated the economy.
they introduced new forms of labor control and new methods of mass production manufacturing a seemingly endless array of industrial and consumer goods.
immigrants arrived from abroad in unprecedented numbers providing labor for the expanding economy and fueling the growth of the nations cities.
in 1920 residents of cities for the first time outnumbered those living in rural areas.
in the first two decades of the twentieth century the united states became a major participant in world affairs.
it repeatedly sent troops to direct the affairs of caribbean and central american countries.
during world war i president woodrow wilson not only dispatched american soldiers for the first time to fight in europe but also called for continuous american involvement in the creation and preservation of a peaceful economically interconnected world order.
these changes increased the economic opportunities of many americans.
the middle class of clerks managers and other whitecollar workers expanded significantly.
economic growth drew large numbers of women into the workforce.
when the outbreak of world war i cut off immigration from europe hundreds of thousands of blacks moved from southern farms to jobs in northern cities gaining access to the industrial economy and changing the countrys racial configuration.
what is sometimes called the second industrial revolution also led to an era of persistent and often violent labor conflict.
to many americans social life seemed increasingly polarized between those at the top who reaped most of the benefits of economic expansion and workers struggling to make ends meet on low wages and living in desperate conditions in city slums.
democracy itself seemed threatened by the political influence of the large corporations and the corrupt activities of city bosses.
in the early twentieth century increasing numbers of americans concluded that only the reform of politics and increased government intervention in economic life could curb the powers of the new corporations ensure safe working conditions and provide economic security for ordinary men and women.
throughout these years divergent views of the countrys course of development and the proper role of government in shaping and reshaping it found expression in debates over american freedom.
many americans held to a traditional understanding of freedom as the absence of external restraints on free individuals operating in a competitive marketplace.
in this view known as liberty of contract any government interference with economic relationships represented an infringement on property rights and therefore on freedom.
others turned to collective action economic and political to try to reverse what they considered a decline of traditional freedoms.
workers flocked into unions that promised not only higher wages but also industrial freedom a share in basic economic decision making.
during the 1890s millions of farmers joined the populist movement in an attempt to reverse their declining economic prospects and rescue the government from what they saw as control by powerful corporate interests.
in the progressive era of the early twentieth century urban reformers sought to expand economic and political freedom by increasing workers rights weakening the power of city bosses and using the power of the state and national governments to regulate corporate behavior.
in many cities and states and at the national level under presidents theodore roosevelt william howard taft and woodrow wilson government took on new roles in progressive america.
it sought to protect workers especially women and children from economic hardship established agencies to determine rules for corporate behavior and set aside parks and forests to preserve them from commercial exploitation.
to progressives freedom was a positive idea the effective power to achieve personal and social goals.
at the same time the expansion of the consumer economy and the new freedoms for women offered by city life encouraged the growth of an idea of personal freedom based on individual fulfillment including self determination in the most intimate areas of life.
even as definitions of freedom expanded the number of americans who enjoyed genuine freedom contracted.
in the 1890s and the early twentieth century the political leaders of the white south imposed on the regions african americans a comprehensive system of second class citizenship that rested on racial segregation denial of the right to vote lack of economic opportunities and the ever present threat of violence.
many native born americans considered immigrants especially the large numbers arriving from southern and eastern europe as unfit for american citizenship.
they sought to restrict their numbers and to force those already here to americanize themselves by abandoning traditional cultures for mainstream values.
the countrys emergence as a world power intensified these debates over freedom.
to its supporters the new american empire represented a continuation of the countrys traditional self image of promoting liberty and democracy throughout the world.
president wilson envisioned american involvement in world war i as a crusade not for national aggrandizement but to make the world safe for democracy yet critics of the acquisition of foreign colonies questioned whether an empire could still be considered a democracy.
this question gained new urgency during world war i on the one hand the war ushered in the final success of the long struggle for woman suffrage the greatest expansion of democracy in american history.
on the other the federal government and private patriotic organizations embarked on the most extensive campaign in american history to stifle criticism of administration policies and the economic status quo.
by 1920 the united states was the worlds foremost economic and military power.
but the role it would play in world affairs in the future and the fate of freedom at home remained unresolved.
c hapter 16 charles darwins on the origin of species mark twain and charles dudley warners gilded age battle of the little bighorn reconstruction ends great railroad strike munn v illinois henry georges progress and poverty sitting bull imprisoned railroad companies create four time zones civil service act william graham sumners what social classes owe to each other elk v wilkins laurence gronlunds the cooperative commonwealth haymarket affair wabash v illinois statue of liberty dedicated dawes act interstate commerce commission created edward bellamys looking backward jacob riiss how the other half lives sherman antitrust act massacre at wounded knee henry demarest lloyds wealth against commonwealth united states v e c knight co thorstein veblens the theory of the leisure class lochner v new york americas gilded age 1870 1890 the second industrial revolution the industrial economy railroads and the national market the spirit of innovation competition and consolidation the rise of andrew carnegie the triumph of john d rockefeller workers freedom in an industrial age sunshine and shadow increasing wealth and poverty the transformation of the west a diverse region farming on the middle border bonanza farms large scale agriculture in california the cowboy and the corporate west the subjugation of the plains indians let me be a free man remaking indian life the dawes act indian citizenship the ghost dance and wounded knee settler societies and global wests politics in a gilded age the corruption of politics the politics of dead center government and the economy reform legislation political conflict in the states freedom in the gilded age the social problem freedom inequality and democracy social darwinism in america liberty of contract the courts and freedom labor and the republic the overwhelming labor question the knights of labor and the conditions essential to liberty middle class reformers progress and poverty the cooperative commonwealth bellamys utopia a social gospel the haym arket affair labor and politics a quilt created by a sioux woman who lived on a reservation in south dakota around 1900 possibly as a gift for a nearby white family.
it depicts scenes of traditional daily life among the indians including hunting buffalo and cooking game.
the birds eggs at the top left corner have hatched at the bottom right.
f ocus q uestions what factors combined to make the united states a mature industrial society after the civil war.
how was the west transformed economically and socially in this period.
was the gilded age political system effective in meeting its goals.
how did the economic development of the gilded age affect american freedom.
how did reformers of the period approach the problems of an industrial society.
the dedication of the statue of liberty october 28 1886 l a n immense crowd gathered in new york harbor on october 28 1886 for the dedication of liberty enlightening the world a fitting symbol for a nation now wholly free.
the idea for the statue originated in 1865 with douard de laboulaye a french educator and the author of several books on the united states as a response to the assassination of abraham lincoln.
the statue de laboulaye hoped would celebrate both the historic friendship between france and the united states and the triumph through the unions victory in the civil war of american freedom.
measuring more than 150 feet from torch to toe and standing atop a huge pedestal the edifice was the tallest manmade structure in the western hemisphere.
it exceeded in height newspapers noted with pride the colossus of rhodes a wonder of the ancient world.
in time the statue of liberty as it came to be called would become americans most revered national icon.
for over a century it has stood as a symbol of freedom.
the statue has offered welcome to millions of immigrants the huddled masses yearning to breathe free celebrated in a poem by emma lazarus inscribed on its base in 1903 in the years since its dedication the statues familiar image has been reproduced by folk artists in every conceivable medium and has been used by advertisers to promote everything from cigarettes and lawn mowers to war bonds.
as its use by chinese students demanding democracy in the tiananmen square protests of 1989 showed it has become a powerful international symbol as well.
the year of the statues dedication 1886 also witnessed the great upheaval a wave of strikes and labor protests that touched every part of the nation.
six months before the unveiling of the statue of liberty police had killed four striking workers who attempted to prevent strikebreakers w h a t f a c t o r s c o m b i n e d t o m a k e t h e u n i t e d s t a t e s a m a t u r e i n d u s t r i a l s o c i e t y a f t e r t h e c i v i l wa r.
from entering a chicago factory.
this was only one of many violent clashes that accompanied labor unrest between the end of reconstruction in 1877 and the turn of the twentieth century.
the 600 dignitaries 598 of them men who gathered on what is now called liberty island for the dedication hoped the statue of liberty would inspire renewed devotion to the nations political and economic system.
but for all its grandeur the statue could not conceal the deep social divisions and fears about the future of american freedom that accompanied the countrys emergence as the worlds leading industrial power.
nor did the celebrations address the crucial questions that moved to the center stage of american public life during the 1870s and 1880s and remained there for decades to come what are the social conditions that make freedom possible and what role should the national government play in defining and protecting the liberty of its citizens.
the second industrial revolution between the end of the civil war and the early twentieth century the united states underwent one of the most rapid and profound economic revolutions any country has ever experienced.
there were numerous causes for this explosive economic growth.
the country enjoyed abundant natural resources a growing supply of labor an expanding market for manufactured goods and the availability of capital for investment.
in addition the federal government actively promoted industrial and agricultural the strike an 1886 painting by the german born artist robert koehler who had grown up in a working class family in milwaukee.
koehler depicts a confrontation between a factory owner dressed in a silk top hat and angry workers.
a woman and her children presumably members of a strikers family watch from the side while another woman at the center appears to plead for restraint.
the threat of violence hangs in the air and a striker in the lower righthand corner reaches for a stone.
the painting was inspired by events in pittsburgh during the great railroad strike of 1877 although koehler was living in new york city at the time.
16 americas gilded age 1870 1890 the second industrial revolution building railroads in the west required remarkable feats of engineering as illustrated by the southern pacific railroads pecos river high bridge in texas.
development.
it enacted high tariffs that protected american industry from foreign competition granted land to railroad companies to encourage construction and used the army to remove indians from western lands desired by farmers and mining companies.
the industrial economy the rapid expansion of factory production mining and railroad construction in all parts of the country except the south signaled the transition from lincolns america a world centered on the small farm and artisan workshop to a mature industrial society.
americans of the late nineteenth century marveled at the triumph of the new economy.
one can hardly believe wrote the philosopher john dewey there has been a revolution in history so rapid so extensive so complete by 1913 the united states produced one third of the worlds industrial output more than the total of great britain france and germany combined.
small scale craft production still flourished in many trades and armies of urban workers male and female toiled in their own homes or in the households of others as outworkers and domestics.
but half of all industrial workers now labored in plants with more than 250 employees.
on the eve of the civil war the first industrial revolution centered on the textile industry had transformed new england into a center of manufacturing.
but otherwise the united states was still primarily an agricultural nation.
by 1880 for the first time the census bureau found a majority of the workforce engaged in non farming jobs.
the traditional dream of economic independence seemed obsolete.
by 1890 two thirds of americans worked for wages rather than owning a farm business or craft shop.
drawn to factories by the promise of employment a new working class emerged in these years.
between 1870 and 1920 almost 11 million americans moved from farm to city and another 25 million immigrants arrived from overseas.
most manufacturing now took place in industrial cities.
new york with its new skyscrapers and hundreds of thousands of workers in all sorts of manufacturing establishments symbolized dynamic urban growth.
after merging w h a t f a c t o r s c o m b i n e d t o m a k e t h e u n i t e d s t a t e s a m a t u r e i n d u s t r i a l s o c i e t y a f t e r t h e c i v i l wa r.
table 16 1 indicators of economic change 1870 1920 farms millions 2 7 5 7 6 4 land in farms million acres wheat grown million bushels employment millions 28 5 44 5 in manufacturing millions 2 5 5 9 11 2 percentage in workforcea agricultural industryb trade service administrationc railroad track thousands of miles steel produced thosuands of tons 0 8 11 2 gnp billions of dollars 7 4 18 7 91 5 per capita in 1920 dollars life expectancy at birth years a percentages are rounded and do not total 100 b includes manufacturing transportation mining construction.
c includes trade finance public administration.
with brooklyn in 1898 its population exceeded 3 4 million.
the city financed industrialization and westward expansion its banks and stock exchange funneling capital to railroads mines and factories.
but the heartland of the second industrial revolution was the region around the great lakes with its factories producing iron and steel machinery chemicals and packaged foods.
pittsburgh had become the worlds center of iron and steel manufacturing.
chicago by 1900 the nations second largest city with 1 7 million inhabitants was home to factories producing steel and farm machinery and giant stockyards where cattle were processed into meat products for shipment east in refrigerated rail cars.
smaller industrial cities also proliferated often concentrating on a single industry cast iron stoves in troy new york silk in paterson new jersey furniture in grand rapids michigan.
railroads and the national market the railroad made possible what is sometimes called the second industrial revolution spurred by private investment and massive grants of land and money by federal state and local governments the number of miles of railroad track in the united states tripled between 1860 and 1880 and tripled again by 1920 opening vast new areas to commercial farming and creating a truly national market for manufactured goods.
in 1886 the railroads adopted a standard national gauge the distance separating the two tracks making it possible for the first time for trains of one company to travel on any other companys track.
by the 1890s five transcontinental lines trans figure 16 1 railroad mileage built 1830 1975 thousand miles 1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 c h.
16 americas gilded age 1870 1890 the railroad seattle pacific time zone network mountain time zone the second industrial revolution central time zone eastern time zone portland canada northern pacif ic helena boise st paul new y or buffalo ntral pa reno ce cific detroit chicago union pac ific salt lake city omaha illinois central san francisco denver kansas city st louis los angeles phoenix ntra l new york cleveland penn s pittsburgh ylvania philadelphia washington d c baltimore and ohio norfolk atlanta charleston dallas sou ther np acific houston atlantic o ce an mobile new orleans mexico gulf of mexico pa c i f i c ocean by 1880 the transnational rail network made possible the creation of a truly national market for goods.
boston k ce memphis santa fe el paso atlantic time zone 500 miles 500 kilometers major railroads in 1880 time zone boundaries ported the products of western mines farms ranches and forests to eastern markets and carried manufactured goods to the west.
the railroads reorganized time itself.
in 1883 the major companies divided the nation into the four time zones still in use today.
indeed the centrality of railroads to the national market meant that when railroads experienced financial crises the entire economy suffered.
the growing population formed an ever expanding market for the mass production mass distribution and mass marketing of goods essential elements of a modern industrial economy.
the spread of national brands like ivory soap and quaker oats symbolized the continuing integration of the economy.
so did the growth of national chains most prominently the atlantic and pacific tea company better known as a p grocery stores.
based in chicago the national mail order firms montgomery ward and sears roebuck co sold clothing jewelry farm equipment and numerous other goods to rural families throughout the country.
the spirit of innovation a remarkable series of technological innovations spurred rapid communication and economic growth.
the opening of the atlantic cable in 1866 w h a t f a c t o r s c o m b i n e d t o m a k e t h e u n i t e d s t a t e s a m a t u r e i n d u s t r i a l s o c i e t y a f t e r t h e c i v i l wa r.
made it possible to send electronic telegraph messages instantaneously between the united states and europe.
during the 1870s and 1880s the telephone typewriter and handheld camera came into use.
scientific breakthroughs poured forth from research laboratories in menlo park and orange new jersey created by the eras greatest inventor thomas a edison.
born in ohio in 1847 edison had little formal education but as a teenager he read popular books on science and began doing chemistry experiments.
during the course of his life edison helped to establish entirely new industries that transformed private life public entertainment and economic activity including the phonograph lightbulb motion picture and a system for generating and distributing electric power.
he opened the first electric generating station in manhattan in 1882 to provide power to streetcars factories and private homes and he established among other companies the forerunner of general electric to market electrical equipment.
the spread of electricity was essential to industrial and urban growth providing a more reliable and flexible source of power than water or steam.
however it was not edison but another inventor nikola tesla an ethnic serb born in modern day croatia who emigrated to the united states at the age of twenty eight who developed an electric motor using the system of alternating current that overcame many of the challenges of using electricity for commercial and industrial purposes.
left travel became globalized in the second half of the nineteenth century.
this advertisement promotes an around theworld route by railroad and steamboat beginning in chicago.
right the cover of the 1897 sears roebuck co catalog.
one of the countrys largest mail order companies sears roebuck processed 100 000 orders per day at the end of the nineteenth century.
the cornucopia at the center suggests the variety of items one could order by mail furniture a piano a bicycle and farm tools.
16 americas gilded age 1870 1890 the second industrial revolution thomas edisons laboratory at menlo park new jersey and some of the employees of the great inventor.
competition and consolidation economic growth was dramatic but highly volatile.
the combination of a market flooded with goods and the federal monetary policies discussed later that removed money from the national economy led to a relentless fall in prices.
the world economy suffered prolonged downturns in the 1870s and 1890s.
indeed before the 1930s the years from 1873 to 1897 were known throughout the world as the great depression.
businesses engaged in ruthless competition.
railroads and other companies tried various means of bringing order to the chaotic marketplace.
they formed pools that divided up markets between supposedly competing firms and fixed prices.
they established trusts legal devices whereby the affairs of several rival companies were managed by a single director.
such efforts to coordinate the economic activities of independent companies generally proved short lived disintegrating as individual firms continued their intense pursuit of profits.
to avoid cutthroat competition more and more corporations battled to control entire industries.
many companies fell by the wayside or were gobbled up by others.
the process of economic concentration culminated between 1897 and 1904 when some 4 000 firms vanished into larger corporations that served national markets and exercised an unprecedented degree of control over the marketplace.
by the time the wave of mergers had been completed giant corporations like u s steel created by financier j p morgan in 1901 by combining eight large steel companies into the first billion dollar economic enterprise standard oil and international harvester a manufacturer of agricultural machinery dominated major parts of the economy.
the rise of andrew carnegie in an era without personal or corporate income taxes some business leaders accumulated enormous fortunes and economic power.
under the aggressive leadership of thomas a scott the pennsylvania railroad for a time the nations largest corporation forged an economic empire that stretched w h a t f a c t o r s c o m b i n e d t o m a k e t h e u n i t e d s t a t e s a m a t u r e i n d u s t r i a l s o c i e t y a f t e r t h e c i v i l wa r.
across the continent and included coal mines and oceangoing steamships.
with an army of professional managers to oversee its far flung activities the railroad pioneered modern techniques of business organization.
another industrial giant was andrew carnegie who emigrated with his family from his native scotland at the age of thirteen and as a teenager worked in a pennsylvania textile factory.
during the 1850s scott hired carnegie as his private telegraph operator and by the eve of the civil war had promoted him to one of the pennsylvania railroads major management positions.
during the depression that began in 1873 carnegie set out to establish a vertically integrated steel company that is one that controlled every phase of the business from raw materials to transportation manufacturing and distribution.
by the 1890s he dominated the steel industry and had accumulated a fortune worth hundreds of millions of dollars.
carnegies complex of steel factories at homestead pennsylvania were the most technologically advanced in the world.
carnegies father an immigrant scottish weaver who had taken part in popular efforts to open the british political system to working class participation had instilled in his son a commitment to democracy and social equality.
from his mother carnegie learned that life was a ceaseless struggle in which one must strive to get ahead or sink beneath the waves.
his life reflected the tension between these elements of his upbringing.
believing that the rich had a moral obligation to promote the advancement of society carnegie denounced the worship of money and distributed much of his wealth to various philanthropies especially the creation of public libraries in towns throughout the country.
but he ran his companies with a dictatorial hand.
his factories operated nonstop with two twelve hour shifts every day of the year except the fourth of july.
the triumph of john d.
rockefeller if any single name became a byword for enormous wealth it was john d rockefeller who began his working career as a clerk for a cleveland merchant and rose to dominate the oil industry.
he drove out rival firms through cutthroat competition arranging secret deals with railroad companies and fixing prices and production quotas.
rockefeller began with horizontal expan the electricity building at the chicago worlds fair of 1893 painted by childe hassam.
the electric lighting at the fair astonished visitors and illustrated how electricity was changing the visual landscape.
16 americas gilded age 1870 1890 u s steel a vertically the second industrial revolution integrated corporation la ke vermont lake mich ro n igan wisconsin hu minnesota lake ontari iowa new hampshire o new york michigan ak cleveland l see inset e massachusetts e eri indiana rhode island connecticut pennsylvania ohio illinois new jersey pittsburgh see inset delaware west virginia missouri maine maryland virginia kentucky tennessee atl antic o cean north carolina arkansas south carolina mississippi louisiana firms incorporated into u s steel type of plant blast furnace rolling mill steel work bridge building plant companies the carnegie co federal steel co national steel co national tube co american tin plate co american steel hoop co american sheet steel co american bridge co lake superior iron mines american steel and wire co of new jersey georgia alabama new kensington pittsburgh monroeville mckeesport florida lake erie gulf of mexico cleveland 200 miles 200 kilometers sion buying out competing oil refineries.
but like carnegie he soon established a vertically integrated monopoly which controlled the drilling refining storage and distribution of oil.
by the 1880s his standard oil company controlled 90 percent of the nations oil industry.
like carnegie rockefeller gave much of his fortune away establishing foundations to promote education and medical research.
and like carnegie he bitterly fought his employees efforts to organize unions.
w h a t f a c t o r s c o m b i n e d t o m a k e t h e u n i t e d s t a t e s a m a t u r e i n d u s t r i a l s o c i e t y a f t e r t h e c i v i l wa r.
these and other industrial leaders inspired among ordinary americans a combination of awe admiration and hostility.
depending on ones point of view they were captains of industry whose energy and vision pushed the economy forward or robber barons who wielded power without any accountability in an unregulated marketplace.
most rose from modest backgrounds and seemed examples of how inventive genius and business sense enabled americans to seize opportunities for success.
but their dictatorial attitudes unscrupulous methods repressive labor policies and exercise of power without any democratic control led to fears that they were undermining political and economic freedom.
concentrated wealth degraded the political process declared henry demarest lloyd in wealth against commonwealth 1894 an expos of how rockefellers standard oil company made a mockery of economic competition and political democracy by manipulating the market and bribing legislators.
liberty and monopoly lloyd concluded cannot live together workers freedom in an industrial age striking as it was the countrys economic growth distributed its benefits very unevenly.
for a minority of workers the rapidly expanding industrial system created new forms of freedom.
in some industries skilled workers commanded high wages and exercised considerable control over the production process.
a workers economic independence now rested on technical skill rather than ownership of ones own shop and tools as in earlier times.
what was known as the miners freedom consisted of elaborate work rules that left skilled underground workers free of managerial supervision on the job.
through their union skilled iron and steelworkers fixed output quotas and controlled the training of apprentices in the technique of iron rolling.
these workers often knew more about the details of production than their employers did.
such freedom however applied only to a tiny portion of the industrial labor force and had little bearing on the lives of the growing army of semiskilled workers who tended machines in the new factories.
for most workers economic insecurity remained a basic fact of life.
during the depressions of the 1870s and 1890s millions of workers lost their jobs or were forced to accept reductions of pay.
the tramp became a familiar figure on the social landscape as thousands of men took to the roads in search of work.
many industrial workers labored sixty hour weeks with no pensions compensation for injuries or protections against unemployment.
although american workers received higher wages than their counterparts in europe they also experienced more dangerous working conditions.
between 1880 and 1900 an average of 35 000 workers perished each year in factory and mine accidents the highest rate in the industrial world.
most strikes for higher wages next a cartoon from the magazine puck september 7 1904 depicts the standard oil company as an octopus with tentacles wrapped around the copper steel and shipping industries as well as a state house and congress.
one tentacle reaches for the white house.
16 americas gilded age 1870 1890 a turn of the century photograph of the casino grounds newport rhode island an exclusive country club for rich socialites of the gilded age.
failed as employers found it easy to call on the unemployed to take the strikers jobs and to bring in public and private police forces to intimidate workers.
much of the working class remained desperately poor and to survive needed income from all family members.
in 1888 the chicago times published a series of articles by reporter nell cusack under the title city slave girls exposing wretched conditions among the growing number of women working for wages in the citys homes factories and sweatshops.
the articles unleashed a flood of letters to the editor from women workers.
one woman singled out domestic service still the largest employment category for women as a slaves life with long hours late and early seven days in the week bossed and ordered about as before the war sunshine w e a lt h the opening image in matthew smiths book sunshine and shadow in new york 1868 contrasts the living conditions of the citys rich and poor.
the second industrial revolution and and shadow increasing poverty at the other end of the economic spectrum the era witnessed an unprecedented accumulation of wealth.
class divisions became more and more visible.
in frontier days all classes in san francisco for example lived near the waterfront.
in the late nineteenth century upper class families built mansions on nob hill and van ness avenue known as millionaires row.
in eastern cities as well the rich increasingly resided in their own exclusive neighborhoods and vacationed among members of their own class at exclusive resorts like newport rhode island.
the growing urban middle class of professionals office workers and small businessmen moved to new urban and suburban neighborhoods linked to central business districts by streetcars and commuter railways.
passion for money wrote the novelist edith wharton in the house of mirth 1905 dominated society.
whartons book traced the difficulties of lily bart a young woman of modest means pressured by her mother and new york high society to barter her beauty for marriage to a rich husband in a world where to be poor.
amounted to disgrace by 1890 the richest 1 percent of americans received the same total income as the bottom half of the population and owned more property than the remaining 99 percent.
many of the wealthiest americans con w h a t f a c t o r s c o m b i n e d t o m a k e t h e u n i t e d s t a t e s a m a t u r e i n d u s t r i a l s o c i e t y a f t e r t h e c i v i l wa r.
sciously pursued an aristocratic lifestyle building palatial homes attending exclusive social clubs schools and colleges holding fancy dress balls and marrying into each others families.
in 1899 the economist and social historian thorstein veblen published the theory of the leisure class a devastating critique of an upper class culture focused on conspicuous consumption that is spending money not on needed or even desired goods but simply to demonstrate the possession of wealth.
one of the eras most widely publicized spectacles was an elaborate costume ball organized in 1897 by mrs bradley martin the daughter of a new york railroad financier.
the theme was the royal court of prerevolutionary france.
the waldorf astoria hotel was decorated to look like the palace of versailles the guests wore the dress of the french nobility and the hostess bedecked herself with the actual jewels of queen marie antoinette.
not that far from the waldorf much of the working class lived in desperate conditions.
matthew smiths 1868 best seller sunshine and shadow in new york opened with an engraving that contrasted department store magnate alexander t stewarts two million dollar mansion with housing in the citys slums.
two decades later jacob riis in how the other half lives 1890 offered a shocking account of living conditions among the urban poor complete with photographs of apartments in dark airless overcrowded tenement houses.
t h e t r a n s f o r m at i o n o f t h e w e s t nowhere did capitalism penetrate more rapidly or dramatically than in the trans mississippi west whose vast trackless spaces as the poet walt whitman called them were now absorbed into the expanding economy.
at the close of the civil war the frontier of settlement did not extend far beyond the mississippi river.
to the west lay millions of acres of fertile and mineral rich land roamed by giant herds of buffalo whose meat and hides provided food clothing and shelter for a population of more than 250 000 indians.
in 1893 the historian frederick jackson turner gave a celebrated lecture the significance of the frontier in american history in which he argued that on the western frontier the distinctive qualities of american culture were forged individual freedom political democracy and economic mobility.
the west he added acted as a safety valve drawing off those dissatisfied with their situation in the east and therefore counteracting the threat of social unrest.
turners was one of the most influential interpretations of american history ever developed.
but his lecture summarized attitudes toward the west that had been widely shared among americans long before 1893 ever since the beginning of colonial settlement in british north america the west a region whose definition shifted as the popula baxter street court 1890 one of numerous photographs by jacob riis depicting living conditions in new york citys slums.
16 americas gilded age 1870 1890 the family of david hilton on their nebraska homestead in 1887 the hiltons insisted on being photographed with their organ away from the modest sod house in which they lived to better represent their aspiration for prosperity.
the transformation of the west tion expanded had been seen as a place of opportunity for those seeking to improve their condition in life.
many americans did indeed experience the westward movement in the way turner described it.
from farmers moving into ohio indiana and illinois in the decades after the american revolution to prospectors who struck it rich in the california gold rush of the mid nineteenth century millions of americans and immigrants from abroad found in the westward movement a path to economic opportunity.
but turner offered only a partial account of western history.
most settlers moved west in family groups or as members of immigrant communities not as lone pioneers.
turner seemed to portray the west as an empty space before the coming of white settlers.
in fact of course it was already inhabited by native americans whose dispossession was essential to the opening of land for settlement by others.
moreover the west was hardly a uniform paradise of small independent farmers.
beginning in the eighteenth century for example california was the site of forced indian labor on missions established by members of religious orders a system that helped establish the pattern of large agricultural land holdings in that region.
landlords railroads and mining companies in the west also utilized mexican migrant and indentured labor chinese working on long term contracts and until the the end of the civil war african american slaves.
a diverse region the west of course was hardly a single area.
west of the mississippi river lay a variety of regions all marked by remarkable physical beauty the vast trackless great plains the rocky mountains the desert of the southwest the sierra nevada and the valleys and coastline of california and the pacific northwest.
it would take many decades before individual settlers and corporate business enterprises penetrated all these areas.
but the process was far advanced by the end of the nineteenth century.
the political and economic incorporation of the american west was part of a global process.
in many parts of the world indigenous inhabitants the mapuche in chile the zulu in south africa aboriginal peoples in australia american indians were pushed aside often after fierce resistance as centralizing governments brought large interior regions under their control.
in the united states the incorporation of the west required the active intervention of the federal government which acquired indian land by war and treaty administered land sales regulated territorial politics and distributed land and money to farmers railroads and mining companies.
in the twentieth century the construction of federally financed irrigation systems and dams would open large areas to commercial farming.
ironically the west would become known not least to its own inhabitants as a place of rugged individualism and sturdy independence.
but h o w w a s t h e we s t t r a n s f o r m e d e c o n o m i c a l l y a n d s o c i a l l y i n t h i s p e r i o d.
without active governmental assistance the region could never have been settled and developed.
fa r m i n g on the middle border even as sporadic indian wars raged settlers poured into the west.
territorial and state governments eager for population and railroad companies anxious to sell land they had acquired from the government flooded european countries and eastern cities with promotional literature promising easy access to land.
more land came into cultivation in the thirty years after the civil war than in the previous two and a half centuries of american history.
hundreds of thousands of families acquired farms under the homestead act and even more purchased land from speculators and from railroad companies that had been granted immense tracts of public land by the federal government.
a new agricultural empire producing wheat and corn for national and international markets arose on the middle border minnesota the dakotas nebraska and kansas whose population rose from 300 000 in 1860 to 5 million in 1900 the farmers were a diverse group including native born easterners blacks escaping the postreconstruction south and immigrants from canada germany scandinavia and great britain.
although ethnic diversity is generally associated with eastern cities in the late nineteenth century the most multicultural state in the union was north dakota.
despite the promises of promotional pamphlets farming on the great plains was not an easy task.
difficulties came in many forms from the poisonous rattlesnakes that lived in the tall prairie grass to the blizzards and droughts that periodically afflicted the region.
much of the burden fell on women.
farm families generally invested in the kinds of labor saving machinery that would bring in cash not machines that would ease womens burdens in the household like the back breaking task of doing laundry.
while husbands and sons tended to devote their labor to cash an engraving from the early 1880s of a california farm adjacent to the southern pacific railroad.
having been granted vast tracts of land by the federal government the railroad encouraged settlement along its lines.
16 americas gilded age 1870 1890 the transformation of the west crops farm wives cared for animals grew crops for food and cooked and cleaned.
a farm woman in arizona described her morning chores in her diary get up turn out my chickens draw a pail of water.
make a fire put potatoes to cook brush and sweep half inch of dust off floor feed three litters of chickens then mix biscuits get breakfast milk besides work in the house and this morning had to go half mile after calves on far flung homesteads many miles from schools medical care and sources of entertainment farm families suffered from loneliness and isolation a problem especially severe for women when their husbands left sometimes for weeks at a time to market their crops.
bonanza california harvest scene dr.
glenns farm in colusa county an engraving from 1876 illustrates the large scale of operations and heavy investment in machinery common on western bonanza farms.
fa r m s john wesley powell the explorer and geologist who surveyed the middle border in the 1870s warned that because of the regions arid land and limited rainfall development there required large scale irrigation projects.
the model of family farming envisioned by the homestead act of 1862 could not apply no single family could do all the work required on irrigated farms only cooperative communal farming could succeed powell maintained.
despite the emergence of a few bonanza farms that covered thousands of acres and employed large numbers of agricultural wage workers family farms still dominated the trans mississippi west.
even small farmers however became increasingly oriented to national and international markets specializing in the production of single crops for sale in faraway places.
at the same time railroads brought factory made goods to rural people replacing items previously produced in farmers homes.
farm families became more and more dependent on loans to purchase land machinery and industrial products and more and more vulnerable to the ups and downs of prices for agricultural goods in the world market.
agriculture reflected how the international economy was becoming more integrated.
the combination of economic depressions and expanding agricultural pro h o w w a s t h e we s t t r a n s f o r m e d e c o n o m i c a l l y a n d s o c i a l l y i n t h i s p e r i o d.
duction in places like argentina australia and the american west pushed prices of farm products steadily downward.
from italy and ireland to china india and the american south small farmers throughout the world suffered severe difficulties in the last quarter of the nineteenth century.
many joined the migration to cities within their countries or the increasing international migration of labor.
large scale a g r i c u lt u r e in california the future of western farming ultimately lay with giant agricultural enterprises relying heavily on irrigation chemicals and machinery investments far beyond the means of family farmers.
a preview of the agricultural future was already evident in california where as far back as spanish and mexican days landownership had been concentrated in large units.
in the late nineteenth century californias giant fruit and vegetable farms owned by corporations like the southern pacific railroad were tilled not by agricultural laborers who could expect to acquire land of their own but by migrant laborers from china the philippines japan and mexico who tramped from place to place following the ripening crops.
california is not a country of farms but.
of plantations and estates wrote the young journalist henry george in 1871 urging the government to take action against land monopoly and to give all men an equal chance to achieve economic independence.
the cowboy and the corporate west the two decades following the civil war also witnessed the golden age of the cattle kingdom.
the kansas pacific railroads stations at abilene dodge city and wichita kansas became destinations for the fabled drives of millions of cattle from texas.
a collection of white mexican and black men who conducted the cattle drives the cowboys became symbols of a life of freedom on the open range.
their exploits would later serve as the theme of many a hollywood movie and their clothing inspired fashions that remain popular today.
but there was nothing romantic about the life of the cowboys most of whom were low paid wage workers.
texas cowboys even went on strike for higher pay in 1883.
the days of the long distance cattle drive ended in the mid 1880s as farmers enclosed more and more of the open range with barbed wire fences making it difficult to graze cattle on the grasslands of the great plains and two terrible winters destroyed millions of cattle.
when the industry recuperated it was reorganized in large enclosed ranches close to rail connections.
the west was more than a farming empire.
by 1890 a higher percentage of its population lived in cities than was the case in other regions.
the economic focus of californias economy remained san francisco a major manufacturing and trading center.
the explosive growth of southern california began in the 1880s first with tourism heavily promoted by railroad companies followed by the discovery of oil in los angeles in 1892 large corporate enterprises appeared throughout the west.
the lumber industry dominated by small scale producers in 1860 came under the control of corporations that acquired large tracts of forest and employed armies of loggers.
western mining from michigan iron ore and copper to gold and silver in california in the late 1800s california tried to attract immigrants by advertising its pleasant climate and the availability of land although large scale corporate farms were coming to dominate the states agriculture.
16 americas gilded age 1870 1890 the transformation of the west nevada and colorado fell under the sway of companies that mobilized eastern and european investment to introduce advanced technology.
gold and silver rushes took place in the dakotas in 1876 idaho in 1883 and alaska at the end of the century.
but as in california after 1848 the independent prospector working a surface mine with his pick and shovel quickly gave way to deep shaft corporate mining employing wage workers.
a similar process occurred in new mexico where traditional life based on sheep farming on land owned in common by mexican villagers had continued more or less unchanged after the united states acquired the area in the mexican war.
railroads reached the area in the 1870s bringing with them eastern mining companies and commercial ranchers and farmers.
because courts only recognized mexican era land titles to individual plots of land communal landholdings were increasingly made available for sale to newcomers.
by 1880 three quarters of new mexicos sheep belonged to just twenty families.
unable to continue as sheep raisers more and more hispanic residents went to work for the new mines and railroads.
the albert bierstadts 1863 painting the rocky mountains landers peak depicts indians as an integral part of the majestic landscape of the west.
subjugation of the plains indians the incorporation of the west into the national economy spelled the doom of the plains indians and their world.
their lives had already undergone profound transformations.
in the eighteenth century the spread of horses originally introduced by the spanish led to a wholesale shift from farming and hunting on foot to mounted hunting of buffalo.
new indian groups migrated to the great plains to take advantage of the horse coalescing into the great tribes of the nineteenth century the cheyenne comanche crow kiowa and sioux.
persistent warfare took place between the more established tribes and newcomers including indians removed from the east who sought access to their hunting grounds.
most migrants on the oregon and california trails before the civil war h o w w a s t h e we s t t r a n s f o r m e d e c o n o m i c a l l y a n d s o c i a l l y i n t h i s p e r i o d.
hunters shooting buffalo as the kansaspacific railroad cuts across the west 1870s.
encountered little hostility from indians often trading with them for food and supplies.
but as settlers encroached on indian lands bloody conflict between the army and plains tribes began in the 1850s and continued for decades.
in 1869 president ulysses s grant announced a new peace policy in the west but warfare soon resumed.
drawing on methods used to defeat the confederacy civil war generals like philip h sheridan set out to destroy the foundations of the indian economy villages horses and especially the buffalo.
hunting by mounted indians had already reduced the buffalo population estimated at 30 million in 1800 but it was army campaigns and the depredations of hunters seeking buffalo hides that rendered the vast herds all but extinct.
by 1886 an expedition from the smithsonian institution in washington had difficulty finding twenty five good specimens a cold wind blew across the prairie when the last buffalo fell said the sioux leader sitting bull a death wind for my people let me be a free man the armys relentless attacks broke the power of one tribe after another.
in 1877 troops commanded by former freedmens bureau commissioner o o howard pursued the nez perc indians on a 1 700 mile chase across the far west.
the nez perc whose name was given them by lewis and clark in 1805 and means pierced noses in french were seeking to escape to canada after fights with settlers who had encroached on tribal lands in oregon and idaho.
after four months howard forced the indians to surrender and they were removed to oklahoma.
two years later the nez perc leader chief joseph delivered a speech in washington to a distinguished audience that included president rutherford b hayes.
condemning the policy of confining indians to reservations joseph adopted the language of freedom and equal rights before the law so powerfully reinforced by the civil war and reconstruction.
treat all men alike he pleaded.
give them the same law.
let me be a free man free to travel free to stop free to work free to trade where i chief joseph of the nez perc indians in 1877 the year he surrendered to the u s army.
voices of freedom from chief joseph of the nez perc indians s p e e c h i n wa s h i n g t o n d.
1 8 7 9 chief joseph leader of the nez perc indians led his people on a 1 700 mile trek from their homes in oregon and idaho through the far west in 1877 in an unsuccessful effort to escape to white men.
good words will not get my people a home where they can live in peace and take care of themselves.
i am tired of talk that comes to nothing.
it makes my heart sick when i remember all the.
audience in washington d c that included broken promises.
if the white man wants to live in peace with the indian he can live in peace.
there need be no president rutherford b hayes appealing for the trouble.
treat all men alike.
give them the same law.
two years later he addressed an freedom and equal rights enshrined in the law after the civil war.
give them all an even chance to live and grow.
all men were made by the same great spirit chief.
they are all brothers.
the earth is the mother of all people and all people should have equal rights upon it.
you might as well expect the rivers to run backward as my friends i have been asked to show you my heart.
i am glad to have a chance to do so.
i want the white people to understand my people.
some of you think an indian is like a wild animal.
this is a great mistake.
i will tell you all about our people and then you can judge whether an indian is a man or not.
i will tell you in my way how the indian sees things.
the white man has more words to tell you how they look to him but it does not require many words to speak the truth.
i have heard talk and talk but nothing is done.
good words do not last long unless they amount to something.
words do not pay for my dead people.
they do not pay for my country now overrun by that any man who was born a free man should be contented when penned up and denied liberty to go where he pleases.
when i think of our condition my heart is heavy.
i see men of my race treated as outlaws and driven from country to country or shot down like animals.
i know that my race must change.
we cannot hold our own with the white men as we are.
we only ask an even chance to live as other men live.
let me be a free man free to travel free to stop free to work free to trade where i choose free to choose my own teachers free to follow the religion of my fathers free to think and talk and act for myself and i will obey every law or submit to the penalty.
f r o m i r a s t e wa r d a s e c o n d d e c l a r a t i o n of independence 1879 at a fourth of july celebration in chicago in 1879 ira steward the most prominent labor leader associated with the movement for the eight hour day invoked the legacy of the declaration of independence and the abolition of slavery during the civil war to discuss labors grievances.
each other with vastly more occupations or days work than the lowest paid workers can give to one another.
and if the workers power to buy increases with his power to do granaries and warehouses will empty their pockets and farms and factories fill up with producers.
and we call to the workers of the whole civilized world especially those of france germany and great britain to join hands with the laborers of the united states in this mighty movement.
resolved that the practical question for an american fourth of july is not between freedom and slavery but between wealth and poverty.
for if it is true that laborers ought to have as little as possible of the wealth they produce south carolina slaveholders were right and the massachusetts abolitionists were wrong.
because when the working classes are denied everything but the barest necessities of life they have no decent use for liberty.
slavery is.
the child of poverty instead of poverty the child of slavery and freedom is the child of wealth instead of wealth the child of freedom.
the only road therefore to universal freedom is the road that leads to universal wealth.
resolved that while the fourth of july was heralded a hundred years ago in the name of liberty we now herald this day in behalf of the great economic measure of eight hours or shorter days work for wageworkers everywhere.
because more leisure rest and thought will cultivate habits customs and expenditures that mean higher wages and the worlds highest paid laborers now furnish on the.
issue of eight hours therefore or less hours we join hands with all regardless of politics nationality color religion or sex knowing no friends or foes except as they aid or oppose this longpostponed and world wide movement.
and for the soundness of our political economy as well as the rectitude of our intentions we confidently and gladly appeal to the wiser statesmanship of the civilized world.
questions 1 what are chief josephs complaints about the treatment of his people.
2 why does ira steward appeal to other countries for assistance and understanding.
3 in what ways do the definitions of freedom in the two documents agree and disagree.
16 americas gilded age 1870 1890 the battle of the little bighorn june 25 26 1876 in which general george a custer and his entire command were killed as drawn by red horse a sioux chief.
the transformation of the west choose free to.
think and talk and act for myself the government eventually transported the surviving nez perc to another reservation in washington territory.
until his death in 1904 joseph would unsuccessfully petition successive presidents for his peoples right to return to their beloved oregon homeland.
indians occasionally managed to inflict costly delay and even defeat on army units.
the most famous indian victory took place in june 1876 at little bighorn when general george a custer and his entire command of 250 men perished.
the sioux and cheyenne warriors led by sitting bull and crazy horse were defending tribal land in the black hills of the dakota territory.
reserved for them in an 1868 treaty for as long as the grass shall grow their lands had been invaded by whites after the discovery of gold.
in the southwest cochise geronimo and other leaders of the apache who had been relocated by the government a number of times led bands that crossed and recrossed the border with mexico evading the army and occasionally killing civilians.
they would not surrender until the mid 1880s.
another casualty was the comanche empire centered in modernday new mexico and colorado.
beginning in the mid eighteenth century the comanche dominated much of the great plains and southwest.
the comanche had subordinated local indian groups to their power imposed a toll on trade routes like the santa fe trail and dealt for a time as an equal with the spanish french and american governments.
their power was not finally broken until the 1870s.
these events delayed only temporarily the onward march of white soldiers settlers and prospectors.
between the end of the civil war and 1890 eight new western states entered the union nebraska colorado north and south dakota montana washington idaho and wyoming.
railroads now crisscrossed the great plains farmers and cattlemen exploited land formerly owned by indians and the plains tribes had been concentrated on h o w w a s t h e we s t t r a n s f o r m e d e c o n o m i c a l l y a n d s o c i a l l y i n t h i s p e r i o d.
reservations ca.
es tc oa sta l tr i b es indian mandan hidatsa minitari ree colville spokan blackfeet coeur d alene flathead w washington n th or yakima nez perce klamath river sioux assiniboin crow chippewa sioux north dakota sioux ponca nebraska paiute ute utah territory paiute california moapa river tule river mission indians suppai hopi hualpai mohave arizona pima apache papago maricopa zui new mexico territory mescalero apache texas indian illinois chippewa munsee missouri indiana kentucky peoria chilocco ottawa kansas wyandotte cherokee tonkawa outlet ponca osage otoe missouri cherokee iowa pawnee cheyenne sac fox arapaho kickapoo wichita creek caddo pottawatomie comanche seminole choctaw kiowa apache chickasaw quapaw modoc shawnee seneca 400 miles 400 kilometers reservations where they lived in poverty preyed upon by unscrupulous traders and government agents.
a strong opponent of the reservation system sitting bull escaped to canada after the army defeated the sioux but he returned and was imprisoned in 1881 he was released in 1883 and for a time became part of buffalo bills wild west show a popular traveling extravaganza complete with mock indian attacks and shooting and riding exhibitions.
for most americans indians were now simply objects of curiosity or entertainment.
remaking sac fox indian territory mexico indian reservations iowa winnebago omaha jicarilla apache pueblo papago pa c ific oce a n kansas navajo territory michigan sac fox kickapoo pottawatomi colorado ute mohave yuma wisconsin sioux wyoming nevada minnesota sioux tribes shoshone arapaho shoshone paiute pomo chippewa tribes south dakota shoshone bannock klamath canada northern cheyenne idaho hoopa valley round valley montana umatilla warm spring oregon life the life my people want is a life of freedom sitting bull declared.
the indian idea of freedom however which centered on preserving their cultural and political autonomy and control of ancestral lands conflicted with the interests and values of most white americans.
nearly all officials believed that the federal government should persuade or force the plains indians to surrender most of their land and to exchange their religion com by 1890 the vast majority of the remaining indian population had been removed to reservations scattered across the western states.
16 americas gilded age 1870 1890 the transformation of the west boys from the lakota tribe on their arrival left and during their stay at carlisle a boarding school that aimed to civilize indians by j n choate a local photographer.
an 1893 photograph depicts the land rush when a portion of cherokee land in the oklahoma territory was opened to white settlement under the provisions of the dawes act.
munal property nomadic way of life and gender relations for christian worship private ownership and small farming on reservations with men tilling the fields and women working in the home.
in 1871 congress eliminated the treaty system that dated back to the revolutionary era by which the federal government negotiated agreements with indians as if they were independent nations.
this step was supported by railroad companies that found tribal sovereignty an obstacle to construction and by republicans who believed that it contradicted the national unity born of the civil war.
the federal government pressed forward with its assault on indian culture.
the bureau of indian affairs established boarding schools where indian children removed from the negative influences of their parents and tribes were dressed in nonindian clothes given new names and educated in white ways.
the dawes act the crucial step in attacking tribalism came in 1887 with the passage of the dawes act named for senator henry l dawes of massachusetts chair of the senates indian affairs committee.
the act broke up the land of nearly all tribes into small parcels to be distributed to indian families with the remainder auctioned off to white purchasers.
indians who accepted the farms and adopted the habits of civilized life would become full fledged american citizens.
the policy proved to be a disaster leading to the loss of much tribal land and the erosion of indian cultural traditions.
whites however benefited enormously.
on the nez perc reservation for example 172 000 acres were divided into farms for indians but white ranchers and land speculators purchased 500 000 acres.
when the government made 2 million acres of indian land available in oklahoma 50 000 white settlers poured into the territory to claim farms on the single day of h o w w a s t h e we s t t r a n s f o r m e d e c o n o m i c a l l y a n d s o c i a l l y i n t h i s p e r i o d.
april 22 1889 further land rushes followed in the 1890s.
in the half century after the passage of the dawes act indians lost 86 million of the 138 million acres of land in their possession in 1887 indian citizenship many laws and treaties in the nineteenth century offered indians the right to become an american citizen if they left the tribal setting and assimilated into american society.
but tribal identity was the one thing nearly every indian wished to maintain and very few took advantage of these offers.
thus few indians were recognized as american citizens.
western courts ruled that the citizenship rights guaranteed by the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments did not apply to them and in elk v wilkins 1884 the u s supreme court agreed even though john elk had left his tribe in oklahoma and lived among white settlers in nebraska.
the court questioned whether any indian had achieved the degree of civilization required of american citizens.
by 1900 roughly 53 000 indians had become american citizens by accepting land allotments under the dawes act.
the following year congress granted citizenship to 100 000 residents of indian territory in present day oklahoma.
the remainder would have to wait until 1919 for those who fought in world war i and 1924 when congress made all indians american citizens.
the ghost dance and wounded knee some indians sought solace in the ghost dance a religious revitalization campaign reminiscent of the pan indian movements led by earlier prophets like neolin and tenskwatawa discussed in chapter 21 the federal government had openly financed all sorts of artistic works during the 1930s.
but cold war funding for the arts remained top secret in part because congress proved reluctant to spend money for this purpose in part because americans charged communist governments with imposing artistic conformity.
in an effort to influence public opinion abroad the soviet union sponsored tours of its world famous ballet companies folk dance troupes and symphony orchestras.
to counteract the widespread european view of the united states as a cultural backwater the cia secretly funded an array of overseas publications conferences publishing houses concerts and art exhibits.
and to try to improve the international image of american race relations the government sent jazz musicians and other black performers abroad especially to africa and asia.
works produced by artists who considered themselves thoroughly nonpolitical became weapons in the cultural cold war.
the cia promoted the so called new york school of painters led by jackson pollock.
for pollock the essence of art lay in the process of creation not the final product.
his action paintings made by spontaneously dripping and pouring paint over large canvases produced works of vivid color and energy but without any recognizable subject matter.
many members of congress much preferred norman rockwells readily understandable illustrations of smalltown life to pollocks abstract expressionism some called pollocks works un american and wondered aloud if they were part of a communist plot.
but the cia funded the museum of modern art in new york which championed the new york school and helped arrange for exhibitions overseas.
it hoped to persuade europeans not only that these paintings demonstrated that the united states represented artistic leadership as well as military power but that such art embodied the free individual expression denied to artists in communist countries.
pollocks paintings john cages musical compositions which incorporated chance sounds rather than a fixed score and the graceful freedom of george balanchines choreography were all described as artistic reflections of the essence of american life.
h o w d i d t h e c o l d wa r r e s h a p e i d e a s o f a m e r i c a n f r e e d o m.
visitors to the museum of modern art in new york city contemplate a work by jackson pollock whose paintings exemplified the artistic school of abstract expressionism promoted during the cold war as a reflection of american freedom.
the paintings had no recognizable subject other than reminding the viewer of how pollock had created them by flinging paint at the canvas.
i want to express my feelings rather than illustrate them pollock declared.
freedom and totalitarianism along with freedom the cold wars other great mobilizing concept was totalitarianism the term originated in europe between the world wars to describe fascist italy and nazi germany aggressive ideologically driven states that sought to subdue all of civil society including churches unions and other voluntary associations to their control.
such states according to the theory of totalitarianism left no room for individual rights or alternative values and therefore could never change from within.
by 1950 the year the mccarran internal security act barred totalitarians from entering the united states the term had become a shorthand way of describing those on the other side in the cold war.
as the eventual collapse of communist governments in eastern europe and the soviet union would demonstrate the idea of totalitarianism greatly exaggerated the totality of government control of private life and thought in these countries.
but its widespread use reinforced the view that the greatest danger to freedom lay in an overly powerful government.
just as the conflict over slavery redefined american freedom in the nineteenth century and the confrontation with the nazis shaped understandings of freedom during world war ii the cold war reshaped them once again.
russia had already conquered america the poet archibald macleish complained in 1949 since politics was conducted under a kind of upsidedown russian veto whatever moscow stood for was by definition the opposite of freedom including anything to which the word socialized could be attached.
in the largest public relations campaign in american history the american medical association raised the specter of socialized medicine to discredit and defeat trumans proposal for national health insurance.
the real estate industry likewise mobilized against public housing terming it socialized housing similar to policies undertaken by moscow.
the soviets opposed organized religion so to strengthen our national resistance to communism congress in 1954 added the words under god to the pledge of allegiance.
cartoonist bill mauldin illustrated the essence of the idea of totalitarianism in this 1946 cartoon a dictatorial government that refuses to accept the legitimacy of difference of opinion.
23 the united states and the cold war 1945 1953 the rise of human the cold war and the idea of freedom rights the cold war also affected the emerging concept of human rights.
the idea that there are rights that are applicable to all of humanity originated during the eighteenth century in the enlightenment and the american and french revolutions.
the atrocities committed during world war ii as well as the global language of the four freedoms and the atlantic charter forcefully raised the issue of human rights in the postwar world.
after the war the victorious allies put numerous german officials on trial before special courts at nuremberg for crimes against humanity.
for the first time individuals were held directly accountable to the international community for violations of human rights.
the trials resulted in prison terms for many nazi officials and the execution of ten leaders.
the united nations charter includes strong language prohibiting discrimination on the basis of race sex or religion.
in 1948 the un general assembly approved a far more sweeping document the universal declaration of human rights drafted by a committee chaired by eleanor roosevelt.
it identified a broad range of rights to be enjoyed by people everywhere including freedom of speech religious toleration and protection against arbitrary government as well as social and economic entitlements like the right to an adequate standard of living and access to housing education and medical care.
the document had no enforcement mechanism.
some considered it an exercise in empty rhetoric.
but the core principle that a nations treatment of its own citizens should be subject to outside evaluation slowly became part of the language in which freedom was discussed.
ambiguities of human rights the american and french revolutions of the late eighteenth century had introduced into international relations the idea of basic rights belonging to all persons simply because they are human.
in a sense this was the origin of the idea of human rights principles so fundamental that no government has a right to violate them.
the antislavery movement had turned this idea into a powerful weapon against the legitimacy of slavery.
yet the debates over the universal declaration of human rights revealed the tensions inherent in the idea tensions that persist to the present day.
to what extent do human rights supercede national sovereignty.
who has the authority to enforce human rights that a government is violating.
the united nations.
regional bodies like the organization of american states and the european union.
a single country as the united states would claim to be doing in the iraq war that began in 2003.
the covenant of the league of nations the predecessor of the united nations created after world war i had contained a clause allowing the league to intervene when a government violated the rights of its own citizens.
one reason for the lack of an enforcement mechanism in the universal declaration of human rights was that both the united states and the soviet union refused to accept outside interference in their internal affairs or restraints on their ability to conduct foreign policy as they desired.
john foster dulles an american delegate to the conference that created the un opposed any statement affirming human rights out of fear that it visions of freedom human rights.
this cartoon from 1947 depicts delegates to a meeting of the un human rights commission as unruly schoolchildren.
eleanor roosevelt lectures delegates from various countries about human rights.
now children she says all together the rights of the individual are above the rights of the state at the lower left john foster dulles an american delegate aims a slingshot at the soviet ambassador to the un andrei y vishinsky who stands in the lower right corner wearing a dunce cap.
charles malik of lebanon offers the teacher an apple.
several delegates seem bored others are attentive.
questions 1 what does the cartoon suggest about the degree of commitment to human rights in the postwar world.
2 what definition of freedom do the words of eleanor roosevelt illustrate.
23 the united states and the cold war 1945 1953 the truman presidency would lead to an international investigation of the negro question in this country in 1947 the naacp did file a petition with the united nations asking it to investigate racism in the united states as a violation of human rights.
conditions in states like mississippi should be of concern to all mankind it argued because if democracy failed to function in the leading democracy in the world the prospects for democracy were weakened everywhere.
but the un decided that it lacked jurisdiction.
nonetheless since the end of world war ii the enjoyment of human rights has increasingly taken its place in definitions of freedom across the globe especially perhaps where such rights are flagrantly violated.
after the cold war ended the idea of human rights would play an increasingly prominent role in world affairs.
but during the 1950s cold war imperatives shaped the concept.
neither the united states nor the soviet union could resist emphasizing certain provisions of the universal declaration while ignoring others.
the soviets claimed to provide all citizens with social and economic rights but violated democratic rights and civil liberties.
many americans condemned the nonpolitical rights as a step toward socialism.
in 1950 freedom house began yearly assessments of the status of freedom in the worlds nations.
it adopted purely political criteria emphasizing citizens rights to participate in open elections and to speak out on public issues.
considering access to employment housing education medical care and the like as part of the definition of freedom the reports argued would be a serious mistake.
eleanor roosevelt saw the universal declaration of human rights as an integrated body of principles a combination of traditional civil and political liberties with the social conditions of freedom outlined in her husbands economic bill of rights of 1944 but to make it easier for member states to ratify the document the un divided it into two covenants civil and political rights and economic social and cultural rights.
it took until 1992 for the u s congress to ratify the first.
it has never approved the second.
the truman presidency the fa i r deal with the end of world war ii president trumans first domestic task was to preside over the transition from a wartime to a peacetime economy.
more than 12 million men remained in uniform in august 1945 they wanted nothing more than to return home to their families.
demobilization proceeded at a rapid pace.
within a year the armed forces had been reduced to 3 million.
some returning soldiers found the adjustment to civilian life difficult.
the divorce rate in 1945 rose to double its prewar level.
others took advantage of the gi bill of rights discussed in the previous chapter to obtain home mortgages set up small businesses and embark on college educations.
the majority of returning soldiers entered the labor force one reason why more than 2 million women workers lost their jobs.
the government abolished wartime agencies that regulated industrial production and labor relations and it dismantled wartime price controls leading to a sharp rise in prices.
in the immediate aftermath of world war ii president truman backed by party liberals and organized labor moved to revive the stalled momentum of the new deal.
trumans program which he announced in what were the major initiatives of trumans domestic policies.
september 1945 and would later call the fair deal focused on improving the social safety net and raising the standard of living of ordinary americans.
he called on congress to increase the minimum wage enact a program of national health insurance and expand public housing social security and aid to education.
truman complained one republican leader was out new dealing the new deal the postwar strike wave in 1946 a new wave of labor militancy swept the country.
the afl and cio launched operation dixie a campaign to bring unionization to the south and by so doing shatter the hold of anti labor conservatives on the regions politics.
more than 200 labor organizers entered the region seeking support especially in the southern textile industry the steel industry in the birmingham region and agriculture.
with war production at an end overtime work diminished even as inflation soared following the removal of price controls.
the resulting drop in workers real income sparked the largest strike wave in american history.
nearly 5 million workers including those in the steel auto coal and other key industries walked off their jobs demanding wage increases.
the strike of 750 000 steelworkers represented the largest single walkout in american history to that date.
even hollywood studios shut down because of a strike of actors and other employees of the movie industry that lasted for the better part of a year.
one historian calls this period the closest thing to a national general strike in industry in the twentieth century president truman feared the strikes would seriously disrupt the economy.
when railroad workers stopped work and set up picket lines the infuriated president prepared a speech in which he threatened to draft them all into the army and hang a few traitors language toned down by his advisers.
the walkout soon ended as did a coal strike after the truman administration secured a court order requiring the miners to return to work.
to resolve other strikes truman appointed federal fact finding boards which generally recommended wage increases although not enough to restore workers purchasing power to wartime levels.
the republican resurgence in the congressional elections of 1946 large numbers of middle class voters alarmed by the labor turmoil voted republican.
many workers disappointed by trumans policies stayed at home.
this was a lethal combination for the democratic party.
for the first time since the 1920s republicans swept to control of both houses of congress.
meanwhile in the face of vigorous opposition from southern employers and public officials and the reluctance of many white workers to join interracial labor unions operation dixie had failed to unionize the south or dent the political control of conservative democrats in the region.
the election of 1946 ensured that a conservative coalition of republicans and southern democrats would continue to dominate congress.
a few of the numerous world war ii veterans who attended college after the war thanks to the gi bill.
23 the united states and the cold war 1945 1953 the truman presidency congress turned aside trumans fair deal program.
it enacted tax cuts for wealthy americans and over the presidents veto in 1947 passed the taft hartley act which sought to reverse some of the gains made by organized labor in the past decade.
the measure authorized the president to suspend strikes by ordering an eighty day cooling off period and it banned sympathy strikes and secondary boycotts labor actions directed not at an employer but at those who did business with him.
it outlawed the closed shop which required a worker to be a union member when taking up a job and authorized states to pass right to work laws prohibiting other forms of compulsory union membership.
it also forced union officials to swear that they were not communists.
while hardly a slave labor bill as the afl and cio called it the taft hartley act made it considerably more difficult to bring unorganized workers into unions.
over time as population and capital investment shifted to states with right to work laws like texas florida and north carolina taft hartley contributed to the decline of organized labors share of the nations workforce.
postwar racial segregation and exclusion were not confined to the south in the post world war ii period.
here in 1947 picketers stand outside a seattle grocery store that refused to serve non whites.
a campaign by black activists supported by a coalition of unions church groups jewish organizations and communists forced most of the citys stores and restaurants to treat customers on an equal basis.
civil rights during his first term truman reached out in unprecedented ways to the nations black community.
the war as noted in the previous chapter 19 until then the vast majority of african americans remained in the south.
the decline of black politics neither black voting nor black officeholding came to an abrupt end in 1877 blacks continued to cast ballots in large numbers although democrats solidified their control of state and local affairs by redrawing district lines and substituting appointive for elective officials in counties with black majorities.
a few blacks even served in congress in the 1880s and 1890s.
nonetheless political opportunities became more and more restricted.
not until the 1990s would the number of black legislators in the south approach the level seen during reconstruction.
for black men of talent and ambition other avenues business the law the church increasingly seemed to offer greater opportunities for person ch.
17 freedoms boundaries at home and abroad 1890 1900 the segregated south al advancement and community service than politics.
the banner of political leadership passed to black women activists.
the national association of colored women founded in 1896 brought together local and regional womens clubs to press for both womens rights and racial uplift.
most female activists emerged from the small urban black middle class and preached the necessity of respectable behavior as part and parcel of the struggle for equal rights.
they aided poor families offered lessons in home life and childrearing and battled gambling and drinking in black communities.
some poor blacks resented middle class efforts to instruct them in proper behavior.
but by insisting on the right of black women to be considered as respectable as their white counterparts the women reformers challenged the racial ideology that consigned all blacks to the status of degraded second class citizens.
for nearly a generation after the end of reconstruction despite fraud and violence black southerners continued to cast ballots.
in some states the republican party remained competitive.
in virginia a coalition of mostly black republicans and anti redeemer democrats formed an alliance known as the readjuster movement the name derived from their plan to scale back or readjust the state debt.
they governed the state between 1879 and 1883 tennessee and arkansas also witnessed the formation of biracial political coalitions that challenged democratic party rule.
despite the limits of the populists interracial alliance the threat of a biracial political insurgency frightened the ruling democrats and contributed greatly to the disenfranchisement movement.
in north carolina for example the end of the populistrepublican coalition government in 1898 accomplished by a violent campaign that culminated in a riot in wilmington in which scores of blacks were killed was quickly followed by the elimination of black voting.
the elimination of black voting between 1890 and 1906 every southern state enacted laws or constitutional provisions meant to eliminate the black vote.
since the fifteenth amendment prohibited the use of race as a qualification for the suffrage how were such measures even possible.
southern legislatures drafted laws that on paper appeared color blind but that were actually designed to end black voting.
the most popular devices were the poll tax a fee that each citizen had to pay in order to retain the right to vote literacy tests and the requirement that a prospective voter demonstrate to election officials an understanding of the state constitution.
six southern states also adopted a grandfather clause exempting from the new requirements descendants of persons eligible to vote before the civil war when only whites of course could cast ballots in the south.
the racial intent of the grandfather clause was so clear that the supreme court in 1915 invalidated such laws for violating the fifteenth amendment.
the other methods of limiting black voting however remained on the books.
some white leaders presented disenfranchisement as a good government measure a means of purifying politics by ending the fraud violence and manipulation of voting returns regularly used against republicans and populists.
but ultimately as a charleston newspaper declared the aim was to make clear that the white south does not desire or intend ever to include black men among its citizens democrats persistently raised the how did the liberties of blacks after 1877 give way to legal segregation across the south.
threat of negro domination to justify the denial of the right to vote.
although election officials often allowed whites who did not meet the new qualifications to register numerous poor and illiterate whites also lost the right to vote a result welcomed by many planters and urban reformers.
louisiana for example reduced the number of blacks registered to vote from 130 000 in 1894 to 1 342 a decade later.
but 80 000 white voters also lost the right.
disenfranchisement led directly to the rise of a generation of southern demagogues who mobilized white voters by extreme appeals to racism.
tom watson who as noted before had tried to forge an interracial populist coalition in the 1890s reemerged early in the twentieth century as a power in georgia public life through vicious speeches whipping up prejudice against blacks jews and catholics.
as late as 1940 only 3 percent of adult black southerners were registered to vote.
the elimination of black and many white voters which reversed the nineteenth century trend toward more inclusive suffrage could not have been accomplished without the approval of the north.
in 1891 the senate defeated a proposal for federal protection of black voting rights in the south.
apart from the grandfather clause the supreme court gave its approval to disenfranchisement laws.
according to the fourteenth amendment any state that deprived male citizens of the franchise was supposed to lose part of its representation in congress.
but like much of the constitution this provision was consistently violated so far as africanamericans were concerned.
as a result southern congressmen wielded far greater power on the national scene than their tiny electorates warranted.
as for blacks for decades thereafter they would regard the loss of suffrage as being the loss of freedom the law of segregation along with disenfranchisement the 1890s saw the widespread imposition of segregation in the south.
laws and local customs requiring the separation of the races had numerous precedents.
they had existed in many parts african americans of all ages were required to abide by segregation laws.
here in a twentieth century photograph a youth is about to drink from a colored water fountain.
17 freedoms boundaries at home and abroad 1890 1900 the segregated south of the pre civil war north.
southern schools and many other institutions had been segregated during reconstruction.
in the 1880s however southern race relations remained unsettled.
some railroads theaters and hotels admitted blacks and whites on an equal basis while others separated them by race or excluded blacks altogether.
in 1883 in the civil rights cases the supreme court invalidated the civil rights act of 1875 which had outlawed racial discrimination by hotels theaters railroads and other public facilities.
the fourteenth amendment the court insisted prohibited unequal treatment by state authorities not private businesses.
in 1896 in the landmark decision in plessy v ferguson the court gave its approval to state laws requiring separate facilities for blacks and whites.
the case arose in louisiana where the legislature had required railroad companies to maintain a separate car or section for black passengers.
a citizens committee of black residents of new orleans came together to challenge the law.
to create a test case homer plessy a light skinned african american refused a conductors order to move to the colored only part of his railroad car and was arrested.
to argue the case before the supreme court the citizens committee hired albion w tourge who as a judge in north carolina during reconstruction had waged a courageous battle against the ku klux klan.
citizenship is national and knows no color he insisted and racial segregation violated the fourteenth amendments guarantee of equal protection before the law.
but in an 8 1 decision the court upheld the louisiana law arguing that segregated facilities did not discriminate so long as they were separate but equal the lone dissenter john marshall harlan reprimanded the majority with an oft quoted comment our constitution is color blind segregation he insisted sprang from whites conviction that they were the dominant race a phrase used by the courts majority and it violated the principle of equal liberty.
to harlan freedom for the former slaves meant the right to participate fully and equally in american society.
segregation and white domination as harlan predicted states reacted to the plessy decision by passing laws mandating racial segregation in every aspect of southern life from schools to hospitals waiting rooms toilets and cemeteries.
some states forbade taxi drivers to carry members of different races at the same time.
despite the thin disguise harlans phrase of equality required by the courts separate but equal doctrine facilities for blacks were either nonexistent or markedly inferior.
in 1900 no public high school for blacks existed in the entire south.
black elementary schools one observer reported occupied buildings as bad as stables more than a form of racial separation segregation was one part of an all encompassing system of white domination in which each component disenfranchisement unequal economic status inferior education reinforced the others.
the point was not so much to keep the races apart as to ensure that when they came into contact with each other whether in politics labor relations or social life whites held the upper hand.
for example many blacks could be found in whites only railroad cars.
but they entered as servants and nurses not as paying customers entitled to equal treatment.
how did the liberties of blacks after 1877 give way to legal segregation across the south.
an elaborate social etiquette developed with proper behavior differentiated by race.
one sociologist who studied the turn of the century south reported that in places of business blacks had to stand back and wait until whites had been served.
they could not raise their voices or in other ways act assertively in the presence of whites and they had to give way on the streets.
in shops whites but not blacks were allowed to try on clothing.
segregation affected other groups as well as blacks.
in some parts of mississippi where chinese laborers had been brought in to work the fields after the civil war three separate school systems white black and chinese were established.
in california black hispanic and american indian children were frequently educated alongside whites but state law required separate schools for those of mongolian or chinese descent in texas and california although mexicans were legally considered white they found themselves barred from many restaurants places of entertainment and other public facilities.
the rise of ly n c h i n g those blacks who sought to challenge the system or who refused to accept the demeaning behavior that was a daily feature of southern life faced not only overwhelming political and legal power but also the threat of violent reprisal.
in every year between 1883 and 1905 more than fifty persons the vast majority of them black men were lynched in the south that is murdered by a mob.
lynching continued well into the twentieth century.
by mid century the total number of victims since 1880 had reached nearly 5 000 some lynchings occurred secretly at night others were advertised part of the crowd of 10 000 that watched the 1893 lynching of henry smith in paris texas.
smith was accused of raping and murdering a four year old girl.
the word justice was painted on the platform.
17 freedoms boundaries at home and abroad 1890 1900 table 17 1 states with over 200 lynchings 1889 1918 state number of lynchings georgia mississippi texas louisiana alabama arkansas the segregated south in advance and attracted large crowds of onlookers.
mobs engaged in activities that shocked the civilized world.
in 1899 sam hose a plantation laborer who killed his employer in self defense was brutally murdered near newman georgia before 2 000 onlookers some of whom arrived on a special excursion train from atlanta.
a crowd including young children watched as his executioners cut off hoses ears fingers and genitals burned him alive and then fought over pieces of his bones as souvenirs.
law enforcement authorities made no effort to prevent the lynching or to bring those who committed the crime to justice.
like many victims of lynchings hose was accused after his death of having raped a white woman.
many white southerners considered preserving the purity of white womanhood a justification for extralegal vengeance.
yet in nearly all cases as activist ida b wells argued in a newspaper editorial after a memphis lynching in 1892 the charge of rape was a bare lie born a slave in mississippi in 1862 wells had become a schoolteacher and editor.
her essay condemning the lynching of three black men in memphis led a mob to destroy her newspaper the memphis free press while she was out of the city.
wells moved to the north where she became the nations leading antilynching crusader.
she bluntly insisted that given the conditions of southern blacks the united states had no right to call itself the land of the free although many countries have witnessed outbreaks of violence against minority racial ethnic or religious groups widespread lynching of individuals over so long a period was a phenomenon unknown elsewhere.
canada for example has experienced only one lynching in its history in 1884 when a mob from the united states crossed the border into british columbia to lynch an indian teenager who had fled after being accused of murder.
years later black writer blyden jackson recalled growing up in earlytwentieth century louisville kentucky a city in many ways typical of the new south.
it was a divided society.
there was the world where white folks lived.
the louisville of the downtown hotels the lower floors of the big movie houses.
the inner sanctums of offices where i could go only as a humble client or a menial custodian then there was the black world the homes the people the churches and the schools where everything was black i knew jackson later recalled that there were two louisvilles and.
two americas the politics of memory as the white north and south moved toward reconciliation in the 1880s and 1890s one cost was the abandonment of the dream of racial equality spawned by the civil war and written into the laws and constitution during reconstruction.
in popular literature and memoirs by participants at veterans reunions and in public memorials the civil war came to be remembered as a tragic family quarrel among white americans in which blacks had played no significant part.
it was a war of brother against brother in which both sides fought gallantly for noble causes local rights on the part of the south preservation of the union for the north.
slavery increasingly came to be viewed as a minor issue not the wars fundamental cause and reconstruction as a regrettable period of negro rule when former slaves how did the liberties of blacks after 1877 give way to legal segregation across the south.
had power thrust upon them by a vindictive north.
this outlook gave legitimacy to southern efforts to eliminate black voting lest the region once again suffer the alleged horrors of reconstruction.
southern governments erected monuments to the lost cause school history textbooks emphasized happy slaves and the evils of reconstruction and the role of black soldiers in winning the war was all but forgotten.
in fact when a group of black veterans attempted to participate in a florida ceremony commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of the outbreak of the civil war in 1911 a white mob tore the military insignias off their jackets and drove them away.
r e d r aw i n g t h e b o u n da r i e s the effective nullification of the laws and amendments of reconstruction and the reduction of blacks to the position of second class citizens reflected nationwide patterns of thought and policy.
as the nineteenth century drew to a close american society seemed to be fracturing along lines of both class and race.
the result commented economist simon patten was a widespread obsession with redrawing the boundary of freedom by identifying and excluding those unworthy of the blessings of liberty.
the south he wrote has its negro the city has its slums.
the friends of american institutions fear the ignorant immigrant and the workingman dislikes the chinese as patten suggested many americans embraced a more and more restricted definition of nationhood.
the new exclusiveness was evident in the pages of popular periodicals filled with derogatory imagery depicting blacks and other lesser groups as little more than savages and criminals incapable of partaking in american freedom.
a cartoon from the magazine judge illustrates anti immigrant sentiment.
a tide of newcomers representing the criminal element of other countries washes up on american shores to the consternation of uncle sam.
17 freedoms boundaries at home and abroad 1890 1900 the new immigration redrawing the boundaries and the new nativism the 1890s witnessed a major shift in the sources of immigration to the united states.
despite the prolonged depression 3 5 million newcomers entered the united states during the decade seeking jobs in the industrial centers of the north and midwest.
over half arrived not from ireland england germany and scandinavia the traditional sources of immigration but from southern and eastern europe especially italy and the russian and austro hungarian empires.
the new immigrants were widely described by native born americans as members of distinct races whose lower level of civilization explained everything from their willingness to work for substandard wages to their supposed inborn tendency toward criminal behavior.
they were beaten men from beaten races wrote economist francis amasa walker representing the worst failures in the struggle for existence american cities said an ohio newspaper were being overrun by foreigners who have no true appreciation of the meaning of liberty and therefore posed a danger to democratic government.
founded in 1894 by a group of boston professionals the immigration restriction league called for reducing immigration by barring the illiterate from entering the united states.
such a measure was adopted by congress early in 1897 but was vetoed by president cleveland.
like the south northern and western states experimented with ways to eliminate undesirable voters.
nearly all the states during the 1890s adopted the secret or australian ballot meant both to protect voters privacy and to limit the participation of illiterates who could no longer receive help from party officials at polling places.
several states ended the nineteenth century practice of allowing immigrants to vote before becoming citizens and adopted stringent new residency and literacy requirements.
none of these measures approached the scope of black disenfranchisement in the south or the continued denial of voting rights to women.
but suffrage throughout the country was increasingly becoming a privilege not a right.
chinese chinese agricultural laborers in southern california around 1880 exclusion and chinese rights the boundaries of nationhood expanded so dramatically in the aftermath of the civil war slowly contracted.
leaders of both parties expressed vicious opinions regarding immigrants from china they were odious abominable dangerous revolting declared republican leader james g blaine.
between 1850 and 1870 nearly all chinese immigrants had been unattached men brought in by labor contractors to work in western gold fields railroad construction and factories.
in the early 1870s entire chinese families began to immigrate leading congress in 1875 to exclude chinese women from entering the country.
california congressman horace page the bills author insisted that it was intended to preserve the health of white citizens by barring chinese prostitutes.
but immigration authorities enforced the page law so as to keep out as well the wives and daughters of arriving men and of those already in the country.
beginning in 1882 congress temporarily excluded immigrants from china from entering the country altogether.
although non whites had long been barred from becoming naturalized citizens this was the first in what ways did the boundaries of american freedom grow narrower in this period.
result of an anti chinese riot in seattle washington.
time that race had been used to exclude an entire group of people from entering the united states.
congress renewed the restriction ten years later and made it permanent in 1902 at the time of exclusion 105 000 persons of chinese descent lived in the united states.
nearly all of them resided on the west coast where they suffered intense discrimination and periodic mob violence.
in the latenineteenth century west thousands of chinese immigrants were expelled from towns and mining camps and mobs assaulted chinese residences and businesses.
drawing on the legislation of the reconstruction era chinese victims sued local governments for redress when their rights were violated and petitioned congress for indemnity.
their demands for equal rights forced the state and federal courts to define the reach of the fourteenth amendment.
for example between 1871 and 1885 san francisco provided no public education for chinese children.
in 1885 the california supreme court in tape v hurley ordered the city to admit chinese students to public schools.
the state legislature responded by passing a law authorizing segregated education and the city established a school for chinese.
but joseph and mary tape who had lived in the united states since the 1860s insisted that their daughter be allowed to attend her neighborhood school like other children.
is it a disgrace to be born a chinese mary tape wrote.
didnt god make us all but her protest failed.
not until 1947 did california repeal the law authorizing separate schools for the chinese.
the u s supreme court also considered the status of chinese americans.
in yick wo v hopkins 1886 the court unanimously ordered san francisco to grant licenses to chinese operated laundries which the city government had refused to do.
to deny a person the opportunity to earn a living the court declared was intolerable in any country where freedom prevails twelve years later in united states v wong kim ark the court ruled that the ch.
17 freedoms boundaries at home and abroad 1890 1900 booker t washington advocate of industrial education and economic self help.
redrawing the boundaries fourteenth amendment awarded citizenship to children of chinese immigrants born on american soil.
yet the justices also affirmed the right of congress to set racial restrictions on immigration.
and in its decision in fong yue ting 1893 the court authorized the federal government to expel chinese aliens without due process of law.
in his dissent justice david j brewer acknowledged that the power was now directed against a people many americans found obnoxious but who shall say he continued it will not be exercised tomorrow against other classes and other people brewer proved to be an accurate prophet.
in 1904 the court cited fong yue ting in upholding a law barring anarchists from entering the united states demonstrating how restrictions on the rights of one group can become a precedent for infringing on the rights of others.
exclusion profoundly shaped the experience of chinese americans long stigmatizing them as incapable of assimilation and justifying their isolation from mainstream society.
congress for the first time also barred groups of whites from entering the country beginning in 1875 with prostitutes and convicted felons and in 1882 adding lunatics and those likely to become a public charge are we still a place of refuge for the oppressed of all nations wondered james b weaver the populist candidate for president in 1892 the emergence of booker t washington the social movements that had helped to expand the nineteenth century boundaries of freedom now redefined their objectives so that they might be realized within the new economic and intellectual framework.
prominent black leaders for example took to emphasizing economic self help and individual advancement into the middle class as an alternative to political agitation.
symbolizing the change was the juxtaposition in 1895 of the death of frederick douglass with booker t washingtons widely praised speech at the atlanta cotton exposition that urged blacks to adjust to segregation and abandon agitation for civil and political rights.
born a slave in 1856 washington had studied as a young man at hampton institute virginia.
he adopted the outlook of hamptons founder general samuel armstrong who emphasized that obtaining farms or skilled jobs was far more important to african americans emerging from slavery than the rights of citizenship.
washington put this view into practice when he became head of tuskegee institute in alabama a center for vocational education education focused on training for a job rather than broad learning.
in his atlanta speech washington repudiated the abolitionist tradition that stressed ceaseless agitation for full equality.
he urged blacks not to try to combat segregation in all the things that are purely social we can be as separate as the fingers yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual progress washington advised his people to seek the assistance of white employers who in a land racked by labor turmoil would prefer a docile dependable black labor force to unionized whites.
washingtons ascendancy rested in large part on his success in channeling aid from wealthy northern whites to tuskegee and to black politicians and newspapers who backed his program.
but his support in the black community also arose from a widespread sense that in the world of the late nineteenth century frontal in what ways did the boundaries of american freedom grow narrower in this period.
assaults on white power were impossible and that blacks should concentrate on building up their segregated communities.
the rise of the afl within the labor movement the demise of the knights of labor and the ascendancy of the american federation of labor afl during the 1890s reflected a similar shift away from a broadly reformist past to more limited goals.
as the homestead and pullman strikes demonstrated direct confrontations with the large corporations were likely to prove suicidal.
unions declared samuel gompers the afls founder and longtime president should not seek economic independence pursue the knights utopian dream of creating a cooperative commonwealth or form independent parties with the aim of achieving power in government.
rather the labor movement should devote itself to negotiating with employers for higher wages and better working conditions for its members.
like washington gompers spoke the language of the eras business culture.
indeed the afl policies he pioneered were known as business unionism gompers embraced the idea of freedom of contract shrewdly turning it into an argument against interference by judges with workers right to organize unions.
during the 1890s union membership rebounded from its decline in the late 1880s.
but at the same time the labor movement became less and less inclusive.
abandoning the knights ideal of labor solidarity the afl restricted membership to skilled workers a small minority of the labor force effectively excluding the vast majority of unskilled workers and therefore nearly all blacks women and new european immigrants.
afl membership centered on sectors of the economy like printing and building construction that were dominated by small competitive businesses with workers who frequently were united by craft skill and ethnic background.
afl unions had little presence in basic industries like steel and rubber or in the large scale factories that now dominated the economy.
the womens era changes in the womens movement reflected the same combination of expanding activities and narrowing boundaries.
the 1890s launched what would later be called the womens era three decades during which women although still denied the vote enjoyed larger opportunities than in the past for economic independence and played a greater and greater role in public life.
by now nearly every state had adopted laws giving married women control over their own wages and property and the right to sign separate contracts and make separate wills.
nearly 5 million women worked for wages in 1900 although most were young unmarried and concentrated in traditional jobs such as domestic service and the garment industry a generation of college educated women was beginning to take its place in better paying clerical and professional positions.
through a network of womens clubs temperance associations and social reform organizations women exerted a growing influence on public affairs.
founded in 1874 the womens christian temperance union wctu grew to become the eras largest female organization with a womans holy war a lithograph from 1874 the year the womens christian temperance union was founded portrays an advocate of prohibition as an armed crusader against hard liquor.
17 freedoms boundaries at home and abroad 1890 1900 redrawing the boundaries a drawing for the 1896 meeting of the national american woman suffrage association depicts elizabeth cady stanton with the womans bible which she wrote on her lap and susan b anthony seated on either side of george washington.
they in turn are flanked by utah and wyoming which as territories had been the first parts of the united states to give women the right to vote.
although the image might lead viewers to assume that stanton and anthony had joined washington in heaven they were both still alive in 1896 membership by 1890 of 150 000 under the banner of home protection it moved from demanding the prohibition of alcoholic beverages blamed for leading men to squander their wages on drink and treat their wives abusively to a comprehensive program of economic and political reform including the right to vote.
women insisted frances willard the groups president must abandon the idea that weakness and dependence were their nature and join assertively in movements to change society.
a wider freedom is coming to the women of america she declared in an 1895 speech to male and female strikers in a massachusetts shoe factory.
too long has it been held that woman has no right to enter these movements.
so much for the movements.
politics is the place for woman at the same time the center of gravity of feminism shifted toward an outlook more in keeping with prevailing racial and ethnic norms.
the earlier feminism of equal rights which claimed the ballot as part of a larger transformation of womens status was never fully repudiated.
the movement continued to argue for womens equality in employment education and politics.
but with increasing frequency the native born middle class women who dominated the suffrage movement claimed the vote as educated members of a superior race in what ways did the boundaries of american freedom grow narrower in this period.
a new generation of suffrage leaders suggested that educational and other voting qualifications did not conflict with the movements aims so long as they applied equally to men and women.
immigrants and former slaves had been enfranchised with ill advised haste declared carrie chapman catt president of the national american woman suffrage association created in 1890 to reunite the rival suffrage organizations formed after the civil war.
indeed catt suggested extending the vote to native born white women would help to counteract the growing power of the ignorant foreign vote in the north and the dangerous potential for a second reconstruction in the south.
elitism within the movement was reinforced when many advocates of suffrage blamed the slum vote for the defeat of a womens suffrage referendum in california.
in 1895 the same year that booker t washington delivered his atlanta address the national american woman suffrage association held its annual convention in that segregated city.
like other american institutions the organized movement for womens suffrage had made its peace with nativism and racism.
becoming a world power the new imperialism in the last years of the 1890s the narrowed definition of nationhood was projected abroad as the united states took its place as an imperial power on the international stage.
in world history the last quarter of the nineteenth century is known as the age of imperialism when rival european empires carved up large parts of the world among themselves.
for most of this period the united states remained a second rate power.
in 1880 the sultan of turkey decided to close three foreign embassies to reduce expenses.
he chose those in sweden belgium and the united states.
in that year the american navy was smaller than denmarks or chiles.
when european powers met at the berlin congress of 1884 1885 to divide most of africa among themselves the united states attended because of its relationship with liberia but did not sign the final agreement.
throughout the nineteenth century large empires dominated much of the globe.
some were land based like the russian ottoman and chinese empires and others included territories on several continents linked by sea such as the british french and spanish.
after 1870 a new imperialism arose dominated by european powers and japan.
belgium great britain and france consolidated their hold on colonies in africa and newly unified germany acquired colonies there as well.
the british and russians sought to increase their influence in central asia and all the european powers struggled to dominate parts of china.
by the early twentieth century most of asia africa the middle east and the pacific had been divided among these empires.
the justification for this expansion of imperial power was that it would bring modern civilization to the supposedly backward peoples of the non european world.
the natives according to their colonial occupiers would be instructed in western values labor practices and the christian religion.
eventually they would be accorded the right of self government although no one could be sure how long this would take.
in the meantime empire was another word for exploitation ch.
17 freedoms boundaries at home and abroad 1890 1900 american becoming a world power expansionism territorial expansion of course had been a feature of american life from well before independence.
but the 1890s marked a major turning point in americas relationship with the rest of the world.
americans were increasingly aware of themselves as an emerging world power.
we are a great imperial republic destined to exercise a controlling influence upon the actions of mankind and to affect the future of the world proclaimed henry watterson an influential newspaper editor.
until the 1890s american expansion had taken place on the north american continent.
ever since the monroe doctrine see chapter.
in south carolina and georgia two very different black societies emerged.
on the rice plantations slaves lived in extremely harsh conditions and had a low birthrate throughout the eighteenth century making rice production dependent on continued slave imports from africa.
the slaves seldom came into contact with whites and enjoyed far more autonomy than elsewhere in the colonies.
the larger structures of their lives were established by slavery but they were able to create an african based culture.
they constructed african style houses chose african names for their children and spoke gullah a language that mixed various african roots and was unintelligible to most whites.
despite a continuing slave trade in which young single males predominated slaves slowly created families and communities that bridged generations.
the experience of slaves who labored in charleston and savannah as servants and skilled workers was quite different.
these assimilated more quickly into euro american culture and sexual liaisons between white owners and slave women produced the beginnings of a class of free mulattos.
in the northern colonies where slaves represented a smaller part of the population dispersed in small holdings among the white population a distinctive african american culture developed more slowly.
living in close proximity to whites they enjoyed more mobility and access to the mainstream of life than their counterparts farther south.
slaves in cities like philadelphia and new york gathered on holidays to perform african dances.
but they had fewer opportunities to create stable family life or a cohesive community.
resistance to slavery the common threads that linked these regional african american cultures were the experience of slavery and the desire for freedom.
throughout the eighteenth century blacks risked their lives in efforts to resist enslavement.
colonial newspapers especially in the southern colonies were filled with advertisements for runaway slaves.
most fugitives were young african men who had arrived recently.
in south carolina and georgia they fled to florida to uninhabited coastal and river swamps or to charleston and savannah where they could pass for free.
in the chesapeake and middle colonies fugitive slaves tended to be familiar with white culture and therefore as one advertisement put it could pretend to be free what edward trelawny the colonial governor of jamaica called a dangerous spirit of liberty was widespread among the new worlds slaves.
the eighteenth centurys first slave uprising occurred in new york city in 1712 what factors led to distinct african american cultures in the eighteenth century.
when a group of slaves set fire to houses on the outskirts of the city and killed the first nine whites who arrived on the scene.
subsequently eighteen conspirators were executed some were tortured and burned alive in a public spectacle meant to intimidate the slave population.
during the 1730s and 1740s continuous warfare involving european empires and indians opened the door to slave resistance.
in 1731 a slave rebellion in louisiana where the french and natchez indians were at war temporarily halted efforts to introduce the plantation system in that region.
there were uprisings throughout the west indies including in the virgin islands owned by denmark and on the french island of guadeloupe.
on jamaica a major british center of sugar production communities of fugitive slaves known as maroons waged outright warfare against british authorities until a treaty of 1739 recognized their freedom in exchange for which they agreed to return future escapees.
the crisis of 1739 1741 on the mainland slaves seized the opportunity for rebellion offered by the war of jenkins ear which pitted england against spain.
in september 1739 a group of south carolina slaves most of them recently arrived from kongo where some it appears had been soldiers seized a store containing numerous weapons at the town of stono.
beating drums to attract followers the armed band marched southward toward florida burning houses and barns killing whites they encountered and shouting liberty floridas spanish rulers offered liberty and protection to fugitives from the british colonies.
the group eventually swelled to some 100 slaves.
after a pitched battle with the colonys militia the rebels were dispersed.
the rebellion took the lives of more than two dozen whites and as many as 200 slaves.
some slaves managed to reach florida where in 1740 they were armed by the spanish to help repel an attack on st augustine by a force from georgia.
the stono rebellion led to a severe tightening of the south carolina slave code and the temporary imposition of a prohibitive tax on imported slaves.
in 1741 a panic which some observers compared to the fear of witches in salem in the 1690s swept new york city.
after a series of fires broke out rumors spread that slaves with some white allies planned to burn part of the city seize weapons and either turn new york over to spain or murder the white population.
more than 150 blacks and 20 whites were arrested and 34 alleged conspirators including 4 white persons were executed.
historians still disagree as to how extensive the plot was or whether it existed at all.
but dramatic events like revolts along with the constant stream of runaways disproved the idea voiced by the governor of south carolina that slaves had no notion of liberty in eighteenth century america dreams of freedom knew no racial boundary.
when white colonists rose in rebellion against british rule tens of thousands of slaves would seize the opportunity to strike for their own liberty.
an advertisement seeking the return of a runaway slave from port royal in the sea islands of south carolina.
mustee was a term for a person of mixed european and african ancestry.
from the south carolina gazette june 11 1747 c h.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 an empire of freedom an empire of freedom british patriotism despite the centrality of slavery to its empire eighteenth century great britain prided itself on being the worlds most advanced and freest nation.
it was not only the eras greatest naval and commercial power but also the home of a complex governmental system with a powerful parliament representing the interests of a self confident landed aristocracy and merchant class.
in london the largest city in europe with a population approaching 1 million by the end of the eighteenth century britain possessed a single political cultural economic capital.
it enjoyed a common law common language and with the exception of a small number of jews catholics and africans common devotion to protestantism.
for much of the eighteenth century britain found itself at war with france which had replaced spain as its major continental rival.
this situation led to the development of a large military establishment high taxes and the creation of the bank of england to help finance european and imperial conflicts.
for both britons and colonists war helped to sharpen a sense of national identity against foreign foes.
british patriotic sentiment became more and more assertive as the eighteenth century progressed.
symbols of british identity proliferated the songs god save the king and rule britannia and even the modern rules of cricket the national sport.
the rapidly expanding british economy formed another point of pride uniting britons and colonists.
continental peoples according to a popular saying wore wooden shoes that is their standard of living was far below that of britons.
writers hailed commerce as a progressive civilizing force a way for different peoples to interact for mutual benefit without domination or military conflict.
especially in contrast to france britain saw itself as a realm of widespread prosperity individual liberty the rule of law and the protestant faith.
wealth religion and freedom went together.
there is no popish nation wrote the massachusetts theologian cotton mather in 1710 but what by embracing the protestant religion would.
not only assert themselves into a glorious liberty but also double their wealth immediately the british constitution central to this sense of british identity was the concept of liberty.
the fierce political struggles of the english civil war and the glorious revolution bequeathed to eighteenth century britons an abiding conviction that liberty was their unique possession.
they believed power and liberty to be natural antagonists.
to mediate between them advocates of british freedom celebrated the rule of law the right to live under legislation to which ones representatives had consented restraints on the arbitrary exercise of political authority and rights like trial by jury enshrined in the common law.
on both sides of the atlantic every political cause it seemed wrapped itself in the language of liberty and claimed to be defending the rights of englishmen continental writers dissatisfied with the lack of liberty in their own countries looked to britain as a model.
the house of commons house of lords and king each checked the power of the others.
this structure wrote the what were the meanings of british liberty in the eighteenth century.
french political philosopher baron montesquieu made britain the one nation in the world whose constitution has political liberty for its purpose in its balanced constitution and the principle that no man even the king is above the law britons claimed to have devised the best means of preventing political tyranny.
until the 1770s most colonists believed themselves to be part of the freest political system mankind had ever known.
as the coexistence of slavery and liberty within the empire demonstrated british freedom was anything but universal.
it was closely identified with the protestant religion and was invoked to contrast britons with the servile subjects of catholic countries especially france britains main rival in eighteenth century europe.
it viewed nearly every other nation on earth as enslaved to popery tyranny or barbarism.
one german military officer commented in 1743 on the british contempt of foreigners they pride themselves not only upon their being free themselves but being the bulwarks of liberty all over europe and they vilify most of the nations on the continent.
for being slaves as they call us british liberty was fully compatible with wide gradations in personal rights.
yet in the minds of the free residents of great britain and its north american colonies liberty was the bond of empire.
the language of liberty these ideas sank deep roots not only within the political nation those who voted held office and engaged in structured political debate but also far more broadly in british and colonial society.
laborers sailors and artisans spoke the language of british freedom as insistently as pamphleteers and parliamentarians.
increasingly the idea of liberty lost its traditional association with privileges derived from membership in a distinct social class and became more and more identified with a general right to resist arbitrary government.
even though less than 5 percent of the british population enjoyed the right to vote representative government was central to the eighteenth century idea of british liberty.
in this painting from 1793 prime minister william pitt addresses the house of commons.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 an empire of freedom on both sides of the atlantic liberty emerged as the battle cry of the rebellious.
frequent crowd actions protesting violations of traditional rights gave concrete expression to popular belief in the right to oppose tyranny.
ordinary persons thought nothing of taking to the streets to protest efforts by merchants to raise the cost of bread above the traditional just price or the royal navys practice of impressment kidnapping poor men on the streets for maritime service.
republican a 1770 engraving from the boston gazette by paul revere illustrates the association of british patriotism and liberty.
britannia sits with a liberty cap and her national shield and releases a bird from a cage.
liberty liberty was central to two sets of political ideas that flourished in the anglo american world.
one is termed by scholars republicanism although few in eighteenthcentury england used the word which literally meant a government without a king and conjured up memories of the beheading of charles i.
republicanism celebrated active participation in public life by economically independent citizens as the essence of liberty.
republicans assumed that only property owning citizens possessed virtue defined in the eighteenth century not simply as a personal moral quality but as the willingness to subordinate self interest to the pursuit of the public good.
only a virtuous people are capable of freedom wrote benjamin franklin.
in eighteenth century britain this body of thought about freedom was most closely associated with a group of critics of the established political order known as the country party because much of their support arose from the landed gentry.
they condemned what they considered the corruption of british politics evidenced by the growing number of government appointees who sat in the house of commons.
they called for the election of men of independence who could not be controlled by the ministry and they criticized the expansion of the national debt and the growing wealth of financial speculators in a commercializing economy.
britain they claimed was succumbing to luxury and political manipulation in a word a loss of virtue thereby endangering the careful balance of its system of government and indeed liberty itself.
in britain country party publicists like john trenchard and thomas gordon authors of catos letters published in the 1720s had little impact.
but their writings were eagerly devoured in the american colonies whose elites were attracted to trenchard and gordons emphasis on the political role of the independent landowner and their warnings against the constant tendency of political power to infringe upon liberty.
liberal freedom the second set of eighteenth century political ideas celebrating freedom came to be known as liberalism although its meaning was quite different from what the word suggests today.
whereas republican liberty had a public and social quality liberalism was essentially individual and private.
the leading philosopher of liberty was john locke whose two treatises of what were the meanings of british liberty in the eighteenth century.
government written around 1680 had limited influence in his own lifetime but became extremely well known in the next century.
many previous writers had compared government to the family assuming that in both inequality was natural and power always emanated from the top.
locke held that the principles that governed the family were inappropriate for organizing public life.
government he wrote was formed by a mutual agreement among equals the parties being male heads of households not all persons.
in this social contract men surrendered a part of their right to govern themselves in order to enjoy the benefits of the rule of law.
they retained however their natural rights whose existence predated the establishment of political authority.
protecting the security of life liberty and property required shielding a realm of private life and personal concerns including family relations religious preferences and economic activity from interference by the state.
during the eighteenth century lockean ideas individual rights the consent of the governed the right of rebellion against unjust or oppressive government would become familiar on both sides of the atlantic.
like other britons locke spoke of liberty as a universal right yet seemed to exclude many persons from its full benefits.
since the protection of property was one of governments main purposes liberalism was compatible with substantial inequalities in wealth and well being.
moreover while locke was one of the first theorists to defend the property rights of women and even their access to divorce and condemned slavery as a vile and miserable estate of man the free individual in liberal thought was essentially the propertied white man.
locke himself had helped to draft the fundamental constitutions of carolina discussed in chapter 6 established a vibrant community they called israel hill.
despite the legal restrictions on free blacks in the state they prospered as farmers and skilled craftsmen and they learned to defend their rights in court even winning lawsuits against whites who owed them money.
the upper and lower south very few free blacks around 37 000 persons or less than 2 percent of the areas black population lived in the lower south in 1860 like william johnson a majority of them resided in cities.
mississippi an overwhelmingly rural state with no real urban centers had fewer than 800 free blacks on the eve of the civil war.
in new orleans and charleston on the other hand relatively prosperous free black communities developed mostly composed of mixed race descendants of unions between white men and slave women.
some became truly wealthy antoine dubuclet of louisiana for example owned 100 slaves.
many free blacks in these cities acquired an education and worked as skilled craftsmen such as tailors carpenters and mechanics.
they established churches for their communities c h.
11 the peculiar institution slaves were an ever present part of southern daily life.
in this 1826 portrait of the five children of commodore john daniel daniels a wealthy baltimore shipowner a young slave lies on the floor at their side holding the soap for a game of blowing bubbles while another hovers in the background almost depicted as part of the rooms design.
life under slavery and schools for their children.
some new orleans free blacks sent their children to france for an education.
these elite free blacks did everything they could to maintain a separation from the slave population.
the brown fellowship society of charleston for example would not even allow dark skinned free men to join.
even in these cities however most free blacks were poor unskilled laborers.
in the upper south where the large majority of southern free blacks lived they generally worked for wages as farm laborers.
here where tobacco had exhausted the soil many planters shifted to grain production which required less year round labor.
they sold off many slaves to the lower south and freed others.
by 1860 half the african american population of maryland was free.
planters hired local free blacks to work alongside their slaves at harvest time.
free blacks in virginia and maryland were closely tied to the slave community and often had relatives in bondage.
some owned slaves but usually these were free men who had purchased their slave wives and children but could not liberate them because the law required any slave who became free to leave the state.
overall in the words of willis a hodges a member of a free virginia family that helped runaways to reach the north free blacks and slaves were one man of sorrow slave labor first and foremost slavery was a system of labor from sunup to first dark with only brief interruptions for meals work occupied most of the slaves time.
large plantations were diversified communities where slaves performed all kinds of work.
the 125 slaves on one plantation for instance included a butler two waitresses a nurse a dairymaid a gardener ten carpenters and two shoemakers.
other plantations counted among their slaves engineers blacksmiths and weavers as well as domestic workers from cooks to coachmen.
slaves cut wood to provide fuel for steamboats worked in iron and coal mines manned the docks in southern seaports and laid railroad track.
they were set to work by local authorities to construct and repair bridges roads and other facilities and by the federal government to build forts and other public buildings in the south.
businessmen merchants lawyers and civil servants owned slaves and by 1860 some 200 000 worked in industry especially in the ironworks and tobacco factories of the upper south.
in southern cities thousands were employed as unskilled laborers and skilled artisans.
reliance on unfree labor moreover extended well beyond the ranks of slaveholders for as noted earlier many small farmers and manufacturers rented slaves from plantation owners.
a few owners gave trusted slaves extensive responsibilities.
simon grays owner made him the head of a riverboat crew on the mississippi.
gray supervised both white and slave workers sold his owners lumber at urban markets and handled large sums of money.
what were the legal and material constraints on slaves lives and work.
distribution of lake super free blacks ior minnesota canada l maine lake u ro n mic hig eh an ak wisconsin lake ontario michigan iowa e lake illinois new york rie massachusetts rhode island pennsylvania ohio indiana vermont new hampshire connecticut new jersey missouri virginia ssi pp ir.
kentucky arkansas maryland north carolina m iss i tennessee mississippi delaware atl anti c o cean south carolina alabama georgia louisiana florida gulf of mexico gang counties with more than 100 free blacks concentrations of free blacks approximately 2 000 or more per county 300 miles 300 kilometers labor and task labor grays experience of course was hardly typical.
the large majority of slaves 75 percent of women and nearly 90 percent of men according to one study worked in the fields.
the precise organization of their labor varied according to the crop and the size of the holding.
on small farms the owner often toiled side by side with his slaves.
the largest concentration of the nations population in 1860 included nearly 500 000 free blacks.
the majority lived in the slave states especially maryland and virginia.
11 the peculiar institution major crops of the life under slavery south wisconsin uri misso nebraska territory new york michigan iowa r pennsylvania illinois indiana ohio oh io utah territory maryland r new jersey delaware kansas virginia missouri kentucky ka ar sa sr n.
mi ssis sip pi r.
indian territory north carolina tennessee arkansas south carolina mississippi alabama georgia texas atl antic o cean louisiana nde gra rio hemp cotton rice sugarcane tobacco florida gulf of mexico cotton was the major agricultural crop of the south and indeed the nation but slaves also grew rice sugarcane tobacco and hemp.
300 miles 300 kilometers slaves however lived and worked on plantations in the cotton belt where men women and children labored in gangs often under the direction of an overseer and perhaps a slave driver who assisted him.
among slaves overseers had a reputation for meting out harsh treatment.
the requisite qualifications for an overseer wrote solomon northup a free black who spent twelve years in slavery after being kidnapped from the north are utter heartlessness brutality and cruelty.
it is his business to produce large crops no matter what the cost the 150 000 slaves who worked in the sugar fields of southern louisiana also labored in large gangs.
conditions here were among the harshest in the south for the late fall harvest season required round the clock labor to cut and process the sugarcane before it spoiled.
on the rice plantations of south carolina and georgia the system of task labor which had originated in the colonial era prevailed.
with few whites willing to venture into the malariainfested swamps slaves were assigned daily tasks and allowed to set their what were the legal and material constraints on slaves lives and work.
own pace of work.
once a slaves task had been completed he or she could spend the rest of the day hunting fishing or cultivating garden crops.
slavery in the cities from the slaves point of view slavery in the different regions of the south could be worse in some respects and better in others.
slaves in the rice fields for example endured harsh working conditions but enjoyed more independence than other rural slaves because of the task system of labor and the absence of a large resident white population.
skilled urban craftsmen also enjoyed considerable autonomy.
most city slaves were servants cooks and other domestic laborers.
but owners sometimes allowed those with craft skills to hire their own time this meant that they could make work arrangements individually with employers with most of the wages going to the slaves owner.
many urban slaves even lived on their own.
but slaveholders increasingly became convinced that as one wrote the growing independence of skilled urban slaves exerts a most injurious influence upon the relation of master and servant for this reason many owners in the 1850s sold city slaves to the countryside and sought replacements among skilled white labor.
during his time in baltimore frederick douglass sought my own employment made my own contracts and collected my own earnings compared to conditions on the plantation he concluded i was really well off douglass hastened to add however that his favored treatment in no way lessened his desire for freedom it was slavery not its mere incidents that i hated maintaining order slaveowners employed a variety of means in their attempts to maintain order and discipline among their human property and persuade them to labor productively.
at base the system rested on force.
masters had almost complete discretion in inflicting punishment and rare was the slave who went through his or her life without experiencing a whipping.
josiah henson who escaped to the north and published an autobiography wrote that he could never erase from his memory the traumatic experience of seeing his father brutally whipped for striking a white man.
any infraction of plantation rules no matter how minor could be punished by the lash.
one georgia planter recorded in his journal that he had whipped a slave for not bringing over milk for my coffee being compelled to take it without subtler means of control supplemented violence.
owners encouraged and a female slave drying cotton on a plantation in the south carolina sea islands 1862 slave men women and children all worked in the cotton fields.
in this undated photograph men women and children pick cotton under the watchful eye of an overseer.
unlike sugarcane cotton does not grow to a great height allowing an overseer to supervise a large number of slaves.
11 the peculiar institution a public whipping of slaves in lexington missouri in 1856 an illustration from the abolitionist publication the suppressed book about slavery.
whipping was a common form of punishment for slaves.
s l a v e c u lt u r e exploited divisions among the slaves especially between field hands and house servants.
they created systems of incentives that rewarded good work with time off or even money payments.
one virginia slaveholder gave his slaves ten cents per day for good work and reported that this made them labor with as much steadiness and cheerfulness as whites thereby saving all the expense of overseers probably the most powerful weapon wielded by slaveowners was the threat of sale which separated slaves from their immediate families and from the communities that despite overwhelming odds african americans created on plantations throughout the south.
s l a v e c u lt u r e slaves never abandoned their desire for freedom or their determination to resist total white control over their lives.
in the face of grim realities they succeeded in forging a semi independent culture centered on the family and church.
this enabled them to survive the experience of bondage without surrendering their self esteem and to pass from generation to generation a set of ideas and values fundamentally at odds with those of their masters.
slave culture drew on the african heritage.
african influences were evident in the slaves music and dances style of religious worship and the use of herbs by slave healers to combat disease.
given the primitive nature of professional medical treatment some whites sought out slave healers instead of trained physicians.
unlike the plantation regions of the caribbean and brazil where the african slave trade continued into the nineteenth century and the black population far outnumbered the white most slaves in the united states were american born and lived amidst a white majority.
slave culture was a new creation shaped by african traditions and american values and experiences.
the slave fa m i ly at the center of the slave community stood the family.
on the sugar plantations of the west indies the number of males far exceeded that of females the workers lived in barracks type buildings and settled family life was nearly impossible.
the united states where the slave population grew from natural increase rather than continued importation from africa had an even male female ratio making the creation of families far more possible.
to be sure the law did not recognize the legality of slave mar h o w d i d f a m i l y g e n d e r r e l i g i o n a n d v a l u e s c o m b i n e t o c r e a t e d i s t i n c t slave cultures in the old south.
the master had to consent before a man and woman could jump over the broomstick the slaves marriage ceremony and families stood in constant danger of being broken up by sale.
nonetheless most adult slaves married and their unions when not disrupted by sale typically lasted for a lifetime.
to solidify a sense of family continuity slaves frequently named children after cousins uncles grandparents and other relatives.
nor did the slave family simply mirror kinship patterns among whites.
slaves for example did not marry first cousins a practice common among white southerners.
most slaves lived in two parent families.
but because of constant sales the slave community had a significantly higher number of femaleheaded households than among whites as well as families in which grandparents other relatives or even non kin assumed responsibility for raising children.
the threat of sale as noted above the threat of sale which disrupted family ties was perhaps the most powerful disciplinary weapon slaveholders possessed.
as the domestic slave trade expanded with the rise of the cotton kingdom about one slave marriage in three in slave selling states like virginia was broken by sale.
many children were separated from their parents by sale.
according to one estimate at least 10 percent of the teenage slaves in the upper south were sold in the interstate slave trade.
fear of sale permeated slave life especially in the upper south.
mother is massa going to sell us tomorrow ran a line in a popular slave song.
as a reflection of their paternalist responsibilities some owners encouraged slaves to marry.
others however remained unaware of their slaves family connections and their interest in slave children was generally limited to the childrens ability to work in the fields.
the federal census broke down the white population by five year age categories but it divided slaves only once at age ten the point at which they became old enough to enter the plantation labor force.
slave traders gave little attention to preserving family ties.
a public notice sale of slaves and stock announced the 1852 auction of property belonging to a recently deceased georgia planter.
it listed thirty six individuals ranging from an infant to a sixty nine year old woman and ended with the proviso slaves will be sold separate or in lots as best suits the purchaser sales like this were a human tragedy.
my dear wife a georgia slave wrote in 1858 i take the pleasure of writing you these few lines with much regret to inform you that i am sold.
give my love to my father and mother and tell them good bye for me and if we shall not meet kitchen ball at white sulphur springs virginia an 1838 painting by the german born american artist christian mayr.
fashionably dressed domestic slaves celebrate the wedding of a couple dressed in white at the center.
11 the peculiar institution s l a v e c u lt u r e in this world i hope to meet in heaven.
my dear wife for you and my children my pen cannot express the grief i feel to be parted from you all gender roles among slaves in some ways gender roles under slavery differed markedly from those in the larger society.
slave men and women experienced in a sense the equality of powerlessness.
the nineteenth centurys cult of domesticity which defined the home as a womans proper sphere did not apply to slave women who regularly worked in the fields.
slave men could not act as the economic providers for their families.
nor could they protect their wives from physical or sexual abuse by owners and overseers a frequent occurrence on many plantations or determine when and under what conditions their children worked.
when slaves worked on their own time however more conventional gender roles prevailed.
slave men chopped wood hunted and fished while women washed sewed and assumed primary responsibility for the care of children.
some planters allowed their slaves small plots of land on which to grow food to supplement the rations provided by the owner women usually took charge of these garden plots but whatever its internal arrangements the family was central to the slave community allowing for the transmission of values traditions and survival strategies in a word of slave culture from one generation to the next.
slave a broadside advertising the public sale of slaves along with horses mules and cattle after the death of their owner.
the advertisement notes that the slaves will be sold individually or in groups as best suits the purchaser an indication that families were likely to be broken up.
the prices are based on each slaves sex age and skill.
virginian luxuries.
originally painted on the back panel of a formal portrait this image illustrates two luxuries of a virginia slaveowner the power to sexually abuse slave women and to whip slaves.
religion a distinctive version of christianity also offered solace to slaves in the face of hardship and hope for liberation from bondage.
some blacks free and slave had taken part in the great awakening of the colonial era and even more were swept into the souths baptist and methodist churches during h o w d i d f a m i l y g e n d e r r e l i g i o n a n d v a l u e s c o m b i n e t o c r e a t e d i s t i n c t slave cultures in the old south.
the religious revivals of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
as one preacher recalled of the great camp meeting that drew thousands of worshipers to cane ridge kentucky in 1801 no distinctions were made as to age sex color or anything of a temporary nature old and young male and female black and white had equal privilege to minister the light which they received in whatever way the spirit directed even though the law prohibited slaves from gathering without a white person present every plantation it seemed had its own black preacher.
usually the preacher was a self called slave who possessed little or no formal education but whose rhetorical abilities and familiarity with the bible made him one of the most respected members of the slave community.
especially in southern cities slaves also worshiped in biracial congregations with white ministers where they generally were required to sit in the back pews or in the balcony.
urban free blacks established their own churches sometimes attended by slaves.
to masters christianity offered another means of social control.
many required slaves to attend services conducted by white ministers who preached that theft was immoral and that the bible required servants to obey their masters.
one slave later recalled being told in a white ministers sermon how good god was in bringing us over to this country from dark and benighted africa and permitting us to listen to the sound of the gospel several slaves walked out of the service during a sermon by charles c jones stressing that god had commanded servants to obey their masters and that they should not try to run away.
one man came up to jones at the end and said the doctrine is one sided the gospel of freedom the slaves transformed the christianity they had embraced turning it to their own purposes.
a blend of african traditions and christian belief slave religion was practiced in secret nighttime gatherings on plantations and in praise meetings replete with shouts dances and frequent emotional interchanges between the preacher and the congregation.
one former slave later recalled typical secret religious gatherings we used to slip off into the woods in the old slave days on sunday evening way down in the swamps to sing and pray to our own liking.
we prayed for this day of freedom the biblical story of exodus in which god chose moses to lead the enslaved jews of egypt into a promised land of freedom played a central role in black christianity.
slaves identified themselves as a chosen people whom god in the fullness of time would deliver from bondage.
at the same time the figure of jesus christ represented to slaves a personal redeemer one who truly cared for the oppressed.
slaves found other heroes and symbols in the bible as well jonah who overcame hard luck and escaped from the belly of a whale david who vanquished the more powerful goliath and daniel who escaped from the lions den.
and the christian a black preacher as portrayed in harpers weekly february 2 1867 although engraved after the civil war the scene is the same as religious services under slavery.
11 the peculiar institution s l a v e c u lt u r e message of brotherhood and the equality of all souls before the creator in the slaves eyes offered an irrefutable indictment of the institution of slavery.
the plantation burial a painting from around 1860 by john antrobus an english artist who emigrated to new orleans in 1850 and later married the daughter of a plantation owner.
a slave preacher conducts a funeral service while black men women and children look on.
the well dressed white man and woman on the far right are presumably the plantation owner and his wife.
this is a rare eyewitness depiction of black culture under slavery.
desire for liberty if their masters developed an elaborate ideology defending the souths peculiar institution slave culture rested on a conviction of the unjustness of bondage and the desire for freedom.
nobody the british political philosopher edmund burke had written during the american revolution will be argued into slavery frederick douglass called the proslavery argument flimsy nonsense which men would be ashamed to remember once slavery had been abolished.
whatever proslavery writers asserted and ministers preached blacks thought of themselves as a working people unjustly deprived of the fruits of their labor by idle planters who lived in luxury.
we bake the bread they give us the crust said a line from one slave song.
most slaves fully understood the impossibility of directly confronting the system.
their folk tales had no figures equivalent to paul bunyan the powerful larger than life backwoodsman popular in white folklore.
slaves folklore such as the brer rabbit stories glorified the weak hare who outwitted stronger foes like the bear and fox rather than challenging them directly.
their religious songs or spirituals spoke of lives of sorrow ive been buked and ive been scorned while holding out hope for ultimate liberation didnt my lord deliver daniel.
when they sang im bound for the land of canaan slaves meant not only relief from worldly woes in an afterlife but also escaping to the north or in gods good time witnessing the breaking of slaverys chains.
freedom declared a black minister after emancipation burned in the black heart long before freedom was born a fugitive who reached the north later recalled that the desire for freedom was the constant theme of conversations in the slave quarters.
even the most ignorant slave observed solomon northup could not fail to observe the difference between their own condition and the meanest white mans and to realize the injustice of laws which place it within the owners power not only to appropriate the profits of their industry but to subject them to unmediated and unprovoked punishment without remedy the world of most rural slaves was bounded by their local communities and kin.
they became extremely familiar with the local landscape crops and population but had little knowledge of the larger world.
nonetheless slaves could not remain indifferent to the currents of thought unleashed by the american revolution or to the language of freedom in the society around them.
i am in a land of liberty wrote joseph taper a virginia slave who escaped to canada around 1840.
here man is as god intended he should be.
not like the southern laws which put man made in the image h o w d i d f a m i l y g e n d e r r e l i g i o n a n d v a l u e s c o m b i n e t o c r e a t e d i s t i n c t slave cultures in the old south.
of god on level with brutes the social and political agenda africanamericans would put forward in the reconstruction era that followed emancipation stressing civil and political equality the strengthening of the black community and autonomy in their working lives flowed directly out of their experience in slavery.
r e s i s ta n c e t o s l av e r y confronted with federal state and local authorities committed to preserving slavery and outnumbered within the south as a whole by the white population slaves could only rarely express their desire for freedom by outright rebellion.
compared to brazil and the west indies which experienced numerous uprisings involving hundreds or even thousands of slaves revolts in the united states were smaller and less frequent.
there was no parallel of course to the successful slave revolution in haiti discussed in chapter 5 americans pledged to end the persecution of loyalists by state and local governments and to restore property seized during the war.
american leaders believed the new nation needed to establish an international reputation for fairness and civility.
states soon repealed their test oaths for voting and officeholding.
loyalists who did not leave the country were quickly reintegrated into american society although despite the promise of the treaty of paris confiscated loyalist property was not returned.
the indians revolution another group for whom american independence spelled a loss of freedom the indians was less fortunate.
despite the proclamation of 1763 discussed in chapter suggested that american slavery faced enemies both within and outside the south.
the proslavery argument increasingly permeated southern intellectual and political life while dissenting opinions were suppressed.
some states made membership in an abolitionist society a criminal offense while mobs drove critics of slavery from their homes.
the souths great reaction produced one of the most thoroughgoing suppressions of freedom of speech in american history.
even as reform movements arose in the north that condemned slavery as contrary to christianity and to basic american values and national debate over the peculiar institution intensified southern society closed in defense of slavery.
suggested reading books aptheker herbert.
american negro slave revolts 1943.
still the fullest account of slave rebellions in the united states.
suggested reading berlin ira.
slaves without masters the free negro in the antebellum south 1974.
a careful study of the status of free blacks stressing differences between the upper and lower south.
clinton catherine.
the plantation mistress womans world in the old south 1982.
explores how the institution of slavery affected the lives of planters wives and daughters.
davis david brion.
inhuman bondage the rise and fall of slavery in the new world 2006.
places the history of slavery in the united states firmly in a hemispheric context.
genovese eugene d roll jordan roll the world the slaves made 1974.
a classic study of the paternalist ethos and the culture that developed under slavery.
gutman herbert g the black family in slavery and freedom 1976.
a pioneering examination of how slaves created and sustained families under the harsh conditions of slavery.
johnson walter.
soul by soul life inside the antebellum slave market 1999.
considers the operations of the new orleans slave market as a window into slavery as a whole.
joyner charles d down by the riverside a south carolina slave community 1984.
studies slave communities in coastal south carolina emphasizing the blend of african and american influences.
kolchin peter.
american slavery 1619 1877 rev.
a careful up to date survey of the history of slavery in north america from its beginning through emancipation.
mccurry stephanie.
masters of small worlds yeoman households gender relations and the political culture of antebellum south carolina 1995.
studies the lives of men and women in non slaveholding families to explore their links with the planter class.
obrien michael.
conjectures of order intellectual life and the american south 2004.
a comprehensive study of intellectual life in the old south.
rugemer edward b the problem of emancipation the caribbean roots of the american civil war 2008.
explores how developments in the west indies affected the outlook of american slaveholders.
stevenson brenda.
life in black and white family and community in the slave south 1996.
focusing on virginia an examination of how slaves adapted to the rise of the interstate slave trade.
wade richard.
slavery in the cities the south 1820 1860 1964.
an examination of slavery in southern cities and growing white fears of lack of control of the urban slave population.
wright gavin.
the political economy of the cotton south households markets and wealth in the nineteenth century 1978.
presents the economic development and structure of the cotton south by a prominent economic historian.
websites born in slavery slave narratives from the federal writers project lcweb2 loc.
gov ammem snhtml snhome html documenting the american south gilder lehrman center for the study of slavery resistance and abolition slaves and the courts 1740 1860 html c hapter r eview review questions 1 given that by 1860 the economic investment represented by the slave population exceeded the value of the nations factories railroads and banks combined explain how important slavery was to the national economy and the emergence of the united states as a great power.
2 while some poor southern whites resented the dominance of the slavocracy most supported the institution and accepted the power of the planter class.
why did the plain folk continue to support slavery.
3 describe the paternalistic ethos the planters embraced and explain how it both masked and justified the brutal realities of slavery.
4 identify the basic elements of the proslavery defense and those points aimed especially at non southern audiences.
5 compare slaves in the old south with those elsewhere in the world focusing on health diet and opportunities for freedom.
6 describe the difference between gang labor and task labor for slaves and explain how slaves tasks varied by region across the old south.
7 enslaved african americans developed their own culture.
what were the different sources of this culture and how did it vary by region.
8 identify the different types of resistance to slavery.
which ones were the most common the most effective and the most demonstrative.
freedom questions 1 in frederick douglasss view how were slaves in their desire for freedom closer to the founding ideals than the whites who celebrated the fourth of july but preserved slavery.
2 how did slavery affect the lives and freedoms of both black and white americans.
3 how did the defenders of slavery handle the founding ideas that freedom and equality were natural rights.
4 what constraints were there on the rights of free blacks in the antebellum south.
5 how did slaves think of freedom and what were the sources for their beliefs.
study and review at key terms r e v i e w ta b l e the peculiar institution p 417 slave rebellions and the old south cotton is king p 417 lords of the loom and lords of the lash p 419 rebellion date result gabriels rebellion virginia prohibits blacks from congregating on sundays without white supervision and restricts masters voluntarily freeing their slaves denmark veseys conspiracy vesey is executed in south carolina and the state increases restrictions on free blacks nat turners rebellion the only large scale rebellion in the south it causes virginia to further tighten its grip on slavery amistad slaves aboard the ship win their freedom increasing southern fear of federal power to attack slavery plain folk p 422 southern paternalism p 423 the proslavery argument p 424 slave religion p 441 silent sabotage p 443 underground railroad p 445 runaways p 445 harriet tubman p 445 denmark veseys conspiracy p 446 nat turners rebellion p 447 c hapter 12 first shaker community established in upstate new york american colonization society founded owenite community established at new harmony the american temperance society founded first black newspaper established in the united states freedoms journal david walkers an appeal to the coloured citizens of the world william lloyd garrisons the liberator debuts american anti slavery society founded lydia maria childs an appeal in favor of that class of americans called africans female moral reform society organized harriet martineaus society in america elijah lovejoy killed theodore weldss slavery as it is new england transcendentalists establish brook farm margaret fullers woman in the nineteenth century john humphrey noyes founds oneida new york seneca falls convention held harriet beecher stowes uncle toms cabin frederick douglasss speech what to the slave is the fourth of july tax supported school systems established in all northern states an age of reform 1820 1840 the reform impulse utopian communities the shakers the mormons trek oneida worldly communities the owenites religion and reform the temperance movement critics of reform reformers and freedom the invention of the asylum the common school abolitionists and the idea of freedom a new vision of america black and white abolitionism black abolitionists abolitionism and race slavery and american freedom gentlemen of property and standing slavery and civil liberties the origins of feminism the crusade against slavery colonization blacks and colonization militant abolitionism the emergence of garrison spreading the abolitionist message slavery and moral suasion the rise of the public woman women and free speech womens rights feminism and freedom women and work the slavery of sex social freedom the abolitionist schism an abolitionist banner.
antislavery organizations adopted the liberty bell as a symbol of their campaign to extend freedom to black americans.
previously the bell forged in philadelphia in the eighteenth century had simply been known as the old state house bell.
f ocus q uestions what were the major movements and goals of antebellum reform.
what were the different varieties of abolitionism.
how did abolitionism challenge barriers to racial equality and free speech.
what were the diverse sources of the antebellum womens rights movement and its significance.
l a mong the many americans who devoted their lives to the crusade against slavery few were as selfless or courageous as abby kelley.
born in massachusetts in 1811 she was educated at a quaker boarding school in rhode island.
as a teacher in lynn massachusetts she joined the female anti slavery society and like thousands of other northern women threw herself into the abolitionist movement.
in 1838 kelley began to give public speeches about slavery.
her first lecture outside of lynn was literally a baptism of fire.
enraged by reports that abolitionists favored amalgamation of the races that is sexual relations between whites and blacks residents of philadelphia stormed the meeting hall and burned it to the ground.
for two decades kelley traveled throughout the north speaking almost daily in churches public halls and antislavery homes on the holy cause of human rights her career illustrated the interconnections of the eras reform movements.
in addition to abolitionism she was active in pacifist organizations which opposed the use of force including war to settle disputes and was a pioneer in the early struggle for womens rights.
in striving to strike the slaves irons off she wrote women found most surely that we were manacled ourselves kelley was not the first american woman to speak in public.
but she covered more miles and gave more speeches than any other female orator.
she forthrightly challenged her eras assumption that womans place was in the home.
more than any other individual remarked lucy stone another womens rights advocate kelley earned for us all the right of free speech abby kelleys private life was as unconventional as her public career.
she enjoyed a long and happy marriage to stephen s foster a strongwilled abolitionist given to interrupting sunday sermons to denounce ministers who failed to condemn slavery.
she gave birth to a daughter in 1847 but soon returned to lecturing.
when criticized for not devoting herself to the care of her infant kelley replied i have done it for the sake of the mothers whose babies are sold away from them.
the most precious legacy i can leave my child is a free country the reform impulse in the history of the world wrote ralph waldo emerson in 1841 the doctrine of reform has never such hope as at the present hour abolitionism was only one of the eras numerous efforts to improve american society.
during his visit in the early 1830s alexis de tocqueville noted how in the absence of a powerful national government americans political and what were the major movements and goals of antebellum reform.
a rare photograph of an abolitionist meeting in new york state around 1850 the woman at the center wearing a bonnet may be abby kelley.
frederick douglass sits immediately to her right.
social activities were organized through voluntary associations churches fraternal orders political clubs and the like.
the reform impulse was part of this proliferation of voluntary groups.
americans established organizations that worked to prevent the manufacture and sale of liquor end public entertainments and the delivery of the mail on sunday improve conditions in prisons expand public education uplift the condition of wage laborers and reorganize society on the basis of cooperation rather than competitive individualism.
nearly all these groups worked to convert public opinion to their cause.
they sent out speakers gathered signatures on petitions and published pamphlets.
like abby kelley many reformers were active in more than one crusade.
some reform movements like restraining the consumption of liquor and alleviating the plight of the blind and insane flourished throughout the nation.
others including womens rights labor unionism and educational reform were weak or nonexistent in the south where they were widely associated with antislavery sentiment.
reform was an international crusade.
peace temperance womens rights and antislavery advocates regularly crisscrossed the atlantic to promote their cause.
reformers adopted a wide variety of tactics to bring about social change.
some relied on moral suasion to convert people to their cause.
others like opponents of the demon rum sought to use the power of the government to force sinners to change their ways.
some reformers decided to withdraw altogether from the larger society and establish their own cooperative settlements.
they hoped to change american life by creating heavens on earth where they could demonstrate by example the superiority of a collective way of life.
reformers never amounted to anything like a majority of the population even in the north but they had a profound impact on both politics and society.
12 an age of reform 1820 1840 utopian communities unorganized territory l a k e supe r i the reform impulse mid nineteenth century or british canada maine la lake m ichi on hur ga n ke wisconsin vermont lake ontar michigan putney oneida brook farm new york iowa l ak ee atlantic o cean rhode island rie illinois pennsylvania ohio zoar indiana maryland utopia missouri new harmony virginia kentucky in the first half of the nineteenth century dozens of utopian communities were established in the united states where small groups of men and women attempted to establish a more perfect social order within the larger society.
new hampshire massachusetts io utopian new jersey modern times connecticut delaware 200 miles 200 kilometers brook farm fourierist rappite oneidan mormon shaker owenite pietistic others mainly new englander settlement communities about 100 reform communities were established in the decades before the civil war.
historians call them utopian after thomas mores sixteenthcentury novel utopia an outline of a perfect society.
the word has also come to imply that such plans are impractical and impossible to realize.
these communities differed greatly in structure and motivation.
some were subject to the iron discipline of a single leader while others operated in a democratic fashion.
most arose from religious conviction but others were inspired by the secular desire to counteract the social and economic changes set in motion by the market revolution.
nearly all the communities set out to reorganize society on a cooperative basis hoping to restore social harmony to a world of excessive individualism and to narrow the widening gap between rich and poor.
through their efforts the words socialism and communism meaning a social organization in which productive property is owned by the community rather than private individuals entered the language of politics.
most utopian communities also tried to find substitutes for conventional gender relations and marriage patterns.
some prohibited sexual relations between men and women altogether others allowed them to change partners at will.
but nearly all insisted that the abolition of private property must be accompanied by an end to mens property in women.
what were the major movements and goals of antebellum reform.
the shakers religious communities attracted those who sought to find a retreat from a society permeated by sin a refuge from the evils of this sodom as the founders of zoar in ohio put it.
but the shakers the most successful of the religious communities also had a significant impact on the outside world.
at their peak during the 1840s cooperative shaker settlements which stretched from maine to kentucky included more than 5 000 members.
the shakers were founded in the late eighteenth century by mother ann lee the daughter of an english blacksmith who became a religious exhorter and claimed that christ had directed her to emigrate with her followers to america.
the first shaker community was established in upstate new york in 1787 god the shakers believed had a dual personality both male and female and thus the two sexes were spiritually equal.
their work was deemed equally important although each man was assigned a sister to take care of his washing and sewing.
virgin purity formed a pillar of the shakers faith.
they completely abandoned traditional family life.
men and women lived separately in large dormitory like structures and ate in communal dining rooms.
their numbers grew by attracting converts and adopting children from orphanages rather than through natural increase.
numerous outsiders visited shaker communities to observe the religious services that gave the group its name in which men and women separated by sex engaged in frenzied dancing.
although they rejected the individual accumulation of private property the shakers proved remarkably successful economically.
they were among the first to market vegetable and flower seeds and herbal medicines commercially and to breed cattle for profit.
their beautifully crafted furniture is still widely admired today.
an engraving of a shaker dance drawn by benson lossing an artist who visited a shaker community and reported on life there for harpers magazine in 1857 c h.
12 an age of reform 1820 1840 the mormons the reform impulse trek another migration brought thousands of members of the church of jesus christ of latter day saints or mormons to modern day utah.
one of the eras numerous religious sects that hoped to create a kingdom of god on earth the mormons had been founded in the 1820s by joseph smith a young farmer in upstate new york.
smith claimed to have been led by an angel to a set of golden plates covered with strange writing which he translated as the book of mormon.
it claimed that ancient hebrews had emigrated to the new world and become the ancestors of the american indians.
the absolute authority smith exercised over his followers as well as the refusal of the mormons to separate church and state alarmed many neighbors.
even more outrageous to the general community was the mormon practice of polygamy which allows one man to have more than one wife a repudiation of traditional christian teaching and nineteenthcentury morality.
mobs drove smith and his followers out of new york ohio and missouri before they settled in 1839 in nauvoo illinois where they hoped to await the second coming of christ.
there five years later smith was arrested on the charge of inciting a riot that destroyed an antimormon newspaper.
while in jail awaiting trial smith was murdered by a group of intruders.
his successor as mormon leader brigham young led more than 10 000 followers across the great plains and rocky mountains to the shores of the great salt lake in present day utah seeking a refuge where they could practice their faith undisturbed.
the mormons plight revealed the limits of religious toleration in nineteenthcentury america.
oneida another influential and controversial community was oneida founded in 1848 in upstate new york by john humphrey noyes the vermont born son of a u s congressman.
after graduating from dartmouth college noyes briefly studied law but soon experienced a conversion at a religious revival and decided to become a minister.
noyes took the revivalists message that man could achieve moral perfection to an atypical extreme.
he preached that he and his followers had become so perfect that they had achieved a state of complete purity of heart or sinlessness.
in 1836 noyes and his followers formed a small community in putney vermont.
like the shakers noyes did away with private property and abandoned traditional marriage.
but in contrast to shaker celibacy he taught that all members of his community formed a single holy family of equals.
his community became notorious for what noyes called complex marriage whereby any man could propose sexual relations to any woman who had the right to reject or accept his invitation which would then be registered in a public record book.
the great danger was exclusive affections which noyes felt destroyed the harmony of the community.
after being indicted for adultery by local officials noyes in 1848 moved his community to oneida where it survived until 1881 oneida was an extremely dictatorial environment.
to become a member of the community one had to demonstrate command of noyess religious teachings and what were the major movements and goals of antebellum reform.
live according to his rules.
members carefully observed each others conduct and publicly criticized those who violated noyess regulations.
by the 1860s a committee was even determining which couples would be permitted to have children an early example of eugenics as the effort to improve the human race by regulating reproduction came to be known.
w o r l d ly communities to outside observers utopian communities like oneida seemed a case of voluntary slavery but because of their members selfless devotion to the teachings and rules laid down by their leader spiritually oriented communities often achieved remarkable longevity.
the shakers survived well into the twentieth century.
communities with a more worldly orientation tended to be beset by internal divisions and therefore lasted for much shorter periods.
in 1841 new england transcendentalists established brook farm not far from boston where they hoped to demonstrate that manual and intellectual labor could coexist harmoniously.
they modeled the community in part on the ideas of the french social reformer charles fourier who envisioned communal living and working arrangements while retaining private property.
fouriers blueprint for phalanxes as he called his settlements planned everything to the last detail from the number of residents 2 000 to how much income would be generated by charging admission to sightseers.
with leisure time devoted to music dancing dramatic readings and intellectual discussion brook farm was like an exciting miniature university.
but it attracted mostly writers teachers and ministers some of whom disliked farm labor.
the novelist nathaniel hawthorne a resident for a time complained about having to shovel manure.
brook farm disbanded after a few years and hawthorne offered a skeptical view of life there in his 1852 novel the blithedale romance.
the owenites the most important secular communitarian meaning a person who plans or lives in a cooperative community was robert owen a british factory owner.
appalled by the degradation of workers in the early industrial revolution owen created a model factory village at new lanark scotland which combined strict rules of work discipline with comfortable housing and free public education.
around 1815 its 1 500 employees made new lanark the largest center of cotton manufacturing in the world.
convinced that the rich and the poor the governors and the governed have really but one interest owen promoted communitarianism as a peaceful means of ensuring that workers received the full value of their labor.
in 1824 he purchased the harmony community in indiana originally founded by the german protestant religious leader george rapp who had emigrated to america with his followers at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
here owen established new harmony where he hoped to create a new moral world the character of man is without a single exception always formed for him owen declared.
individuals could be transformed by changing the the crisis a publication by the communitarian robert owen and his son robert dale owen.
the cover depicts owens vision of a planned socialist community.
12 an age of reform 1820 1840 the drunkards progress an 1826 anti liquor broadside illustrating how drinking leads a respectable man and his family to ruin.
the reform impulse circumstances in which they lived.
in owens scheme children would be removed at an early age from the care of their parents to be educated in schools where they would be trained to subordinate individual ambition to the common good.
owen also defended womens rights especially access to education and the right to divorce.
at new harmony he promised women would no longer be enslaved to their husbands and false notions about innate differences between the sexes would be abandoned.
harmony eluded the residents of new harmony.
they squabbled about everything from the communitys constitution to the distribution of property.
owens settlement survived for only a few years but it strongly influenced the labor movement educational reformers and womens rights advocates.
owens vision resonated with the widely held american belief that a community of equals could be created in the new world.
quite different from owens planned system were the short lived secular communities founded by josiah warren an early american anarchist one who believes that all institutions that exercise power over individuals including government are illegitimate.
at utopia ohio and modern times new york warren established totally unregulated voluntary settlements.
like other communitarians warren tried to address the sources of labor unrest and womens inequality.
in an attempt to solve the labor problem he created stores where goods were exchanged according to the amount of work that had gone into producing them thus preventing middlemen like bankers and merchants from sharing in the hard earned income of farmers laborers and manufacturers.
marriage in warrens communities was a purely voluntary arrangement since no laws regulated personal behavior.
in effect warren took american individualism to its logi what were the major movements and goals of antebellum reform.
cal extreme.
freedom he declared meant allowing each individual to be absolute despot or sovereign over himself.
religion and reform most americans saw the ownership of property as the key to economic independence and therefore to freedom and marriage as the foundation of the social order.
few were likely to join communities that required them to surrender both.
far more typical of the reform impulse were movements that aimed at liberating men and women either from restraints external to themselves such as slavery and war or from forms of internal servitude like drinking illiteracy and a tendency toward criminality.
drinkers proclaimed one reformer could not be considered free they were chained to alcohol bound to the demon rum many of these reform movements drew their inspiration from the religious revivalism of the second great awakening discussed in chapter that the chief obstacles to freedom were economic not political revealed little appreciation of how the denial of voting rights underpinned the comprehensive system of inequality to which southern blacks were subjected.
most settlement house reformers accepted segregation as natural and equitable assuming there should be white settlements for white neighborhoods and black settlements for black.
white leaders of the woman suffrage movement said little about black disenfranchisement.
in the south members of upper class white womens clubs sometimes raised funds for black schools and community centers.
but suffrage leaders insisted that the ch.
19 safe for democracy who is an american.
vote was a racial entitlement a badge and synonym of freedom in the words of rebecca felton of georgia that should not be denied to free born white women during reconstruction women had been denied constitutional recognition because it was the negros hour now world war is womans hour excluded blacks.
the amendment that achieved woman suffrage left the states free to limit voting by poll taxes and literacy tests.
living in the south the vast majority of the countrys black women did not enjoy its benefits.
r o o s e v e lt wilson and race the progressive presidents shared prevailing attitudes concerning blacks.
theodore roosevelt shocked white opinion by inviting booker t washington to dine with him in the white house and by appointing a number of blacks to federal offices.
but in 1906 when a small group of black soldiers shot off their guns in brownsville texas killing one resident and none of their fellows would name them roosevelt ordered the dishonorable discharge of three black companies 156 men in all including six winners of the congressional medal of honor.
roosevelts ingrained belief in anglo saxon racial destiny he called indians savages and blacks wholly unfit for the suffrage did nothing to lessen progressive intellectuals enthusiasm for his new nationalism.
even jane addams one of the few progressives to take a strong interest in black rights and a founder of the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp went along when the progressive party convention of 1912 rejected a civil rights plank in its platform and barred black delegates from the south.
woodrow wilson a native of virginia could speak without irony of the souths genuine representative government and its exalted standards of liberty his administration imposed racial segregation in federal departments in washington d c and dismissed numerous black federal employees.
wilson allowed d w griffiths film birth of a nation which glorified the ku klux klan as the defender of white civilization during reconstruction to have its premiere at the white house in 1915.
have you a new freedom for white americans and a new slavery for your african american fellow citizens william monroe trotter the militant black editor of the boston guardian and founder of the all black national equal rights league asked the president.
blacks subject to disenfranchisement and segregation were understandably skeptical of the nations claim to embody freedom and fully appreciated the ways the symbols of liberty could coexist with brutal racial violence.
in one of hundreds of lynchings during the progressive era a white mob in springfield missouri in 1906 falsely accused three black men of rape hanged them from an electric light pole and burned their bodies in a public orgy of violence.
atop the pole stood a replica of the statue of liberty.
a cartoon from the st louis postdispatch april 17 1906 commenting on the lynching of three black men in springfield missouri.
the shadow cast by the statue of liberty forms a gallows on the ground.
du black bois and the revival protest black leaders struggled to find a strategy to rekindle the national commitment to equality that had flickered brightly if briefly during reconstruction.
no one thought more deeply or over so long a period about the black how did the war affect race relations in the united states.
condition and the challenge it posed to american democracy than the scholar and activist w e b du bois.
born in great barrington massachusetts in 1868 and educated at fisk and harvard universities du bois lived to his ninety fifth year.
the unifying theme of his career was du boiss effort to reconcile the contradiction between what he called american freedom for whites and the continuing subjection of negroes his book the souls of black folk 1903 issued a clarion call for blacks dissatisfied with the accommodationist policies of booker t washington to press for equal rights.
du bois believed that educated african americans like himself the talented tenth of the black community must use their education and training to challenge inequality.
in some ways du bois was a typical progressive who believed that investigation exposure and education would lead to solutions for social problems.
as a professor at atlanta university he projected a grandiose plan for decades of scholarly study of black life in order to make the country aware of racism and point the way toward its elimination.
but he also understood the necessity of political action.
in 1905 du bois gathered a group of black leaders at niagara falls meeting on the canadian side since no american hotel would provide accommodations and organized the niagara movement which sought to reinvigorate the abolitionist tradition.
we claim for ourselves du bois wrote in the groups manifesto every single right that belongs to a freeborn american political civil and social and until we get these rights we will never cease to protest and assail the ears of america the declaration of principles adopted at niagara falls called for restoring to blacks the right to vote an end to racial segregation and complete equality in economic and educational opportunity.
these would remain the cornerstones of the black struggle for racial justice for decades to come.
four years later du bois joined with a group of mostly white reformers shocked by a lynching in springfield illinois lincolns adult home to create the national association for the advancement of colored people.
the naacp as it was known launched a long struggle for the enforcement of the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments.
the naacps legal strategy won a few victories.
in bailey v alabama 1911 the supreme court overturned southern peonage laws that made it a crime for sharecroppers to break their labor contracts.
six years later it ruled unconstitutional a louisville zoning regulation excluding blacks from living in certain parts of the city primarily because it interfered with whites right to sell their property as they saw fit.
overall however the progressive era witnessed virtually no progress toward racial justice.
at a time when americans rights were being reformulated blacks said moorfield story the naacps president enjoyed a curious citizenship they shared obligations like military service but not the fundamental rights to which all men are entitled unless we repudiate.
the declaration of independence w e b du bois founder of the naacp and editor of its magazine the crisis in his new york office.
19 safe for democracy who is an american.
closing a 1918 poster celebrates black soldiers in world war i as true sons of freedom at the upper right abraham lincoln looks on with a somewhat modified quotation from the gettysburg address.
ranks among black americans the wartime language of freedom inspired hopes for a radical change in the countrys racial system.
with the notable exception of william monroe trotter most black leaders saw american participation in the war as an opportunity to make real the promise of freedom.
to trotter much publicized german atrocities were no worse than american lynchings rather than making the world safe for democracy the government should worry about making the south safe for the negroes yet the black press rallied to the war.
du bois himself in a widely reprinted editorial in the naacps monthly magazine the crisis called on africanamericans to close ranks and enlist in the army to help make our own america a real land of the free black participation in the civil war had helped to secure the destruction of slavery and the achievement of citizenship.
but during world war i closing ranks did not bring significant gains.
the navy barred blacks entirely and the segregated army confined most of the 400 000 blacks who served in the war to supply units rather than combat.
wilson feared as he noted in his diary that the overseas experience would go to their heads and the u s army campaigned strenuously to persuade the french not to treat black soldiers as equals not to eat or socialize with them or even shake their hands.
contact with african colonial soldiers fighting alongside the british and french did widen the horizons of black american soldiers.
but while colonial troops marched in the victory parade in paris the wilson administration did not allow black americans to participate.
the great the promised migration land and nonetheless the war unleashed social changes that altered the contours of american race relations.
the combination of increased wartime production and a drastic falloff in immigration from europe once war broke out opened thousands of industrial jobs to black laborers for the first time inspiring a large scale migration from south to north.
on the eve of world war i 90 percent of the african american population still lived in the south.
most northern cities had tiny black populations and domestic and service work still predominated among both black men and women in the north.
but between 1910 and 1920 half a million blacks left the south.
the black population of chicago more than doubled new york citys rose 66 percent and smaller industrial cities like akron buffalo and trenton showed similar gains.
many motives sustained the great migration higher wages in northern factories than were available in the south even if blacks remained confined to menial and unskilled positions opportunities for educating their children escape from the threat of lynching and the prospect of exercising the right to vote.
migrants spoke of a second emancipation of crossing over jordan and of how did the war affect race relations in the united states.
leaving the realm of pharaoh for the table 19 1 the great migration promised land.
one group from mississippi stopped to sing i am bound for the land of canaan after their train black population crossed the ohio river into the north.
city the black migrants mostly young men new york 91 709 and women carried with them a new philadelphia 84 459 vision of opportunity of social and ecochicago 44 103 nomic freedom as alain locke explained in the preface to his influential st louis 43 960 book the new negro 1925.
yet the detroit 5 741 migrants encountered vast disappointpittsburgh 25 623 ments severely restricted employment cleveland 8 448 opportunities exclusion from unions rigid housing segregation and outbreaks of violence that made it clear that no region of the country was free from racial hostility.
more white southerners than blacks moved north during the war often with similar economic aspirations.
but the new black presence coupled with demands for change inspired by the war created a racial tinderbox that needed only an incident to trigger an explosion.
racial violence north and south dozens of blacks were killed during a 1917 riot in east st louis illinois where employers had recruited black workers in an attempt to weaken unions most of which excluded blacks from membership.
in 1919 more than 250 persons died in riots in the urban north.
most notable was the violence in chicago touched off by the drowning by white bathers of a black teenager who accidentally crossed the unofficial dividing line between black and white beaches on lake michigan.
the riot that followed raged for five days and involved pitched battles between the races throughout the city.
by the time the national guard restored order 38 persons had been killed and more than 500 injured.
violence was not confined to the north.
in the year after the war ended seventy six persons were lynched in the south including several returning black veterans wearing their uniforms.
in phillips county arkansas attacks on striking black sharecroppers by armed white vigilantes left as many as 200 persons dead and required the intervention of the army to restore order.
the worst race riot in american history occurred in tulsa oklahoma in 1921 when more than 300 blacks were killed and over 10 000 left homeless after a white mob including police and national guardsmen burned an all black section of the city to the ground.
the violence erupted after a group of black veterans tried to prevent the lynching of a youth who had accidently tripped and fallen on a white female elevator operator causing rumors of rape to sweep the city.
the rise of garveyism world war i kindled a new spirit of militancy.
the east st louis riot of 1917 inspired a widely publicized silent protest parade on new yorks black population percent increase 152 467 66 3 134 229 58 9 109 458 148 2 69 854 58 9 40 838 611 3 37 725 47 2 34 451 307 8 ch.
19 safe for democracy the silent parade down fifth avenue july 28 1917 in which 10 000 black marchers protested the east st louis race riot.
fifth avenue in which 10 000 blacks silently carried placards reading mr.
president why not make america safe for democracy in the new densely populated black ghettos of the north widespread support emerged for the universal negro improvement association a movement for african independence and black self reliance launched by marcus garvey a recent immigrant from jamaica.
freedom for garveyites meant national self determination.
blacks they insisted should enjoy the same internationally recognized identity enjoyed by other peoples in the aftermath of the war.
everywhere we hear the cry of freedom garvey proclaimed in 1921.
we desire a freedom that will lift us to the common standard of all men.
freedom that will give us a chance and opportunity to rise to the fullest of our ambition and that we cannot get in countries where other men rule and dominate du bois and other established black leaders viewed garvey as little more than a demagogue.
they applauded when the government deported him after a conviction for mail fraud.
but the massive following his movement achieved testified to the sense of betrayal that had been kindled in black communities during and after the war.
a worldwide upsurge the combination of militant hopes for social change and disappointment with the wars outcome was evident far beyond the black community.
in the union of soviet socialist republics or soviet union as russia had been renamed after the revolution lenins government had nationalized landholdings banks and factories and proclaimed the socialist dream of a workers government.
the russian revolution and the democratic aspirations unleashed by world war i sent tremors of hope and fear throughout the world.
like 1848 and in the future 1968 1919 was a year of worldwide social and political upheaval.
inspired by lenins call for revolution communist led governments came to power in bavaria a part of germany and hungary.
general strikes demanding the fulfillment of wartime promises of industrial democracy took place in belfast glasgow and winnipeg.
in spain anarchist peasants began seizing land.
crowds in india challenged british rule and nationalist movements in other colonies demanded independence.
we are living and shall live all our lives in a revolutionary world wrote walter lippmann.
the worldwide revolutionary upsurge produced a countervailing mobilization by opponents of radical change.
even as they fought the germans why was 1919 such a watershed year for the united states and the world.
the allies viewed the soviet government as a dire threat and attempted to overturn it.
in the summer of 1918 allied expeditionary forces british french japanese and americans landed in russia to aid lenins opponents in the civil war that had engulfed the country.
the last of them did not leave until 1920 wilsons policies toward the soviet union revealed the contradictions within the liberal internationalist vision.
on the one hand in keeping with the principles of the fourteen points and its goal of a worldwide economic open door wilson hoped to foster trade with the new government.
on the other fear of communism as a source of international instability and a threat to private property inspired military intervention in russia.
the allies did not invite the soviet union to the versailles peace conference and wilson refused to extend diplomatic recognition to lenins government.
the soviet regime survived but in the rest of the world the tide of change receded.
by the fall the mass strikes had been suppressed and conservative governments had been installed in central europe.
anticommunism would remain a pillar of twentieth century american foreign policy.
upheaval in america in the united states 1919 also brought unprecedented turmoil.
it seemed all the more disorienting for occurring in the midst of a worldwide flu epidemic that killed between 20 and 40 million persons including nearly 700 000 americans.
racial violence as noted above was widespread.
in june bombs exploded at the homes of prominent americans including the attorney general a mitchell palmer who escaped uninjured.
among aggrieved american workers wartime language linking patriotism with democracy and freedom inspired hopes that an era of social justice and economic empowerment was at hand.
in 1917 wilson had told the afl while we are fighting for freedom we must see to it among other things that labor is free labor took him seriously more seriously it seems than wilson intended.
the government as one machinist put it had proclaimed to the world that the freedom and democracy we are fighting for shall be practiced in the industries of america by the wars end many americans believed that the country stood on the verge of what herbert hoover called a new industrial order sidney hillman leader of the garment workers union was one of those caught up in the utopian dreams inspired by the war and reinforced by the russian revolution.
one can hear the footsteps of the deliverer he wrote.
labor will rule and the world will be free in 1919 more than 4 million workers engaged in strikes the greatest wave of labor unrest in american history.
there were walkouts among many others by textile workers telephone operators and broadway actors.
throughout the country workers appropriated the imagery and rhetoric of the war parading in army uniforms with liberty buttons denouncing their employers as kaisers and demanding freedom in the workplace they were met by an unprecedented mobilization of employers government and private patriotic organizations.
the strike wave began in january 1919 in seattle where a walkout of shipyard workers mushroomed into a general strike that for once united ch.
19 safe for democracy afl unions and the iww.
for five days a committee of labor leaders oversaw city services until federal troops arrived to end the strike.
in september boston policemen struck for higher wages and shorter working hours.
declaring there is no right to strike against the public safety massachusetts governor calvin coolidge called out the national guard to patrol the city and fired the entire police force.
in the nations coalfields a company manager observed wartime propaganda had raised unrealistic expectations among workers who took the promise of an actual emancipation too literally when the war ended miners demanded an end to company absolutism.
their strike was ended by a court injunction obtained by attorney general palmer.
the an advertisement placed by a steel company in a pittsburgh newspaper announces in several languages that the steel strike of 1919 has failed the use of the figure of uncle sam illustrates how the companies clothed their anti union stance in the language of patriotism.
steel strike the wartime rhetoric of economic democracy and freedom helped to inspire the eras greatest labor uprising the 1919 steel strike.
centered in chicago it united some 365 000 mostly immigrant workers in demands for union recognition higher wages and an eight hour workday.
before 1917 the steel mills were little autocracies where managers arbitrarily established wages and working conditions and suppressed all efforts at union organizing.
during the war workers flooded into the amalgamated association the union that had been nearly destroyed by its defeat at homestead a generation earlier.
by the end of 1918 they had won an eighthour day.
employers anti union activities resumed following the armistice that ended the fighting.
for why this war asked one polish immigrant steelworker at a union meeting.
for why we buy liberty bonds.
for the mills.
no for freedom and america for everybody.
no more work like a horse and wagon.
for eight hour day in response to the strike steel magnates launched a concerted counterattack.
employers appealed to anti immigrant sentiment among native born workers many of whom returned to work and conducted a propaganda campaign that associated the strikers with the iww communism and disloyalty.
americanism vs alienism was the issue of the strike declared the new york tribune.
with middle class opinion having turned against the labor movement and the police in pittsburgh assaulting workers on the streets the strike collapsed in early 1920 the local police with literature seized from a communist party office in cambridge massachusetts november 1919 great red scare many progressives hoped to see the wartime apparatus of economic planning continue after 1918 the wilson administration however quickly dismantled the agencies that had established controls over industrial production and the labor market although during the 1930s they would serve as models for some policies of franklin d roosevelts new deal.
wartime repression of dissent however continued.
it reached its peak with the red scare of 1919 1920 a short lived but intense period of political intolerance inspired by the postwar strike wave and the social tensions and fears generated by the russian revolution.
convinced that episodes like the steel strike were part of a worldwide communist conspiracy attorney general a mitchell palmer in november why was 1919 such a watershed year for the united states and the world.
1919 and january 1920 dispatched federal agents to raid the offices of radical and labor organizations throughout the country.
they carried search warrants so broad that they reminded those with a sense of history of the writs of assistance against which james otis had eloquently protested as being destructive of liberty in 1761 the palmer raids were overseen by the twenty four year old director of the radical division of the justice department j edgar hoover.
more than 5 000 persons were arrested most of them without warrants and held for months without charge.
the government deported hundreds of immigrant radicals including emma goldman the prominent radical speaker mentioned in the previous chapter 23.
two additional nations that emerged from the soviet union lie to the east and are not indicated here kyrgyzstan and tajikistan.
turkey spi georgia tbilisi greece athens ca black sea turkmenistan ashgabat war a far more serious crisis arose in 1990 when iraq invaded and annexed kuwait an oil rich sheikdom on the persian gulf.
fearing that iraqi dictator saddam hussein might next attack saudi arabia a longtime ally that supplied more oil to the united states than any other country bush rushed troops to defend the kingdom and warned iraq to withdraw from kuwait or face war.
his policy aroused intense debate in the united states.
critics insisted that diplomacy be given a chance to resolve the crisis.
bush spoke of defending the freedom of saudi arabia and restoring that of kuwait.
antiwar activists pointed out that neither qualified as a free country both for example denied women the right to vote.
but the iraqi invasion so flagrantly violated international law that bush succeeded in building a forty nation coalition committed to restoring kuwaits independence secured the support of the united nations and sent half a million american troops along with a naval armada to the region.
in february 1991 the united states launched operation desert storm which quickly drove the iraqi army from kuwait.
tens of thousands of iraqis and 184 americans died in the conflict.
the united nations ordered iraq to disarm and imposed economic sanctions that produced widespread civilian suffering for the rest of the decade.
but hussein remained in place.
so did a large american military establishment in saudi arabia to the outrage of islamic fundamentalists who deemed its presence an affront to their faith.
visions of freedom workers trying to deal with crowds of customers at the opening of the first mcdonalds restaurant in beijing in 1992 by the end of the century there were 200 mcdonalds in china and the company was serving hamburgers in more than 100 countries one example of the globalization of the world economy during the 1990s.
the companys spread also provoked protests from those who claimed its food was unhealthy or fattening.
questions 1 what does the image tell us about economic and cultural globalization in the 1990s.
2 compare this image to the one on pp.
1122 1123 as a measure of american influence in china and the world.
27 globalization and its discontents 1989 2000 the post cold war world president bush with defense secretary dick cheney left and general colin powell right chair of the joint chiefs of staff at a meeting in january 1991 shortly before the beginning of the gulf war.
cheney and powell would play major roles in the administration of bushs son president george w bush.
the gulf war was the first post cold war international crisis.
despite assembling a broad coalition the united states did nearly all of the fighting itself.
relying on high tech weaponry like cruise missiles that reached iraq from bases and aircraft carriers hundreds of miles away the united states was able to prevail quickly and avoid the prolonged involvement and high casualties of vietnam.
the soviet union in the process of disintegration remained on the sidelines.
in the wars immediate aftermath bushs public approval rating rose to an unprecedented 89 percent.
visions of a m e r i c a s role in a speech to congress president bush identified the gulf war as the first step in the struggle to create a world rooted in democracy and global free trade.
but it remained unclear how this broad vision would be translated into policy.
soon after the end of the war general colin powell chairman of the joint chiefs of staff and dick cheney the secretary of defense outlined different visions of the future.
powell predicted that the post cold war world would be a dangerous environment with conflicts popping up in unexpected places.
to avoid being drawn into an unending role as global policeman he insisted the united states should not commit its troops abroad without clear objectives and a timetable for withdrawal.
cheney argued that with the demise of the soviet union the united states possessed the power to reshape the world and prevent hostile states from achieving regional power.
it must be willing to use force independently if necessary to maintain its strategic dominance.
for the rest of the 1990s it was not certain which definition of the american role in the post cold war world would predominate.
the election of clinton had a presidential election been held in 1991 bush would undoubtedly have been victorious.
but in that year the economy slipped into recession.
in a kind of hangover from the speculative excesses of the reagan years unemployment rose and family income stagnated.
despite victory in the what were the major international initiatives of the clinton administration i n t h e a f t e r m a t h o f t h e c o l d wa r.
cold war and the gulf public opinion polls showed that the presidential more and more americans believed the country was on the election of 1992 wrong track.
no one seized more effectively on the widespread sense of unease than bill clinton a former governor of arkansas.
in 1992 clinton won the democratic nomina11 tion by combining social liberalism he supported abor3 tion rights gay rights and affirmative action for racial minorities with elements of conservatism he pledged to reduce government bureaucracy and borrowing a page 22 12 from republicans promised to end welfare as we know it.
a charismatic campaigner clinton conveyed sincere con7 9 cern for voters economic anxieties.
to counter republican rhetoric urging voters to blame their woes on welfare queens and others who cheated honest taxpayers clinton argued that deindustrialization caused rising inequality and electoral vote candidate share party the loss of good jobs.
in his speech accepting the nomina370 69 clinton democrat tion he spoke of people working harder than ever spend168 31 bush republican ing less time with their children working nights and weekperot independent ends while those who cut corners and cut deals have been rewarded bush by contrast seemed out of touch with the day to day lives of ordinary americans.
on the wall of democratic headquarters clintons campaign director posted the slogan its the economy stupid a reminder that the economic downturn was the democrats strongest card.
bush was further weakened when conservative leader pat buchanan delivered a fiery televised speech at the republican national convention that declared cultural war against gays feminists and supporters of abortion rights.
this seemed to confirm the democratic portrait of republicans as intolerant and divisive.
from a peak of 89 percent in 1991 bushs popularity slumped to 29 percent during the 1992 campaign.
a third candidate the eccentric texas billionaire ross perot also entered the fray.
he attacked bush and clinton as lacking the economic know how to deal with the recession and the ever increasing national debt.
that millions of americans considered perot a credible candidate at one point polls showed him leading both clinton and bush testified to widespread dissatisfaction with the major parties.
perots support faded as election day approached but he still received 19 percent of the popular vote the best result for a third party candidate since theodore roosevelt in 1912 clinton won by a substantial margin a humiliating outcome for bush given his earlier popularity.
clinton in 3 15 popular vote share 44 908 254 43 39 102 343 38 19 741 065 19 office in his first two years in office clinton turned away from some of the social and economic policies of the reagan and bush years.
he appointed several blacks and women to his cabinet including janet reno the first female attorney general and named two supporters of abortion rights ruth bader ginsburg and stephen breyer to the supreme court.
he modified the militarys strict ban on gay soldiers instituting a dont ask dont tell policy by which officers would not seek out gays for dismissal from the armed edward sorels illustration for the cover of the new yorker depicts bill clinton at his 1993 inauguration flanked by some of his predecessors as president.
27 globalization and its discontents 1989 2000 the post cold war world forces.
his first budget raised taxes on the wealthy and significantly expanded the earned income tax credit eitc a cash payment for lowincome workers begun during the ford administration.
the most effective antipoverty policy since the great society the eitc raised more than 4 million americans half of them children above the poverty line during clintons presidency.
clinton shared his predecessors passion for free trade.
despite strong opposition from unions and environmentalists he obtained congressional approval in 1993 of the north american free trade agreement nafta a treaty negotiated by bush that created a free trade zone consisting of canada mexico and the united states.
the major policy initiative of clintons first term was a plan devised by a panel headed by his wife hillary a lawyer who had pursued an independent career after their marriage to address the rising cost of health care and the increasing number of americans who lacked health insurance.
in canada and western europe governments provided universal medical coverage.
the united states had the worlds most advanced medical technology and a woefully incomplete system of health insurance.
the great society had provided coverage for the elderly and poor through the medicare and medicaid programs.
many employers offered health insurance to their workers.
but tens of millions of americans lacked any coverage at all.
beginning in the 1980s moreover businesses shifted their employees from individual doctors to health maintenance organizations hmos which reduced costs by limiting physicians fees and critics charged denying patients needed medical procedures.
announced with great fanfare by hillary rodham clinton at congressional hearings in 1993 clintons plan would have provided universal coverage through large groupings of organizations like the hmos.
doctors and health insurance and drug companies attacked it vehemently fearing government regulations that would limit reimbursement for medical procedures insurance rates and the price of drugs.
too complex to be easily understood by most voters and vulnerable to criticism for further expanding the unpopular federal bureaucracy the plan died in 1994 nothing took its place.
by 2008 some 50 million americans most of them persons who held full time jobs still lacked health insurance meaning that illness could quickly become a financial disaster.
the freedom revolution with the economy recovering slowly from the recession and clintons first two years in office seemingly lacking in significant accomplishments voters in 1994 turned against the administration.
for the first time since the 1950s republicans won control of both houses of congress.
they proclaimed their triumph the freedom revolution newt gingrich a conservative congressman from georgia who became the new speaker of the house masterminded their campaign.
gingrich had devised a platform called the contract with america which promised to curtail the scope of government cut back on taxes and economic and environmental regulations overhaul the welfare system and end affirmative action.
viewing their electoral triumph as an endorsement of the contract republicans moved swiftly to implement its provisions.
the house what were the major international initiatives of the clinton administration i n t h e a f t e r m a t h o f t h e c o l d wa r.
congressman newt gingrich of georgia at a rally in september 1994 announcing the contract with america the republican program for the congressional elections that fall.
the republican sweep resulted in gingrichs election as speaker of the house.
approved deep cuts in social educational and environmental programs including the popular medicare system.
with the president and congress unable to reach agreement on a budget the government in december 1995 shut down all nonessential operations including washington d c museums and national parks.
gingrich had assumed that the public shared his intense ideological convictions.
he discovered that in 1994 they had voted against clinton not for the full implementation of the contract with america.
most americans blamed congress for the impasse and gingrichs popularity plummeted.
clintons political strategy like truman after the republican sweep of 1946 clinton rebuilt his popularity by campaigning against a radical congress.
he opposed the most extreme parts of his opponents program while adopting others.
in his state of the union address of january 1996 he announced that the era of big government is over in effect turning his back on the tradition of democratic party liberalism and embracing the antigovernment outlook associated with republicans since the days of barry goldwater.
he also approved the telecommunications act of 1996 which deregulated broadcasting and telephone companies and gave billions of dollars worth of digital frequencies to existing broadcasters without charge.
also in 1996 ignoring the protests of most democrats clinton signed into law a republican bill that abolished the program of aid to families with dependent children afdc commonly known as welfare grants of money to the states with strict limits on how long recipients could receive payments replaced it.
at the time of its abolition afdc assisted 14 million individuals 9 million of them children.
thanks to stringent new eligibility requirements imposed by the states and the economic boom of the late 1990s welfare rolls plummeted.
but the number of children living in poverty remained essentially unchanged.
nonetheless clinton had succeeded in one of his primary goals by the late 1990s welfare a hotly contested issue for twenty years or more had disappeared from political debate.
27 globalization and its discontents 1989 2000 the post cold war world commentators called clintons political strategy triangulation this meant embracing the most popular republican policies like welfare reform while leaving his opponents with extreme positions unpopular among suburban middle class voters such as hostility to abortion rights and environmental protection.
clintons strategy enabled him to neutralize republican claims that democrats were the party of high taxes and lavish spending on persons who preferred dependency to honest labor.
clintons passion for free trade alienated many working class democrats but convinced middle class voters that the party was not beholden to the unions.
clinton easily defeated republican bob dole in the presidential contest of 1996 becoming the first democrat elected to two terms since fdr.
clinton had accomplished for reaganism what eisenhower had done for the new deal and nixon for the great society consolidating a basic shift in american politics by accepting many of the premises of his opponents.
clinton and world a f fa i r s like jimmy carter before him clintons primary political interests concerned domestic not international affairs.
but with the united states now indisputably the worlds dominant power clinton like carter took steps to encourage the settlement of long standing international conflicts and tried to elevate support for human rights to a central place in international relations.
he met only mixed success.
clinton strongly supported a 1993 agreement negotiated at oslo norway in which israel for the first time recognized the legitimacy of the palestine liberation organization.
the oslo accords seemed to outline a road to mideast peace.
but neither side proved willing to implement them fully.
israeli governments continued to build jewish settlements on palestinian land in the west bank a part of jordan that israel had occupied during the 1967 six day war.
the new palestinian authority which shared in governing parts of the west bank as a stepping stone to full statehood proved to be corrupt powerless and unable to curb the growth of groups bent on violence against israel.
at the end of his presidency clinton brought israeli and palestinian leaders to camp david to try to work out a final peace treaty.
but the meeting failed and violence soon resumed.
like carter clinton found it difficult to balance concern for human rights with strategic and economic interests and to formulate clear guidelines for humanitarian interventions overseas.
for example the united states did nothing in 1994 when tribal massacres racked rwanda in central africa.
more than 800 000 people were slaughtered and 2 million refugees fled the country.
the balkan crisis the most complex foreign policy crisis of the clinton years arose from the disintegration of yugoslavia a multi ethnic state in southeastern europe that had been carved from the old austro hungarian empire after world war i as in the rest of eastern europe the communist government that had ruled yugoslavia since the 1940s collapsed in 1989 within a few years the countrys six provinces dissolved into five new states.
ethnic conflict plagued several of these new nations.
in 1992 serbs in bosnia which what were the major international initiatives of the clinton administration i n t h e a f t e r m a t h o f t h e c o l d wa r.
a 1992 photograph of refugees in wartorn bosnia illustrates the humanitarian crisis in the balkans during the 1990s.
straddled the historic boundary between christianity and islam in southeastern europe launched a war aimed at driving out muslims and croats.
they conducted the war with unprecedented ferocity using mass murder and rape as military strategies.
ethnic cleansing a terrible new term meaning the forcible expulsion from an area of a particular ethnic group now entered the international vocabulary.
by the end of 1993 more than 100 000 bosnians nearly all of them civilians had perished.
with the cold war over protection of human rights in the balkans gave nato a new purpose.
after considerable indecision nato launched air strikes against bosnian serb forces with american planes contributing.
un troops including 20 000 americans arrived as peacekeepers.
in 1998 ethnic cleansing again surfaced this time by yugoslavian troops and local serbs against the albanian population of kosovo a province of serbia.
more than 800 000 albanians fled the region.
to halt the bloodshed nato launched a two month war in 1999 against yugoslavia that led to the deployment of american and un forces in kosovo.
human rights during clintons presidency human rights played an increasingly important role in international affairs.
hundreds of nongovernmental agencies throughout the world defined themselves as protectors of human rights.
during the 1990s the agenda of international human rights organizations expanded to include access to health care womens rights and the rights of indigenous peoples like the aborigines of australia and the descendants of the original inhabitants of the americas.
human rights emerged as a justification for interventions in matters once considered to be the internal affairs of sovereign nations.
the united states dispatched the military to distant parts of the world to assist in international missions to protect civilians.
27 globalization and its discontents 1989 2000 a new economy.
new institutions emerged that sought to punish violations of human rights.
the rwandan genocide produced a un sponsored war crimes court that sentenced the countrys former prime minister to life in prison.
an international tribunal put yugoslav president slobodan milo sevic on trial for sponsoring the massacre of civilians.
the european court of human rights overruled legal decisions by national courts that violated individual rights.
spanish and british courts considered charging former chilean dictator augusto pinochet with murder although he proved to be too ill to stand trial.
it remained to be seen whether these initiatives would grow into an effective international system of protecting human rights across national boundaries.
despite adopting human rights as a slogan many governments continued to violate them in practice.
a new economy.
clintons popularity rested in part on the american economys remarkable performance in the mid and late 1990s.
after recovery from the recession of 1990 1991 economic expansion continued for the rest of the decade.
by 2000 unemployment stood below 4 percent a figure not seen since the 1960s.
many economists had insisted that if unemployment fell that low inflation would inevitably increase.
yet prices barely rose during the boom because rising worldwide oil production kept the cost of energy low and weak unions and increased global competition made it difficult for workers to achieve significant wage increases and for corporations to raise prices.
the boom became the longest uninterrupted period of economic expansion in the nations history.
because reagan and bush had left behind massive budget deficits clinton worked hard to balance the federal budget a goal traditionally associated with fiscal conservatives.
since economic growth produced rising tax revenues clinton during his second term not only balanced the budget but actually produced budget surpluses.
the first starbucks store which opened in seattle in 1971 by the early twenty first century starbucks had more than 7 000 such establishments in countries around the globe.
what forces drove the economic resurgence of the 1990s.
two architects of the computer revolution steve jobs standing the head of apple computer and bill gates via the internet founder of microsoft at a 1997 convention.
the computer revolution many commentators spoke of the 1990s as the dawn of a new economy in which computers and the internet would produce vast new efficiencies and the production and sale of information would occupy the central place once held by the manufacture of goods.
computers had first been developed during and after world war ii to solve scientific problems and do calculations involving enormous amounts of data.
the early ones were extremely large expensive and by modern standards slow.
research for the space program of the 1960s spurred the development of improved computer technology notably the miniaturization of parts thanks to the development of the microchip on which circuits could be imprinted.
microchips made possible the development of entirely new consumer products.
video cassette recorders handheld video games cellular phones and digital cameras were mass produced at affordable prices during the 1990s mostly in asia and latin america rather than the united states.
but it was the computer that transformed american life.
beginning in the 1980s companies like apple and ibm marketed computers for business and home use.
as computers became smaller faster and less expensive they found a place in businesses of every kind.
in occupations as diverse as clerical work banking architectural design medical diagnosis and even factory production they transformed the american workplace.
they also changed private life.
by the year 2000 nearly half of all american households owned a personal computer used for entertainment shopping and sending and receiving electronic mail.
centers of computer technology such as silicon valley south of san francisco the seattle and austin metropolitan areas and lower manhattan boomed during the 1990s.
hollywood as always reflected changes in popular consciousness in this case the impact of the computer revolution.
in war of the worlds a 1953 movie based on a novel by h g wells technologically superior aliens invade earth ch.
27 globalization and its discontents 1989 2000 young people seemed to adapt to the computer revolution more readily than their elders.
here nine year old anna walter teaches several adults how to use the internet in wichita kansas.
a new economy.
only to succumb to disease viruses to which they have no resistance.
in independence day one of the most successful movies of the 1990s a similar invasion is thwarted in part by the introduction of a different kind of virus a program that disables computers into the control mechanism of the alien spaceship.
the internet first developed as a high speed military communications network was simplified and opened to commercial and individual use through personal computers.
the internet expanded the flow of information and communications more radically than any invention since the printing press.
at a time when the ownership of newspapers television stations and publishing houses was becoming concentrated in the hands of a few giant media conglomerates the fact that anyone with a computer could post his or her ideas for worldwide circulation led netizens citizens of the internet to hail the advent of a new democratic public sphere in cyberspace.
global economic problems american economic expansion in the 1990s seemed all the more remarkable since other advanced countries found themselves bogged down in difficulty.
in western europe unemployment remained far higher than in the united states.
japan which some commentators of the 1980s had expected to surpass the united states as the worlds leading economic power was locked in a long term recession.
despite an influx of western loans and investment russia moved from one economic crisis to another.
relying strongly on advice from american free market economists and the clinton administration russian president boris yeltsin presided over a policy of shock therapy that privatized state owned enterprises and imposed severe cuts in wages and in the guaranteed jobs health care and housing russians had become used to under communism.
foreign investors and a new russian business class many of them yeltsins relatives and cronies and former party officials reaped a windfall while most of the population plunged into poverty.
many third world countries faced large trade deficits and problems repaying loans from foreign banks and other institutions.
a sharp decline in the value of the thai currency in 1997 sparked a fiscal crisis throughout asia only resolved by massive loans from the international monetary fund.
these bailouts inspired criticisms echoed at the seattle protests of 1999 that globalization increased social inequality.
foreign investors had their loans repaid but receiving nations were required to balance their budgets by stringent cutbacks in public spending so that the burden fell disproportionately on the poor.
the stock market boom and bust in the united states economic growth and talk of a new economy sparked a frenzied boom in the stock market that was reminiscent of the 1920s.
investors large and small poured funds into stocks spurred by the rise of what forces drove the economic resurgence of the 1990s.
technicians at the offices of fhp wireless in belmont california one of numerous technology companies launched with great fanfare in the late 1990s.
unlike many fhp survived.
in 2002 fortune magazine listed it as one of the countrys cool companies it is now called tropos networks.
discount and online firms that advertised aggressively and charged lower fees than traditional brokers.
by 2000 a majority of american households owned stocks directly or through investment in mutual funds and pension and retirement accounts.
investors were especially attracted to the new dot coms companies that conducted business via the internet and seemed to symbolize the promise of the new economy.
standard poors index of 500 stocks s p 500 increased 20 percent or more each year from 1996 to 1999 a remarkable performance.
but the nasdaq a stock exchange dominated by new technology companies rose more than 500 percent from 1998 to 1999 many of these high tech companies never turned a profit.
but economic journalists and stock brokers explained that the new economy had so revolutionized business that traditional methods of assessing a companys value no longer applied inevitably the bubble burst.
on april 14 2000 stocks suffered their largest one day point drop in history.
for the first time since the depression stock prices declined for three successive years 2000 2002 wiping out billions of dollars in americans net worth and pension funds.
the value of nasdaq stocks fell by nearly 80 percent between 2000 and 2002 not until 2006 would the general stock index again reach the level of early 2000 while the nasdaq still remains far below its record high.
by 2001 the american economy had fallen into a recession.
talk of a new economy it appeared had been premature.
the enron syndrome only after the market dropped did it become apparent that the stock boom of the 1990s had been fueled in part by fraud.
for a time in 2001 and 2002 americans were treated almost daily to revelations of incredible greed and corruption on the part of respected brokerage firms accountants and ch.
27 globalization and its discontents 1989 2000 a new economy.
cartoonist david jacobsons comment on the enron scandal.
company executives.
during the late 1990s accounting firms like arthur andersen giant banks like j p morgan chase and citigroup and corporate lawyers pocketed extravagant fees for devising complex schemes to help push up companies stock prices by hiding their true financial condition.
enron a houston based energy company that epitomized the new economy it bought and sold electricity rather than actually producing it reported as profits billions of dollars in operating losses.
brokers at respected wall street firms advised favored clients to sell risky stocks while foisting them on ordinary customers.
when stock prices began to fall insiders jumped ship while brokers urged hapless individual investors to hold on to their shares many of which ended up being worthless.
in the early twenty first century the bill came due for many corporate criminals.
the founder of adelphia communications was convicted of misuse of company funds.
a jury found the chairman of tyco international guilty of looting the company of millions of dollars.
a number of former chief executives faced long prison terms.
kenneth lay and jeffrey skilling chief officers of enron were convicted by a texas jury of multiple counts of fraud.
lay died before sentencing.
even reputable firms like j p morgan chase and citigroup agreed to pay billions of dollars to compensate investors on whom they had pushed worthless stocks.
fruits of deregulation at the height of the 1990s boom with globalization in full swing stocks rising and the economy expanding the economic model of free trade and deregulation appeared unassailable.
but the retreat from government economic regulation a policy embraced by both the republican congress and president clinton left no one to represent the public interest.
the sectors of the economy most affected by the scandals energy telecommunications and stock trading had all been subjects of deregulation.
what forces drove the economic resurgence of the 1990s.
enron could manipulate energy prices because congress had granted it an exemption from laws regulating the price of natural gas and electricity.
worldcom a communications giant that like enron issued fraudulent earnings statements had benefited from the telecommunications act of 1996 mentioned earlier that privatized the airwaves.
many stock frauds stemmed from the repeal in 1999 of the glasssteagall act a new deal measure that had separated commercial banks which accept deposits and make loans from investment banks which invest in stocks and real estate and take larger risks.
the repeal made possible the emergence of superbanks that combined these two functions.
phil gramm the texas congressman who wrote the repeal bill which clinton signed explained his thinking in this way glass steagall came at a time when the thinking was that government was the answer.
in this era of economic prosperity we have decided that freedom is the answer but banks took their new freedom as an invitation to engage in all sorts of misdeeds knowing that they had become so big that if anything happened the federal government would have no choice but to rescue them.
conflicts of interest proliferated.
banks financed risky new stock offerings by fledgling internet companies while their investment arms peddled the shares to an unsuspecting public.
worse these banks poured money into risky mortgages.
when the housing bubble collapsed in 2007 2008 the banks suffered losses that threatened to bring down the entire financial system.
the bush and obama administrations felt they had no choice but to expend hundreds of billions of dollars of taxpayer money to save the banks from their own misconduct.
inequality the boom that began in 1995 benefited nearly all americans.
for the first time since the early 1970s average real wages and family incomes began to grow significantly.
economic expansion at a time of low unemployment brought rapid increases in wages for families at all income levels.
it aided low skilled workers especially non whites who had been left out of previous periods of growth.
by 2000 the number of long term unemployed 2 million in 1993 had declined to around 700 000 yet despite these gains average wages for nonsupervisory workers adjusted for inflation remained below the level of the 1970s.
overall in the last two decades of the twentieth century the poor and the middle class became worse off while the rich became significantly richer.
between 1977 and 1999 the average after tax income of the poorest onefifth of americans fell 12 percent and that of the middle one fifth decreased by 3 percent.
in contrast thanks to the soaring stock market and increasingly generous pay for top executives the income of the top onefifth rose 38 percent.
the wealth of the richest americans exploded during the 1990s.
sales of luxury goods like yachts and mansions boomed.
bill gates head of microsoft and the countrys richest person owned as much wealth as the bottom 40 percent of the american population put together.
in 1965 the salary of the typical corporate chief executive officer ceo had been 26 times the annual income of the typical worker.
in 2000 the ratio had increased to 310 to 1 figure 27 1 u s income inequality 1913 2003 index of economic inequality rising 525 500 475 450 425 400 375 higher more unequal 1933 1953 year 1993 2003 the gini index measures economic inequality the higher the number the more unequally income is distributed.
as the graph shows inequality peaked just before the great depression fell dramatically during the new deal world war ii and the postwar economic boom and then began a steady upward climb in the early 1970s.
voices of freedom from bill clinton s p e e c h o n s i g n i n g o f n a f ta 1 9 9 3 the north american free trade agreement was signed by president bill clinton early in his first term.
it created a free trade zone an area where goods can travel freely without paying import class that was created and enlarged by the wise policies of expanding trade at the end of world war and mexico.
clinton asked americans to accept ii has been under severe stress.
most americans are working harder for less.
they are vulnerable to the fear tactics and the averseness to change that are economic globalization as an inevitable form of behind much of the opposition to nafta.
but i duties composed of canada the united states progress and the path to future prosperity.
there will be no job loss he promised.
things did not entirely work out that way.
as president it is my duty to speak frankly to the american people about the world in which we now live.
fifty years ago at the end of world war ii an unchallenged america was protected by the oceans and by our technological superiority and very frankly by the economic devastation of the people who could otherwise have been our competitors.
we chose then to try to help rebuild our former enemies and to create a world of free trade supported by institutions which would facilitate it.
as a result jobs were created and opportunity thrived all across the world.
for the last 20 years in all the wealthy countries of the world because of changes in the global environment because of the growth of technology because of increasing competition the middle want to say to my fellow americans when you live in a time of change the only way to recover your security and to broaden your horizons is to adapt to the change to embrace to move forward.
the only way we can recover the fortunes of the middle class in this country so that people who work harder and smarter can at least prosper more the only way we can pass on the american dream of the last 40 years to our children and their children for the next 40 is to adapt to the changes which are occurring.
in a fundamental sense this debate about nafta is a debate about whether we will embrace these changes and create the jobs of tomorrow or try to resist these changes hoping we can preserve the economic structures of yesterday.
i believe that nafta will create 1 million jobs in the first 5 years of its impact.
nafta will generate these jobs by fostering an export boom to mexico by tearing down tariff walls.
there will be no job loss.
f r o m g l o b a l e x c h a n g e s e at t l e declaration for global democracy december 1999 the demonstrations that disrupted the december 1999 meeting of the world trade organization in seattle brought to public attention a widespread dissatisfaction with the effects of economic globalization in this declaration organizers of the protest offered their critique.
global trade agreements must not undermine the ability of each nation state or local community to meet its citizens social environmental cultural or economic needs.
the world trade organization must be replaced by a democratic and transparent body accountable to citizens not to corporations.
no globalization without representation.
as citizens of global society recognizing that the world trade organization is unjustly dominated by corporate interests and run for the enrichment of the few at the expense of all others we demand representatives from all sectors of society must be included in all levels of trade policy formulations.
all global citizens must be democratically represented in the formulation implementation and evaluation of all global social and economic policies.
global trade and investment must not be ends in themselves but rather the instruments for achieving questions 1 why does clinton feel that free trade is necessary to american prosperity.
2 why do the seattle protesters feel that the world trade organization is a threat to democracy.
3 how do these documents reflect contradictory arguments about the impact of globalization in the united states.
equitable and sustainable development including protection for workers and the environment.
27 globalization and its discontents 1989 2000 a new economy.
a cartoonist offered this view in 1993 of the results of the north american free trade agreement suggesting that the united states was exporting manufacturing factories and jobs and receiving immigrant workers in exchange.
barbies liberty a satirical work by the artist hans haacke recasts the barbie doll one of americas most successful toys in the image of the statue of liberty to comment on the loss of manufacturing jobs to low wage areas overseas.
dot com millionaires and well paid computer designers and programmers received much publicity.
but companies continued to shift manufacturing jobs overseas.
thanks to nafta which eliminated barriers to imports from mexico a thriving industrial zone emerged just across the southern border of the united states where american manufacturers built plants to take advantage of cheap labor and weak environmental and safety regulations.
despite low unemployment companies threats to shut down and move exerted downward pressure on american wages.
in 2000 the united states no longer led the world in the hourly wages of manufacturing workers lagging behind several countries in europe.
in terms of the distribution of income and wealth the united states was the most unequal society in the developed world.
high tech firms did not create enough high paying jobs to compensate.
microsoft symbol of the new economy employed only 30 000 people.
in 1970 general motors had been the countrys largest corporate employer.
in the early twenty first century it had been replaced by wal mart a giant discount retail chain that paid most of its 1 6 million workers slightly more than the minimum wage.
wal mart aggressively opposed efforts at collective bargaining.
not a single one of its employees belonged to a union.
in 2000 well over half the labor force worked for less than fourteen dollars per hour a wage on which families found it very difficult to make ends meet.
because of the decline in union membership and the spread of part time employment fewer and fewer workers enjoyed fringe benefits common in union contracts such as employer provided health insurance.
in dual cities like los angeles and new york high tech computer companies and firms engaging in international finance coexisted with sweatshops reminiscent of the progressive era where workers toiled in overcrowded conditions for the minimum wage or less.
poverty was not limited to urban areas.
the highest rates of poverty could be found in isolated rural regions that experienced the continuation of the long term decline in family farming.
what forces drove the economic resurgence of the 1990s.
of the twenty five poorest counties in the united states in 2000 nine were located in nebraska and south dakota.
at the end of the twentieth century the united states more than ever before was a suburban nation.
two thirds of new jobs were created in the suburbs.
suburbs were no longer places from which people commuted to jobs in central cities their office parks industrial plants and huge shopping malls employed many local residents.
nor were suburbs as racially segregated as in the past.
in 2000 one quarter of the suburban population was black and hispanics represented a majority of the population in the suburbs of los angeles and miami.
but suburbs remained divided by income there were rich suburbs middle class suburbs and poor suburbs with little connection between them.
c u lt u r e w a r s the end of the cold war ushered in hopes for a new era of global harmony.
instead what one observer called a rebellion of particularisms renewed emphasis on group identity and insistent demands for group recognition and power racked the international arena during the 1990s.
in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries socialism and nationalism had united people of different backgrounds in pursuit of common goals.
now in africa asia the middle east and parts of europe the waning of movements based on socialism and the declining power of nation states arising from globalization seemed to unleash long simmering ethnic and religious antagonisms.
partly in reaction to the global spread of a secular culture based on consumption and mass entertainment intense religious movements attracted increasing numbers of followers hindu nationalism in india orthodox judaism in israel islamic fundamentalism in much of the muslim world and evangelical christianity in the united states.
like other nations although in a far less extreme way and with little accompanying violence the united states experienced divisions arising from the intensification of ethnic and racial identities and religious fundamentalism.
the newest immigrants because of shifts in immigration cultural and racial diversity became increasingly visible in the united states.
until the immigration law of 1965 the vast majority of twentieth century newcomers had hailed from table 27 1 immigration to the united states 1960 2000 decade total europe asia western hemisphere africa oceania 1961 1970 3 321 584 1 123 492 427 642 1 716 374 28 954 25 122 1971 1980 4 493 302 800 368 1 588 178 1 982 735 80 779 41 242 1981 1990 7 337 030 761 550 2 738 157 3 615 225 176 893 45 205 1991 2000 9 052 999 1 359 737 2 795 672 4 486 806 354 939 55 845 ch.
27 globalization and its discontents 1989 2000 maps of d i v e r s i t y percentage of county population american indian 5 20 35 50 percentage of county population black 5 based on the 2000 census these maps show that nearly every state has a significant non white population.
20 c u lt u r e w a r s 35 50 percentage of county population asian 5 20 35 50 percentage of county population hispanic 5 20 35 50 europe.
that measure as noted in.

chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 quadrupled in size from 100 000 to 400 000 in the rst decade after emancipation.
these churches formed the bedrock of black community life and they soon gave rise to other benevolent fraternal and mutual aid societies.
all these orga ni zations helped blacks protect their newly won freedom.
emancipation also meant education for many blacks.
learning to read and write had been a privilege generally denied to them under slavery.
freedmen wasted no time establishing societies for self improvement which undertook to raise funds to purchase land build schoolhouses and hire teachers.
one member of a north carolina education society asserted that a schoolhouse would be the rst proof of their independence southern blacks soon found however that the demand outstripped the supply of qualied black teachers.
they accepted the aid of northern white women sent by the american missionary association who volunteered their ser vices as teachers.
they also turned to the federal government for help.
the freed blacks were going to need all the friends and power they could muster in washington.
the freedmens bureau abolitionists had long preached that slavery was a degrading institution.
now the emancipators were faced with the brutal reality that the freedmen were overwhelmingly unskilled unlettered without property or money and with scant knowledge of how to survive as free people.
to cope with this problem throughout the conquered south congress created the freedmens bureau on march 3 1865 on paper at least the bureau was intended to be a kind of primitive welfare agency.
it was to provide food clothing medical care and education both to freedmen and to white refugees.
heading the bureau was a women from the north enthusiastically embraced the opportunity to go south and teach in freedmens bureau schools for emancipated blacks.
one volunteer explained her motives i thought i must do something not having money at my command what could i do but give myself to the work.
i would go to them and give them my life if necessary.
warmly sympathetic friend of blacks union general oliver o howard who later founded and served as president of howard university in washington d c the bureau achieved its greatest successes in education.
it taught an estimated 200 000 blacks how to read.
many former slaves had a passion for learning partly because they wanted to close the gap between themselves and whites and partly because they longed to read the word of god.
in one elementary class in north carolina sat four generations of the same family ranging from a six year old child to a seventy ve yearold grandmother.
but in other areas the bureaus accomplishments were meager or even mischievous.
although the bureau was authorized to settle former slaves on forty acre tracts conscated from the confederates little land actually made it into blacks hands.
instead local administrators often collaborated with planters in expelling blacks from towns and cajoling them into signing labor contracts to work for their former masters.
still the white south resented the bureau as a meddlesome federal interloper that threatened to upset white racial dominance.
president andrew johnson who shared the white supremacist views of most white southerners repeatedly tried to kill it and it expired in 1872 johnson the tailor president few presidents have ever been faced with a more perplexing sea of troubles than that confronting andrew johnson.
what manner of man was this medium built dark eyed black haired tennessean now chief executive by virtue of the bullet that killed lincoln.
no citizen not even lincoln has ever reached the white house from humbler beginnings.
born to impoverished parents in north carolina and orphaned early johnson never attended school but was apprenticed to a tailor at age ten.
ambitious to get ahead he taught himself to read and later his wife taught him to write and do simple arithmetic.
like many another self made man he was inclined to overpraise his maker.
johnson early became active in politics in tennessee where he had moved when seventeen years old.
he shone as an impassioned champion of poor whites against the planter aristocrats although he himself ultimately owned a few slaves.
he excelled as a two sted stump speaker before angry and heckling crowds who on occasion greeted his political oratory with cocked pistols not just cocked ears.
elected to congress he attracted much favorable attention in the johnson s plans for the south crushed by the constitution president andrew johnson revered the u s constitution but eventually felt its awesome weight in his impeachment trial.
north but not the south when he refused to secede with his own state.
after tennessee was partially redeemed by union armies he was appointed war governor and served courageously in an at mosphere of danger.
political exigency next thrust johnson into the vice presidency.
lincolns union party in 1864 needed to attract support from the war democrats and other prosouthern elements and johnson a democrat seemed to be the ideal man.
unfortunately he appeared at the vice presidential inaugural ceremonies the following march in a scandalous condition.
he had recently been af icted with typhoid fever and although not known as a heavy drinker he was urged by his friends to take a stiff bracer of whiskey.
this he did with unfortunate results.
old andy johnson was no doubt a man of parts unpolished parts.
he was intelligent able forceful and gifted with homespun honesty.
steadfastly devoted to duty and to the people he was a dogmatic champion of states rights and the constitution.
he would often present a copy of the document to visitors and he was buried with one as a pillow.
yet the man who had raised himself from the tailors bench to the presidents chair was a mist.
a southerner who did not understand the north a tennessean who had earned the distrust of the south a democrat who had never been accepted by the republicans a president who had never been elected to the ofce he was not at home in a republican white house.
hotheaded contentious and stubborn he was the wrong man in the wrong place at the wrong time.
a reconstruction policy devised by angels might well have failed in his tactless hands.
presidential reconstruction even before the shooting war had ended the political war over reconstruction had begun.
abraham lincoln believed that the southern states had never legally withdrawn from the union.
their formal restoration to the union would therefore be relatively simple.
accordingly lincoln in 1863 proclaimed his 10 percent reconstruction plan.
it decreed that a state could be reintegrated into the union when 10 percent of its voters in the presidential election of 1860 had taken an oath of allegiance to the united states and pledged to abide by emancipation.
the next step would be formal erection of a state government.
lincoln would then recognize the puried regime.
lincolns proclamation provoked a sharp reaction in congress where republicans feared the restoration of the planter aristocracy to power and the possible reenslavement of blacks.
republicans therefore rammed through congress in 1864 the wade davis bill.
the bill required that 50 percent of a states voters take the oath of allegiance and demanded stronger safeguards for chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 me nr 8 d 1 ny d 20 nr 16 michigan territory unorganized territory pa il oh in mo va ky vt 7 nh nj ma ri ct 4 de md nr 6 d 5 nc tn sc ar terr.
ms al ga la fl terr.
candidate party electoral vote jackson democrat 68 647 286 56 0 32 508 064 44 0 j q adams national republican popular vote territories unsettled etc.
rachel jackson a devoted wife who did not live to become rst lady rachel died a month after the election of 1828 andrew jackson was convinced that his enemies vicious accusations that she was a bigamist and an adulteress had killed her.
the more complicated truth was that andrew jackson had married rachel robards condent that her divorce had been granted.
two years later when they discovered to their dismay that it had not been they made haste to correct the marital miscue.
been born in a log cabin but now lived in a luxurious manor off the labor of his many slaves.
and adams though perhaps an aristocrat was far from corrupt.
if anything his uncompromising morals were too elevated for the job.
mudslinging reached new lows in 1828 and the electorate developed a taste for bare knuckle politics.
adams would not stoop to gutter tactics but many of his backers were less squeamish.
they described jacksons mother as a prostitute and his wife as an adulteress they printed black bordered handbills shaped like cof ns recounting his numerous duels and brawls and trumpeting his hanging of six mutinous militiamen.
jackson men also hit below the belt.
president adams had purchased with his own money and for his own use a billiard table and a set of chessmen.
in the mouths of rabid jacksonites these items became gaming tables and gambling furniture for the presidential palace criticism was also directed at the large sums adams had received over the years in federal map 13 1 presidential election of 1828 with electoral vote by state jackson swept the south and west whereas adams retained the old federalist stronghold of the northeast.
yet jacksons inroads in the northeast were decisive.
he won twenty of new yorks electoral votes and all twenty eight of pennsylvanias.
if those votes had gone the other way adams would have been interactive map victorious by a margin of one vote.
salaries well earned though they had been.
he was even accused of having procured a servant girl for the lust of the russian tsar in short of having served as a pimp.
on voting day the electorate split on largely sectional lines.
jacksons strongest support came from the west and south see map 13 1.
the middle states and the old northwest were divided while adams won the backing of his own new eng land and the propertied better elements of the northeast.
but when the popular vote was converted to electoral votes general jack one anti jackson newspaper declared general jacksons mother was a common prostitute brought to this country by the british soldiers.
she afterwards married a mulatto man with whom she had several children of which number general jackson is one.
the election of andrew jackson sons triumph could not be denied.
old hickory had trounced adams by an electoral count of 178 to 83 although a considerable part of jacksons support was lined up by machine politicians in eastern cities particularly in new york and pennsylvania the political center of gravity clearly had shifted away from the conser vative eastern seaboard toward the emerging states across the mountains.
in 1824 thomas jefferson 1743 1826 said of jackson when i was president of the senate he was a senator and he could never speak on account of the rashness of his feelings.
i have seen him attempt it repeatedly and as often choke with rage.
his passions are no doubt cooler now.
but he is a dangerous man.
old hickory as president the new president cut a striking gure tall lean with bushy iron gray hair brushed high above a prominent forehead craggy eyebrows and blue eyes.
his irritability and emaciated condition resulted in part from long term bouts with dysentery malaria tuberculosis and lead poisoning from two bullets that he carried in his body from near fatal duels.
his autobiography was written in his lined face.
jacksons upbringing had its shortcomings.
born in the carolinas and early orphaned mischievous andy grew up without parental restraints.
as a youth he displayed much more interest in brawling and cockghting than in his scanty opportunities for reading and spelling.
although he eventually learned to express himself in writing with vigor and clarity his grammar was always rough hewn and his spelling original like that of many contemporaries.
he sometimes misspelled a word two different ways in the same letter.
the youthful carolinian shrewdly moved up west to tennessee where ghting was prized above writing.
there through native intelligence force of personality and powers of leadership he became a judge and a member of congress.
af icted with a violent temper he early became involved in a number of duels stabbings and bloody frays.
his passions were so profound that on occasion he would choke into silence when he tried to speak.
the rst president from the west the rst nominated at a formal party convention in 1832 and only the second without a college education washington was the rst jackson was unique.
his university was adversity.
he had risen from the masses but he was not one of them except insofar as he shared many of their prejudices.
essentially a frontier aristocrat he owned many slaves cultivated broad acres and lived in one of the nest mansions in america the hermitage near nashville tennessee.
more westerner than easterner more country gentleman than common clay more courtly than crude he was hard to t into a neat category.
jacksons inauguration seemed to symbolize the ascendancy of the masses.
hickoryites poured into washington from far away sleeping on hotel oors and in hallways.
they were curious to see their hero take ofce and perhaps hoped to pick up a well paying ofce for themselves.
nobodies mingled with notables as the white house for the rst time was thrown open to the multitude.
a milling crowd of rubbernecking clerks and shopkeepers hobnailed artisans and grimy laborers surged in allegedly wrecking the china and furniture and threatening the peoples champion with cracked ribs.
jackson was hastily spirited through a side door and the white house miraculously emptied itself when the word was passed that huge bowls of well spiked punch had been placed on the lawns.
such was the inaugural brawl to conser vatives this orgy seemed like the end of the world.
king mob reigned triumphant as jacksonian vulgarity replaced jeffersonian simplicity.
fainthearted traditionalists shuddered drew their blinds and recalled with trepidation the opening scenes of the french revolution.
english novelist charles dickens 1812 1870 traveled to the united states just a few years after alexis de tocqueville see thinking globally alexis de tocqueville on democracy in america and europe pp.
he had his own views on the implications of americas vaunted equality the people are all alike too.
there is no diversity of character.
they travel about on the same errands say and do the same things in exactly the same manner and follow in the same dull cheerless round.
all down the long table there is scarcely a man who is in anything different from his neighbor.
thinking globally alexis de tocqueville on democracy in america and europe o n may 11 1831 a twenty six year old frenchman alexis de tocqueville stepped ashore in new york city and began his fateful acquaintance with andrew jacksons america.
for nine months he visited the cities of the atlantic seaboard from boston to washington trekked west to detroit and oated down the ohio and mississippi rivers to new orleans keenly observing the american scene.
four years later he published the rst volume of his monumental work democracy in america.
it remains to this day probably the most insightful analysis of american society ever written and provides an indispensable starting point for understanding both the nature of modern democracy and the american national character.
tocqueville was born in the french revolutionary era and he witnessed the so called july revolution in france in 1830 which widened the french electorate.
he was following closely the agitation in britain for a broader more democratic franchise which culminated in the landmark reform bill of 1832 he also knew of the several independent democratic republics that had blossomed in latin america as the disruptions of the napoleonic wars weakened spains imperial grip venezuela proclaimed its independence in 1811 argentina in 1816 chile in 1818 mexico and peru in 1821.
brazil declared its independence from portugal in 1822 but remained a monarchy until becoming a republic in 1889.
those events convinced him that democracy was the irresistible wave of the future but he was far less certain about what that democratic future might mean for human happiness political stability and social justice.
thus he studied america to understand europes indeed the worlds fate.
in america i saw more than america he wrote.
i sought there the image of democracy itself.
in order to learn what we have to fear or to hope from its progress he announced his central insight in his books rst sentence among the novel objects that attracted my attention during my stay in the united states nothing struck me more forcibly than the general equality of condition among the people he acknowledged the gross inequality of slavery but he considered slavery to be something that was peculiar to america not to democracy the primary fact of equality he argued exercised a prodigious inuence on the whole course of society it is easy to understand why the scale and pervasiveness of american equality made such an impression on tocqueville.
mass democratic participation was already a well established fact when he arrived.
almost 1 2 million voters nearly 50 percent of the adult white male population had cast their ballots in the election that brought jackson to the white house in 1828 in contrast frances july revolution had enfranchised fewer than 200 000 propertied males less than 1 percent of the total population in 1830 and britains reform bill of 1832 would extend voting rights only to some 800 000 male property holders in a country with 50 percent more people than the united states.
tocqueville repeatedly remarked on the seething restless energy that american equality unleashed and he speculated on two possible futures for the united states.
they might be called respectively the centripetal and centrifugal scenarios.
in the rst scenario tocqueville thought that the doctrine of equality might breed a suffocating conformity that would eventually invoke the power of the state to enforce a stern and repressive consensus the kind of tyranny of the majority that had worried founders like james madison.
tocqueville thought he saw signs that such a future was already emerging.
i know of no country in which there is so little independence of mind and real freedom of discussion as in america he wrote.
in the second scenario equality might foster radical individualism a word that tocqueville coined to capture the unique psychology he encountered every where in america.
as social conditions become more equal he wrote people acquire the habit of always considering themselves as standing alone and they are apt to imagine that their whole destiny is in their own hands in this case gnawing individual loneliness and even social anarchy might dene americas future.
democracy makes every man forget his ancestors tocqueville wrote.
it throws him back forever upon himself alone and threatens in the end to conne him entirely within the solitude of his own heart tocqueville noted several factors that mitigated both of those grim prospects and held american democracy in a alexis de tocqueville 1805 1859 election day in philadelphia by john lewis krimmel 1815 the german immigrant krimmel recorded as early as 1815 the growing popular interest in elections that would culminate in jacksonian democracy a decade later.
although politics was serious business it also provided the occasion for much socializing and merriment.
even disfranchised free blacks women and children turned out for the festivities on election day.
healthy balance the absence of hostile countries on its borders a vigorously free press robust voluntary associations especially churches and political parties and crucially habits of the heart which sustained a sense of civic belonging and responsibility.
but tocqueville raised troubling questions about whether those factors would prove durable.
if not what would the ultimate fate of democracy be.
ironically today the united states has markedly lower rates of political participation than many other countries especially those in europe see table 13 2.
can it be that america the pioneering mass democracy that served as tocquevilles laboratory and his window on the future has proved to be less fertile soil for the development of democracy than the old world societies with which he compared it in the 1830s.
table 13 2 voter turnout by country 1840 2000 percentage of voting age population percentage of eligible voters 1841 1842 1841 1842 germany japan mexico united states united kingdom france percentage of voting age population percentage of eligible voters percentage of voting age population percentage of voting age population 1902 1898 1902 1898 1958 1961 1958 2001 1995 1998 voting age population includes individuals of any race and both genders.
for france and the united kingdom individuals over the age of twenty are included in population estimates.
for the united states the voting age population is an approximation of the total population over age twenty one.
virtually all blacks and all women were ineligible to vote in the united states.
landholding requirements severely limited eligibility in the united kingdom and france.
the voting age was reduced to eighteen in the united states france the united kingdom and germany in the second half of the twentieth century.
the voting age in mexico was eighteen for both the 1958 and 2000 elections.
the voting age in japan is twenty.
sources historical statistics of the united states vol.
5 state economy and society in western europe 1815 1975 international historical statistics 1750 2005 europe and international institute for democracy and electoral assistance.
chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 freedmen voting richmond virginia 1871 the exercise of democratic rights by former slaves constituted a political and social revolution in the south and was bitterly resented by whites.
employers and government and recruiting militias to protect black communities from white retaliation.
though african american women did not obtain the right to vote they too assumed new political roles.
black women faithfully attended the parades and rallies common in black communities during the early years of reconstruction and helped assemble mass meetings in the newly constructed black churches.
they even showed up at the constitutional conventions held throughout the south in 1867 monitoring the proceedings and participating in informal votes outside the convention halls.
but black men elected as delegates to the state constitutional conventions held the greater political authority.
they formed the backbone of the black political community.
at the conventions they sat down with whites to hammer out new state constitutions which most importantly provided for universal male suffrage.
though the subsequent elections produced no black governors or majorities in state senates black political participation expanded exponentially during reconstruction.
between 1868 and 1876 fourteen black congressmen and two black senators hiram revels and blanche k bruce both of mississippi served in washington d c blacks also served in state governments as lieutenant governors and representatives and in local governments as mayors magistrates sheriffs and justices of the peace.
the sight of former slaves holding ofce deeply offended their onetime masters who lashed out with particular fury at the freedmens white allies labeling them scalawags and carpetbaggers.
the so called scalawags were southerners often former unionists and whigs.
the former confederates accused them often with wild exaggeration of plundering the treasuries of the southern states through their political inuence in the radical governments.
the carpetbaggers on the other hand were supposedly sleazy northerners who had packed all their worldly goods into a carpetbag suitcase at wars end and had come south to seek personal power and prot.
in fact most were former union soldiers and northern businessmen and professionals who wanted to play a role in modernizing the new south how well did the radical regimes rule.
the radical legislatures passed much desirable legislation and introduced many badly needed reforms.
for the rst time in southern history steps were taken toward establishing adequate public schools.
tax systems were streamlined public works were launched and property rights radical reconstruction black reconstruction a composite portrait of the rst black senators and representatives in the forty rst and forty second congresses.
senator hiram revels on the left was elected in 1870 to the seat that had been occupied by jefferson davis when the south seceded.
were guaranteed to women.
many welcome reforms were retained by the all white redeemer governments that later returned to power.
despite these achievements graft ran rampant in many radical governments.
this was especially true in south carolina and louisiana where conscienceless promoters and other pocket padders used politically inexperienced blacks as pawns.
the worst black andwhite legislatures purchased as legislative supplies such stationery as hams perfumes suspenders bonnets corsets champagne and a cof n one thrifty carpetbag governor in a single year saved 100 000 from a salary of 8 000.
yet this sort of corruption was by no means con ned to the south in these postwar years.
the crimes of the reconstruction governments were no more outrageous than the scams and felonies being perpetrated in the north at the same time especially in boss tweeds new york.
the ku klux klan deeply embittered some southern whites resorted to savage mea sures against radical rule.
many whites resented the success and ability of black legislators as much as they resented alleged corruption a number of secret orga ni zations mushroomed forth the most notorious of which was the invisible empire of the south or ku klux klan founded in tennessee in 1866 besheeted nightriders their horses hooves mufed would approach the cabin of an upstart black and hammer on the door.
in ghoulish tones one thirsty horseman would demand a bucket of water.
then under pretense of drinking he would pour it into a rubber attachment concealed beneath his mask and gown smack his lips and declare that this was the rst water he had tasted since he was killed at the battle of shiloh.
if fright did not produce the desired effect force was employed.
such tomfoolery and terror proved partially effective.
many ex bondsmen and white carpetbaggers quick to take a hint shunned the polls.
those stubborn souls who persisted in their upstart ways were ogged mutilated or even murdered.
in one louisiana parish in 1868 whites in two days killed or wounded two hundred victims a pile of twenty ve bodies was found half buried in the woods.
by such atrocious practices were blacks kept in their place that is down.
the klan became a refuge for numerous bandits and cutthroats.
any scoundrel could don a sheet.
chapter 32 the politics of boom and bust 1920 1932 battleships aircraft carrier tonnage battleship tonnage u s 525 000 135 000 britain 525 000 135 000 japan france 175 000 60 000 italy 175 000 60 000 315 000 81 000 figure 32 1 limits imposed by washington conference 1921 1922 the pledge of the british and americans to refrain from fortifying their far eastern possessions while japan was allowed to fortify its possessions was the key to the naval limitation treaty.
the united states and great britain thus won a temporary victory but later paid a horrendous price when they had to dislodge the well entrenched japanese from the pacic in world war ii.
oceans lled with american vessels.
britain still commanded the worlds largest navy but the clatter of american riveters proclaimed that the united states would soon overtake it.
public agitation in america fed by these worries brought about the headline making washington disarmament conference in 1921 1922.
invitations went to all the major naval powers except bolshevik russia whose government the united states refused ofcially to recognize.
the double agenda included naval disarmament and the situation in the far east.
at the outset secretary hughes startled the delegates who were expecting the usual diplomatic fencestraddling with a comprehensive concrete plan for declaring a ten year holiday on the construction of battleships and even for scrapping some of the huge dreadnoughts already built.
he proposed that the scaled down navies of america and britain should enjoy parity in battleships and aircraft carriers with japan on the small end of a 5 5 3 ratio.
this arrangement sounded to the sensitive japa nese ambassador like rolls royce rolls royce ford complex bargaining followed in the wake of hughess proposals.
the five power naval treaty of 1922 embodied hughess ideas on ship ratios but only after face saving compensation was offered to the insecure japa nese see figure 32 1.
the british and americans both conceded that they would refrain from fortifying their far eastern possessions including the philippines.
the japa nese were not subjected to such restraints in their possessions.
in addition a four power treaty replaced the twenty year old anglo japa nese alliance.
the new pact bound britain japan france and the united states to preserve the status quo in the pacic another concession to the jumpy japa nese.
finally the washington conference gave chaotic china the sick man of the far east a shot in the arm with the nine power treaty of 1922 whose signatories agreed to nail wide open the open door in china.
when the nal gavel banged the hardingites boasted with much fanfare and some justication of their globe shaking achievement in disarmament.
but their satisfaction was somewhat illusory.
no restrictions had been placed on small warships and the other powers churned ahead with the construction of cruisers destroyers and submarines while pennypinching uncle sam lagged dangerously behind.
congress also pointedly declared that it was making no commitment to the use of armed force or any kind of joint action when it ratied the four power treaty.
these reservations in effect rendered the treaty a dead letter.
ominously the american people seemed content to rely for their security on words and wishful thinking rather than on weapons and hardheaded realism.
a similar sentimentalism welled up later in the decade when americans clamored for the outlawry of war the conviction spread that if quarreling nations would only take the pledge to foreswear war as an instrument of national policy swords could be beaten into plowshares.
calvin coolidges secretary of state frank b kellogg who later won the nobel peace prize for his role was lukewarm about the idea.
raising the protective tariff but after petitions bearing more than 2 million signatures cascaded into washington he signed with the french foreign minister in 1928 the famed kelloggbriand pact.
ofcially known as the pact of paris it was ultimately ratied by sixty two nations.
this new parchment peace was delusory in the extreme.
defensive wars were still permitted and what scheming aggressor could not cook up an excuse of self defense.
lacking both muscles and teeth the pact was a diplomatic derelict and virtually useless in a showdown.
yet it accurately and dangerously reected the american mind in the 1920s which was all too willing to be lulled into a false sense of security.
this mood took even deeper hold in the ostrichlike neutralism of the 1930s.
hiking the tariff higher a comparable lack of realism aficted foreign economic policy in the 1920s.
businesspeople shortsightedly obsessed with the dazzling prospects in the prosperous home market sought to keep that market to themselves by inging up insurmountable tariff walls around the united states.
they were spurred into action by their fear of a ood of cheap goods from recovering europe especially during the brief but sharp recession of 1920 1921.
in 1922 congress passed the comprehensive fordney mccumber tariff law.
glib lobbyists once more descended upon washington and helped boost schedules from the average of 27 percent under wilsons underwood tariff of 1913 to an average of 38 5 percent which was almost as high as tafts payne aldrich tariff of 1909.
see the appendix.
duties on farm produce were increased and the principle was proclaimed that the general rates were designed to equalize the cost of american and foreign production.
a promising degree of exibility was introduced for the rst time when the president was authorized with the advice of the fact nding tariff commission to reduce or increase duties by as much as 50 percent.
presidents harding and coolidge true to their bigindustry sympathies were far more friendly to tariff increases than to reductions.
in six years they authorized thirty two upward changes including on their list vital commodities like dairy products chemicals and pig iron.
during the same period the white house ordered only ve reductions.
these included mill feed and such tri ing items as bobwhite quail paintbrush handles phenol and cresylic acid.
the high tariff course thus charted by the republican regimes set off an ominous chain reaction.
european producers felt the squeeze for the american tariff walls prolonged their postwar chaos.
an impoverished europe needed to sell its manufactured goods to the united states particularly if it hoped to achieve economic recovery and to pay its huge war debt to washington.
america needed to give foreign nations a chance to make a prot from it so that they could buy its manufactured articles and repay debts.
international trade americans were slow to learn is a twoway street.
in general they could not sell to others in quantity unless they bought from them in quantity or lent them more u s dollars.
erecting tariff walls was a game that two could play.
the american example spurred european nations throughout the feverish 1920s to pile up higher barriers themselves.
these articial obstacles were doubly bad they hurt not only american made goods but the products of european countries as well.
the whole vicious circle further deepened the international economic distress providing one more rung on the ladder by which adolf hitler scrambled to power.
the stench of scandal the loose morality and get rich quickism of the harding era manifested themselves spectacularly in a series of scandals.
early in 1923 colonel charles r forbes onetime deserter from the army was caught with his hand in the till and resigned as head of the veterans bureau.
an appointee of the gullible harding he and his accomplices looted the government to the tune of about 200 million chiey in connection with the building of veterans hospitals.
he was sentenced to two years in a federal penitentiary.
most shocking of all was the teapot dome scandal an affair that involved priceless naval oil reserves at teapot dome wyoming and elk hills cal i fornia.
in 1921 the slippery secretary of the interior albert b fall induced his careless colleague the secretary of the navy to transfer these valuable properties to the interior department.
harding indiscreetly signed the secret order.
fall then quietly leased the lands to oilmen harry f sinclair and edward l doheny but not until he had received a bribe loan of 100 000 from doheny and about three times that amount in all from sinclair.
chapter in american history to a dramatic climax.
all but unique among modern peoples americans for nearly two centuries had been spared from foreign attack on their homeland.
that unusual degree of virtually cost free liberty or death critics of the usa patriot act feared the extinction of cherished civil liberties including the right to protest against the governments policies.
chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 the seeds of the north american slave system.
yet blacks were too costly for most of the hard pinched white colonists to acquire and for decades few were brought to virginia.
in 1650 virginia counted but three hundred blacks although by the end of the century blacks most of them enslaved made up approximately 14 percent of the colonys population.
representative self government was also born in primitive virginia in the same cradle with slavery and in the same year 1619.
the virginia company authorized the settlers to summon an assembly known as the house of burgesses.
a momentous precedent was thus feebly established for this assemblage was the rst of many miniature parliaments to ourish in the soil of america.
as time passed james i grew increasingly hostile to virginia.
he detested tobacco and he distrusted the representative house of burgesses which he branded a seminary of sedition in 1624 he revoked the charter of the bankrupt and beleaguered virginia company thus making virginia a royal colony directly under his control.
maryland catholic haven maryland the second plantation colony but the fourth eng lish colony to be planted was founded in 1634 by lord baltimore of a prominent eng lish catholic family.
he embarked upon the venture partly to reap nancial prots and partly to create a refuge for his fellow catholics.
protestant eng land was still persecuting roman catholics among numerous discriminations a couple seeking wedlock could not be legally married by a catholic priest.
absentee proprietor lord baltimore hoped that the two hundred settlers who founded maryland at st marys on chesapeake bay would be the vanguard of a vast new feudal domain.
huge estates were to be awarded to his largely catholic relatives and gracious manor houses modeled on those of eng lands aristocracy were intended to arise amidst the fertile forests.
as in virginia colonists proved willing to come only if offered the opportunity to acquire land of their own.
soon they were dispersed around the chesapeake region on modest farms and the haughty land barons mostly catholic were surrounded by resentful backcountry planters mostly protestant.
resentment ared into open rebellion near the end of the century and the baltimore family for a time lost its proprietary rights.
despite these tensions maryland prospered.
like virginia it blossomed forth in acres of tobacco.
also like virginia it depended for labor in its early years mainly on white indentured servants penniless persons who bound themselves to work for a number of years to pay their passage.
in both colonies it was only in the later years of the seventeenth century that black slaves began to be imported in large numbers.
lord baltimore a canny soul permitted unusual freedom of worship at the outset.
he hoped that he would thus purchase toleration for his own fellow worshipers.
but the heavy tide of protestants threatened to submerge the catholics and place severe restrictions on them as in eng land.
faced with disaster the catholics of maryland threw their support behind the famed act of toleration which was passed in 1649 by the local representative assembly.
marylands new religious statute guaranteed toleration to all christians.
but less liberally it decreed the death penalty for those like jews and atheists who denied the divinity of jesus.
the law thus sanctioned less toleration than had previously existed in the settlement but it did extend a temporary cloak of protection to the uneasy catholic minority.
one result was that when the colonial era ended maryland probably sheltered more roman catholics than any other eng lishspeaking colony in the new world.
the west indies way station to mainland america while the eng lish were planting the rst frail colonial shoots in the chesapeake they also were busily colonizing the islands of the west indies.
spain weakened by military overextension and distracted by its rebellious dutch provinces relaxed its grip on much of the caribbean in the early 1600s.
by the mid seventeenth century eng land had secured its claim to several west indian islands including the large prize of jamaica in 1655 sugar formed the foundation of the west indian economy.
what tobacco was to the chesapeake sugar cane was to the caribbean with one crucial difference.
tobacco was a poor mans crop.
it could be planted easily it produced commercially marketable leaves within a year and it required only simple processing.
sugar cane in contrast was a rich mans crop.
it had to be planted extensively to yield commercially viable quantities of sugar.
extensive planting in turn required extensive and arduous land clearing.
and the english colonization in the caribbean above sugar mill in brazil by frans post ca.
1640 left saccharum ofcinarum sugar cane african peoples throughout the new world in the three and a half centuries following columbuss discovery.
to control this large and potentially restive slave population eng lish authorities devised formal codes that de ned the slaves legal status and their masters prerogatives.
the notorious barbados slave code of 1661 denied even the most fundamental rights to slaves and gave masters virtually complete control over their laborers including the right to in ict vicious punishments for even slight infractions.
cane stalks yielded their sugar only after an elaborate process of re ning in a sugar mill.
the need for land and for the labor to clear it and to run the mills made sugar cultivation a capital intensive business.
only wealthy growers with abundant capital to invest could succeed in sugar.
the sugar lords extended their dominion over the west indies in the seventeenth century.
to work their sprawling plantations they imported enormous numbers of enslaved africans more than a quarter of a million in the ve decades after 1640 by about 1700 black slaves outnumbered white settlers in the eng lish west indies by nearly four to one and the regions population has remained predominantly black ever since.
west indians thus take their place among the numerous children of the african diaspora the vast scattering of african slaves destined for the west indian sugar plantations were bound and branded on west african beaches and ferried out in canoes to the waiting slave ships.
an english sailor described the scene the negroes are so wilful and loth to leave their own country that have often leapd out of the canoes boat and ship into the sea and kept under water till they were drowned to avoid being taken up and saved by our boats which pursued them they having a more dreadful apprehension of barbadoes than we can have of hell.
chapter 42 the american people face a new century especially in genetics and computer applications presented americans with stunning opportunities as well as wrenching ethical choices.
ecological dangers made the responsible stewardship of a fragile planet more urgent than ever.
inequality and prejudice continued to challenge americans to close the gap between their most hallowed values and the stark realities of modern life.
and the terrorist attacks of september 11 2001 violently heralded a new era of fear and anxiety.
but men and women make history only within the framework bequeathed to them by earlier generations.
for better or worse they march forward along times path bearing the burdens of the past.
knowing when they have come to a truly new turn in the road when they can lay part of their burden down and when they cannot or should not all this constitutes the sort of wisdom that only historical study can engender.
economic revolutions when the twentieth century opened united states steel corporation was the agship business of americas booming industrial revolution.
a generation later general motors annually producing millions of automobiles became the characteristic american corporation signaling the historic shift to a mass consumer outsourcing jobs to india sophisticated computer technology has allowed developing countries like india to attract western employers seeking lower labor costs.
indias educated and englishspeaking work force has made it particularly suitable for international call centers and computer programming.
economy that began in the 1920s and owered fully in the 1950s.
following world war ii the rise of international business machines ibm symbolized yet another momentous transformation to the fast paced information age when the storing organizing and processing of data became an industry in its own right.
the pace of the information age soon accelerated.
by centurys end the rapid emergence of microsoft corporation and the phenomenal growth of the internet heralded an explosive communications revolution.
americans now rocketed down the information superhighway toward the uncharted terrain of an electronic global village where traditional geographic social and political boundaries could be vaulted with the tap of a keypad.
the communications revolution was full of both promise and peril.
in the blink of an eye ordinary cit izens could gain access to information once available only to privileged elites with vast libraries or expert staffs at their disposal.
businesspeople instantaneously girdled the planet with transactions of prodigious scope and serpentine complexity.
japa nese bankers might sell wheat contracts in chicago and simultaneously direct the prots to buying oil shipments from the persian gulf offered by a broker in amsterdam.
by the late 1990s a dot com explosion of new commercial ventures quickly expanded the mar the economy and technology index 5 000 4 500 4 000 3 500 3 000 2 500 2 000 1 500 1 000 ket and the stock market stakes for entrepreneurs leading the way in making the internet a twenty rstcentury electronic mall town square library and entertainment center rolled into one.
but the very speed and efciency of the new communications tools threatened to wipe out entire occupational categories.
postal carriers travel agents store clerks bank tellers stockbrokers and all kinds of other workers whose business it was to mediate between product and client might nd themselves roadkill on the information superhighway.
white collar jobs in nancial ser vices and high tech engineering once thought securely anchored in places like chicago los angeles and new york could now be outsourced to countries such as ireland and india where employees could help keep a companys global circuits ring twenty four hours a day.
the high tech economy also proved to be as prone to boom and bust as the old smokestack economy.
in the spring of 2000 the stock market began its most precipitous slide since the second world war.
by the time the markets bottomed out in 2003 they had lost 6 trillion in value see figure 42 1.
the boom of the late 1990s turned out to be as one observer put it the dot con investors had scooped up shares in edgling rms that proved unable to turn a prot and stock prices imploded accordingly once the bubble burst.
millions of americans watched aghast as their pension plans shrank by a third or more.
recent retir figure 42 1 the rise and fall of the nasdaq composite index 1994 2004 in march 2000 the nasdaq composite index replete with technology stocks peaked at its alltime closing high of 5 048 before losing over 75 percent of its market value in the next three years.
the same index had opened in february 1971 with a base valuation of 100 points.
source msn money.
ees scrambled back into the job market.
the economic turbulence of the rst years of the century stood as a sober reminder that even as the american economy generated extraordinary wealth and innovation by global standards it was scarcely immune to the ageold vagaries of risk error scandal and the business cycle.
increasingly scientic research was the motor that propelled the economy and new scientic knowledge raised new moral dilemmas and provoked new political arguments.
when scientists rst unlocked the secrets of molecular genetic structure in the 1950s the road lay open to breeding new strains of high yield pest and weather resistant crops to curing hereditary diseases and also unfortunately to unleashing genetic mutations that might threaten the fragile balance of the wondrous biosphere in which humankind was delicately suspended.
by the dawn of the new century scientists stood at the threshold of a revolution in biological engineering.
the human genome project established the dna sequencing of the thirty thousand human genes pointing the way to radical new medical therapies and to mouthwatering prots for bioengineering rms.
startling breakthroughs in the cloning of animals raised thorny questions about the legitimacy of applying cloning technology to human reproduction.
research into human stem cells held out the promise of cures for af ictions like parkinsons disease and alzheimers.
but the bush administration chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 outraged cleveland grudgingly allowed the bill which also contained a 2 percent tax on incomes over 4 000 to become law without his signature.
when the supreme court struck down the income tax provision in 1895 the populists and other disaffected groups found proof that the courts were only the tools of the plutocrats.
democratic political fortunes naturally suffered in the face of these several setbacks.
the tariff dynamite that had blasted the republicans out of the house in 1890 now dislodged the democrats with a strong helping hand from the depression.
the revitalized republicans singing times are mighty hard won the congressional elections of 1894 in a landslide 244 seats to 105 for the democrats.
the republicans be it violated the direct tax clause.
4 in the appendix.
the sixteenth amendment to the constitution adopted in 1913 permitted an income tax.
gan to look forward to the presidential race of 1896 with unconcealed glee.
despite his gruff integrity and occasional courage grover cleveland failed utterly to cope with the serious economic crisis that befell the country in 1893 he was tied down in ofce by the same threads that held all the politicians of the day to lilliputian levels.
grant hayes gareld arthur harrison and cleveland are often referred to as the forgettable presidents bewhiskered and bland in person they left mostly blanks or blots on the nations political record as issues like the tariff the money question and the rights of labor continued to fester.
what little political vitality existed in gilded age america was to be found in local settings or in congress which overshadowed the white house for most of this period.
but before the century ended down and out debtors and disgruntled workers would make one last titanic effort to wring reform out of the political system in the momentous election of 1896 chronology grant defeats seymour for presidency fisk and gould corner gold market tweed scandal in new york crdit mobilier scandal exposed liberal republicans break with grant grant defeats greeley for presidency panic of 1873 whiskey ring scandal civil rights act of 1875 resumption act hayes tilden election standoff and crisis compromise of 1877 reconstruction ends railroad strikes paralyze nation gareld defeats hancock for presidency gareld assassinated arthur assumes presidency chinese exclusion act civil rights cases pendleton act sets up civil service commission cleveland defeats blaine for presidency harrison defeats cleveland for presidency billion dollar congress mckinley tariff act sherman silver purchase act repealed 1893 homestead steel strike coeur dalene idaho silver miners strike peoples party candidate james b weaver wins twenty two electoral votes cleveland defeats harrison and weaver to regain presidency depression of 1893 begins republicans regain house of representatives j p morgans banking syndicate loans 65 million in gold to federal government plessy v ferguson legitimizes separate but equal doctrine varying viewpoints key terms waving the bloody shirt 539 tweed ring 539 crdit mobilier scandal 541 panic of 1873 542 gilded age 543 patronage 544 compromise of 1877 545 people to know civil rights act of 1875 546 sharecropping 547 jim crow 547 plessy v ferguson 547 chinese exclusion act 549 pendleton act 553 homestead strike 557 grandfather clause 559 jay gould horace greeley rutherford b hayes james a gareld chester arthur grover cleveland thomas b reed tom watson william jennings bryan j p morgan the populists radicals or reactionaries.
t aking their cue from contemporary satirical commentaries like mark twain and charles dudley warners the gilded age 1873 the rst historians who wrote about the post civil war era judged it harshly.
they condemned its politicians as petty and corrupt lamented the emergence of a new plutocratic class and railed against the arrogance of corporate power.
such a view is conspicuous in charles and mary beards the rise of american civilization 4 vols 1927 1942 perhaps the most inuential american history textbook ever written.
the beards were leaders of the so called progressive school of historical writing that ourished in the early years of the twentieth century.
progressive historians many of whom grew up in the gilded age shared in a widespread disillusionment that the civil war had failed to generate a rebirth of american idealism.
their political sympathies were chillingly antibusiness and warmly pro labor pro farmer and pro reform.
historians of the progressive persuasion identied populism as virtually the only orga nized opposition to the social economic and political order that took shape in the last decades of the nineteenth century.
the populists thus became heroes to several generations of writers who bemoaned that order and looked back longingly at americans agrarian past.
john d hicks the populist revolt 1931 is the classic portrayal of the populists as embattled farmers hurling deance at wall street and the robber barons in a last ditch defense of their simple honest way of life.
bowed but unbroken by the defeat of their great champion william jennings bryan in the presidential election of 1896 the populists hicks claimed left a reforming legacy that ourished again in the progressive era and the new deal.
hickss point of view was the dominant one until the 1950s when it was sharply criticized by richard hofstadter in the age of reform 1955.
hofstadter charged that the progressive historians had romanticized the populists who were best understood not as picturesque protesters but as harassed little country businessmen bristling with provincial prejudices.
the city born and bred hofstadter argued that the populist revolt was aimed not just at big business and the money power but also somewhat irrationally at urbanism immigrants the east and modernity itself.
hofstadter thus exposed a dark side of populism which contained elements of backwoods antiintellectualism paranoia and even anti semitism.
in the 1960s several scholars inspired by the work of c vann woodward as well as by sympathy with the protest movements of that turbulent decade began to rehabilitate the populists as authentic reformers with genuine grievances.
especially notable in this vein was lawrence goodwyns democratic promise chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 the country needs and.
demands bold persistent experimentation.
it is common sense to take a method and try it.
if it fails admit it frankly and try another.
but above all try something.
franklin d roosevelt campaign speech 1932 v oters were in an ugly mood as the presidential campaign of 1932 neared.
countless factory chimneys remained ominously cold while more than 11 million unemployed workers and their families sank ever deeper into the pit of poverty.
herbert hoover may have won the 1928 election by promising a chicken in every pot but three years later that chicken seemed to have laid a discharge slip in every pay envelope.
hoover sick at heart was renominated by the republican convention in chicago without great enthusiasm.
the platform indulged in extravagant praise of republican antidepression policies while halfheartedly promising to repeal national prohibition and return control of liquor to the states.
the rising star of the democratic rmament was governor franklin delano roosevelt of new york a fth cousin of theodore roosevelt.
like the rough rider he had been born to a wealthy new york family had graduated from harvard had been elected as a kid gloved politician to the new york legislature had served as governor of the empire state had been nominated for the vice presidency though not elected and had served capably as assistant secretary of the navy.
although both men were master politicians adept with the colorful phrase tr was pugnacious and confrontational while fdr was suave and conciliatory qualities that appealed strongly to a people traumatized by one of the greatest crises in american history.
fdr politician in a wheelchair infantile paralysis while putting steel braces on franklin roosevelts legs put additional steel into his soul.
until 1921 when the dread disease struck young roosevelt tall six feet two inches athletic and handsome this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 eng lish settlers and the powerful pequot tribe.
besieging a pequot village on connecticuts mystic river english militiamen and their narragansett indian allies set re to the indian wigwams and shot the eeing survivors.
the slaughter wrote a brutal nish to the pequot war virtually annihilated the pequot tribe and inaugurated four decades of uneasy peace between puritans and indians.
lashed by critics in eng land the puritans made some feeble efforts at converting the remaining indians to christianity although puritan missionary zeal never equaled that of the catholic spanish and french.
a mere handful of indians were gathered into puritan praying towns to make the acquaintance of the english god and to learn the ways of eng lish culture.
the indians only hope for resisting eng lish encroachment lay in intertribal unity a pan indian alliance against the swiftly spreading eng lish settlements.
in 1675 massasoits son metacom called king philip by the eng lish forged such an alliance and mounted a series of coordinated assaults on eng lish villages throughout new eng land.
frontier settlements were especially hard hit and refugees fell back toward the relative safety of boston.
when the war ended in 1676 fty two puritan towns had been attacked and twelve destroyed entirely.
hundreds of colonists and many more indians lay dead.
metacoms wife and son were sold into slavery he himself was captured beheaded and drawn and quartered.
his head was carried on a pike back to plymouth where it was mounted on grisly display for years.
king philips war slowed the westward march of eng lish settlement in new eng land for several decades.
but the war in icted a lasting defeat on new eng lands indians.
drastically reduced in numbers dispirited and disbanded they thereafter posed only sporadic threats to the new eng land colonists.
seeds of colonial unity and independence a path breaking experiment in union was launched in 1643 when four colonies banded together to form the new eng land confederation.
the eng lish civil war was then deeply distracting old eng land throwing the colonists upon their own resources.
the primary purpose of the confederation was defense against foes or potential foes notably the indians the french and the dutch.
purely intercolonial problems such as run away servants and criminals who had ed from one colony to another also came within the jurisdiction of the confederation.
each member colony regardless of size wielded two votes an arrangement highly displeasing to the most populous colony massachusetts bay.
the confederation was essentially an exclusive puritan club.
it consisted of the two massachusetts colonies the bay colony and bantam sized plymouth and the two connecticut colonies new haven and the scattered valley settlements.
the puritan leaders blackballed rhode island as well as the maine outposts.
these places it was charged harbored too many heretical or otherwise undesirable characters.
shockingly one of the maine towns had made a tailor its mayor and had even sheltered an excommunicated minister of the gospel.
weak though it was the confederation was the rst notable milestone on the long and rocky road toward colonial unity.
the delegates took tottering but longoverdue steps toward acting together on matters of intercolonial importance.
rank and le colonists for their part received valuable experience in delegating their votes to properly chosen representatives.
back in eng land the king had paid little attention to the american colonies during the early years of their planting.
they were allowed in effect to become semiautonomous commonwealths.
this era of benign neglect was prolonged when the crown struggling to retain its power became enmeshed during the 1640s in civil wars with the parliamentarians.
but when charles ii was restored to the eng lish throne in 1660 see table 3 1 the royalists and their church of eng land allies were once more rmly in the saddle.
puritan hopes of eventually purifying the old eng lish church withered.
worse charles ii was determined to take an active aggressive hand in the management of the colonies.
his plans ran headlong against the habits that decades of relative independence had bred in the colonists.
deepening colonial deance was nowhere more glaringly revealed than in massachusetts.
one of the kings agents in boston was mortied to nd that royal orders had no more effect than old issues of the london gazette.
punishment was soon forthcoming.
as a slap at massachusetts charles ii gave rival connecticut in 1662 a sea to sea charter grant which legalized the squatter settlements.
the very next year the outcasts in rhode island received a new charter which gave kingly sanction to the most religiously tolerant confederation and dominion in new england table 3 1 the stuart dynasty in eng land name reign relation to america james i 1603 1625 charles i 1625 1649 interregnum 1649 1660 charles ii 1660 1685 james ii 1685 1688 william mary 1689 1702 mary died 1694 va plymouth founded separatists persecuted civil wars 1642 1649 mass md.
founded commonwealth protectorate oliver cromwell the restoration carolinas pa n y founded conn chartered catholic trend glorious revolution 1688 king williams war 1689 1697 see p 29 for predecessors p 113 for successors.
government yet devised in america.
a nal and crushing blow fell on the stiff necked bay colony in 1684 when its precious charter was revoked by the london authorities.
andros promotes the first american revolution massachusetts suffered further humiliation in 1686 when the dominion of new eng land was created by royal authority see map 3 3.
unlike the homegrown new eng land confederation it was imposed from london.
embracing at rst all of new eng land it was expanded two years later to include new york and east and west jersey.
the dominion also aimed at bolstering colonial defense in the event of war with the indians and hence from the imperial viewpoint of parliament was a statesmanlike move.
more importantly the dominion of new eng land was designed to promote urgently needed efciency in the administration of the eng lish navigation laws.
those laws reected the intensifying colonial rivalries of the seventeenth century.
they sought to stitch englands overseas possessions more tightly to the motherland by throttling american trade with countries not ruled by the eng lish crown.
like colonial peoples everywhere the americans chafed at such con nements and smuggling became an increasingly common and honorable occupation.
at the head of the new dominion stood autocratic sir edmund andros an able eng lish military man conscientious but tactless.
establishing headquarters in puritanical boston he generated much hostility by his open af liation with the despised church of eng land.
the colonists were also outraged by his noisy and sabbath profaning soldiers who were accused of teaching the people to drink blaspheme curse and damn andros was prompt to use the mailed st.
he ruthlessly curbed the cherished town meetings laid heavy restrictions on the courts the press and the schools and revoked all land titles.
dispensing with the popular assemblies he taxed the people without the consent of their duly elected representatives.
he also strove to enforce the unpopular navigation laws and suppress smuggling.
liberty loving colonists accustomed to unusual privileges during long decades of neglect were goaded to the verge of revolt.
the people of old eng land soon taught the people of new eng land a few lessons in resisting oppression.
in 1688 1689 they engineered the memorable glorious or bloodless revolution.
dethroning the despotic and unpopular catholic james ii they enthroned the protestant rulers of the netherlands the dutch born william iii and his eng lish wife mary ii daughter of james ii.
when the news of the glorious revolution reached america the ramshackle dominion of new eng land collapsed like a house of cards.
a boston mob catching the fever rose against the existing regime.
sir edmund andros attempted to ee in womens clothing but was betrayed by boots protruding beneath his dress.
he was hastily shipped off to eng land.
massachusetts though rid of the despotic andros did not gain as much from the upheaval as it had hoped.
in 1691 it was arbitrarily made a royal colony with a new charter and a new royal governor.
the permanent loss of the ancient charter was a staggering blow to the proud puritans who never fully recovered.
worst of all the privilege of voting once a monopoly of church chapter 42 the american people face a new century and 8 percent of women and a majority of the elderly population relied primarily on social security checks for their living expenses.
contrary to popular mythology social security payments to retirees did not represent reimbursement for contributions that the elderly had made during their working lives.
in fact the payments of current workers into the social security system funded the benets to the current generation of retirees.
by the time the new century opened those billions of dollars 1 400 1 300 1 200 1 100 1 000 1930 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 2000 05 figure 42 4 government expenditures for social welfare 1930 2005 social welfare includes unemployment and old age insurance health care and veterans benets.
the skyrocketing costs from the mid 1960s onward reect new commitments made through great society programs and the increasing size and political clout of the elderly population who were the main beneciaries of expensive programs like medicare.
the steep rise after 1970 is also explained by the galloping ination of the 1970s.
sources statistical abstract of the united states 2003 ofce of management and budget 2005 and 2006 budget fy2005 tables html.
benets had risen so high and the ratio of active workers to retirees had dropped so low that drastic adjustments were necessary.
the problem intensied as elders found that health care costs especially prescription drugs and long term nursing care were rising at a far faster clip than their retirement benets were designed to cover.
at the beginning of the new century as the huge wave of post world war ii baby boomers approached retirement age it seemed that the unfunded liability the difference between what the government had promised to pay to the elderly and the taxes it expected to take in might rise above 7 trillion a sum that threatened to bankrupt the republic unless drastic reforms were adopted.
yet because of the electoral power of older americans social security and medicare reform remained the third rail of american politics which politicians touched only at their peril see figure 42 4.
pressures mounted nonetheless to cut benets persuade older americans to work longer or take even more drastic action.
in 2005 freshly reelected president george w bush made social security reform the centerpiece of his domestic agenda and proposed partially privatizing the system.
bushs plan would have given younger workers the option to invest some of their payroll taxes in individual retirement funds.
but the electoral power of older americans and the countrys ultimate loyalty to a public social safety net brought the bush plan to a stunningly quick halt that spring.
plans to reshape the social security system lay dormant for the rest of the bush years even as some analysts claimed that payments to the nonworking elderly threatened to soak up fully half of the working populations income by about 2040 the new immigration newcomers continued to ow into modern america.
they washed ashore in waves that numbered nearly 1 million persons per year from the 1980s into the early twenty rst century the largest inow of immigrants in americas experience.
in striking contrast to the historic pattern of immigration europe contributed far fewer people than did asia and latin america see figure 42 5.
and unlike their predecessors many of the new immigrants settled not only in traditional ethnic enclaves in cities and towns but also in the sprawling suburbs of places like los angeles dallas and atlanta where many of the new jobs were to be found.
immigration and assimilation in thousands 4 000 1961 1970 3 500 1971 1980 1981 1990 3 000 1991 2000 2001 2006 2 500 2 000 1 500 1 000 europe asia africa mexico caribbean central america south america figure 42 5 recent legal immigration by area of origin 1961 2006 source yearbook of immigration statistics 2002 and 2006 department of homeland security.
what prompted this new migration to america.
the truth is that the newest immigrants came for many of the same reasons as the old.
they typically left countries where populations were growing rapidly and where agricultural and industrial revolutions were shaking people loose from old habits of life conditions almost identical to those in nineteenthcentury europe.
and they came to america as previous immigrants had done in search of jobs and economic opportunity.
some came with skills and even professional degrees from india or taiwan or the former soviet union and they found their way into middle class jobs.
but most came with fewer skills and less education seeking work as janitors nannies farm laborers lawn cutters or restaurant workers.
the southwest from texas to cal i fornia felt the immigrant impact especially sharply as mexican migrants by far the largest contingent of modern immigrants concentrated heavily in that region.
by the turn of the century latinos made up nearly one third of the population in texas arizona and cal i fornia and 40 percent in new mexico amounting to a demo graphic reconquista of the lands lost by mexico in the war of 1846 1848.
see makers of america the latinos pp.
the size and geographic concentration of the latino population in the southwest had few precedents in the history of american immigration.
most previous groups had been so thinly scattered across the land that they had little choice but to learn eng lish and make their way in the larger american society however much they might have longed to preserve their native language and customs.
but it seemed possible that mexican americans might succeed in creating a truly bicultural zone in the booming southwestern states especially since their mother culture lay accessible just next door.
some old stock americans worried about the capacity of the modern united states to absorb these new immigrants.
the immigration reform and control act of 1986 attempted to choke off illegal entry by penalizing employers of undocumented aliens and by granting amnesty to many of those already here.
chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 hoovers humiliation in 1932 hoover had been swept into ofce on the rising tide of prosperity he was swept out of ofce by the receding tide of depression.
the ood of votes totaled 22 809 638 for roosevelt and 15 758 901 for hoover the electoral count stood at 472 to 59 in all the loser carried only six rock ribbed republican states.
one striking feature of the election was the beginning of a distinct shift of blacks traditionally grateful to the republican party of lincoln over to the roosevelt camp.
as the last hired and rst red black americans had been among the worst sufferers from the depression.
beginning with the election of 1932 they became notably in the great urban centers of the north a vital element in the democratic party.
hard times unquestionably ruined the republicans for the electoral upheaval in 1932 was as much anti hoover as it was pro roosevelt.
democrats had only to harness the national grudge and let it pull them to victory.
an overwhelming majority of democrats appear to have voiced a demand for change a new deal rather than the new deal for the latter was only a gleam in the eyes of its sponsors.
any upstanding democratic candidate probably could have won.
the preinauguration lame duck period now ground slowly to an end.
hoover though defeated and repudiated continued to be president for four long months until march 4 1933 but he was helpless to embark upon any long range policies without the cooperation of roosevelt and the victorious president elect proved rather uncooperative.
hoover at length succeeded in arranging two meetings with him to discuss the wardebt muddle.
but roosevelt who airily remarked to the press its not my baby fought shy of assuming responsibility without authority.
as hoover privately confessed he was trying to bind his successor to an anti inationary policy that would have made impossible many of the later new deal experiments.
but in politics the winner not the loser calls the tune.
with washington deadlocked the vast and vaunted american economic machine clanked to a virtual halt.
one worker in four tramped the streets feet weary and hands idle.
banks were locking their doors all over the nation as people ner vously stuffed paper money under their mattresses.
hooverites then and later accused roosevelt of deliberately permitting the depression to worsen so that he could emerge the more spectacularly as a savior.
fdr and the three rs relief recovery reform great crises often call forth gifted leaders and the hand of destiny tapped roosevelt on the shoulder.
on a dreary inauguration day march 4 1933 his vibrant voice broadcast nationally from a bulletproof stand provided the american people with inspirational new hope.
he denounced the money changers who had brought on the calamity and declared that the government must wage war on the great depression as it would wage war on an armed foe.
his clarion note was let me assert my rm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself roosevelt moved decisively.
now that he had full responsibility he boldly declared a nationwide banking holiday march 6 10 as a prelude to opening the banks on a sounder basis.
he then summoned the over unemployed and frustrated democratic candidate franklin roosevelt offered hope if few concrete plans to the millions struggling to cope with the great depression.
roosevelt ousts hoover whelmingly democratic congress into special session to cope with the national emergency.
for the so called hundred days march 9 june 16 1933 members hastily cranked out an unprecedented basketful of remedial legislation see table 33 1.
some of it derived from earlier progressivism but these new mea sures mostly sought to deal with a desperate emergency.
roosevelts new deal programs aimed at three rs relief recovery and reform.
short range goals were relief and immediate recovery especially in the rst two years.
long range goals were permanent recovery and reform of current abuses particularly those that had produced the boom or bust catastrophe.
the three r objectives often overlapped and got in one table 33 1 principal new deal acts during the hundred days congress 1933 items in parentheses indicate secondary purposes recovery relief reform beer act beer act beer and wine revenue act march 22 1933 ccc unemployment relief act march 31 1933 creates civilian conservation corps ccc fdr closes banks march 6 1933 emergency banking relief act march 9 1933 fdr orders gold surrender april 5 1933 fdr abandons gold standard april 19 1933 fera federal emergency relief act may 12 1933 creates federal emergency relief administration fera aaa agricultural adjustment act aaa may 12 1933 tva tva tennessee valley authority act tva may 18 1933 federal securities act may 27 1933 gold payment clause repealed june 5 1933 holc home owners re nancing act june 13 1933 creates home owners loan corporation holc national industrial recovery act june 16 1933 creates national recovery administration nra public works administration pwa nra pwa nra glass steagall act glass steagall act glass steagall banking reform act june 16 1933 creates federal deposit insurance corporation for later new deal mea sures see p 831 chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 considerable progress and millions of reliefers were grateful to their bountiful government.
the exultant democrats renominated roosevelt on a platform squarely endorsing the new deal.
the republicans were hard pressed to nd someone to feed to the champ they nally settled on the colorless but homespun and honest governor of the sunower state of kansas alfred m landon.
landon himself was a moderate who accepted some new deal reforms although not the popular social security act.
but the republican platform vigorously condemned the new deal of franklin decit roosevelt for its radicalism experimentation confusion and frightful waste backing landon ex president hoover called for a holy crusade for liberty echoing the cry of the american liberty league a group of wealthy conservatives who had orga nized in 1934 to ght socialistic new deal schemes.
roosevelt gave as good as he got.
angry enough to stretch sheet iron the president took to the stump and denounced the economic royalists who sought to hide behind the ag and the constitution i welcome their hatred he proclaimed.
a landslide overwhelmed landon as the demoralized republicans carried only two states maine and vermont.
this dismal showing caused political wiseacres to make the old adage read as maine goes so goes vermont the popular vote was 27 752 869 to 16 674 665 the electoral count was 523 to 8 the most lopsided in 116 years.
a good humored newspaper columnist quipped if landon had given one more speech roosevelt would have carried canada too democratic majorities riding in on roosevelts magic coattails were again returned to congress.
jubilant democrats could now claim more than two thirds of the seats in the house and a like proportion in the senate.
the battle of 1936 perhaps the most bitter since bryans defeat in 1896 partially bore out republican charges of class warfare.
even more than in 1932 the needy economic groups were lined up against the socalled greedy economic groups.
cio units contributed generously to fdrs campaign chest.
many left wingers turned to roosevelt as the customary third party protest vote sharply declined.
blacks several million of whom had also appreciated welcome relief checks had maine which traditionally held its state elections in september was long regarded as a political weathervane hence the expression as maine goes so goes the nation three days before the 1936 election roosevelt took the moral high ground in his speech at new yorks madison square garden i should like to have it said of my rst administration that in it the forces of selshness and of lust for power met their match.
i should like to have it said of my second administration that in it these forces met their master.
by now largely shaken off their traditional allegiance to the republican party.
to them lincoln was nally dead fdr won primarily because he appealed to the forgotten man whom he never forgot.
some of the presidents support was only pocketbook deep reliefers were not going to bite the hand that doled out the government checks.
no one as al smith remarked shoots at santa claus but roosevelt in fact had forged a powerful and enduring coalition of the south blacks urbanites and the poor.
he proved especially effective in marshaling the support of the multitudes of new immigrants mostly the catholics and jews who had swarmed into the great cities since the turn of the century.
these once scorned newcomers with their now numerous sons and daughters had at last come politically of age.
in the 1920s one out of every twentyve federal judgeships went to a catholic roosevelt appointed catholics to one out of every four.
nine old men on the bench bowing his head to the sleety blasts roosevelt took the presidential oath on january 20 1937 instead of the traditional march 4 the twentieth amendment to the constitution had been ratied in 1933.
see the appendix.
it swept away the postelection lame duck session of congress and shortened by six weeks the awkward period before inauguration.
flushed with victory roosevelt interpreted his reelection as a mandate to continue new deal reforms.
but in his eyes the cloistered old men on the supreme bench like fossilized stumbling blocks stood stubbornly in the pathway of progress.
in nine major cases involving the new deal the roosevelt administration the court packing controversy had been thwarted seven times.
the court was ultraconser vative and six of the nine oldsters in black were over seventy.
as luck would have it not a single member had been appointed by fdr in his rst term.
roosevelt his dutch up viewed with mounting impatience what he regarded as the obstructive conservatism of the court.
some of these old guard appointees were hanging on with a senile grip partly because they felt it their patriotic duty to curb the socialistic tendencies of that radical in the white house.
roosevelt believed that the voters in three successive elections the presidential elections of 1932 and 1936 and the midterm congressional elections of 1934 had returned a smashing verdict in favor of his program of reform.
democracy in his view meant rule by the people.
if the american way of life was to be preserved roosevelt argued the supreme court ought to get in line with the supreme court of public opinion.
roosevelt nally hit upon a court scheme that he regarded as the answer to a maidens prayer in fact it proved to be one of the most costly political misjudgments of his career.
when he sprang his brainstorm on a shocked nation early in 1937 he caught the country and congress completely by surprise.
roosevelt bluntly asked congress for legislation to permit him to add a new justice to the supreme court for every member over seventy who would not retire.
the maximum membership could then be fteen.
roosevelt pointed to the necessity of injecting vigorous new blood for the court he alleged was far behind in its work.
this charge which turned out to be false brought heated accusations of dishonesty.
at best roosevelt was headstrong and not fully aware of the fact that the court in popular thinking had become something of a sacred cow.
the court changes course congress and the nation were promptly convulsed over roosevelts court packing plan to expand the supreme court.
franklin double crossing roosevelt was vilied for attempting to break down the delicate checks and balances among the three branches of the government.
he was accused of grooming himself as a dictator by trying to browbeat the judiciary.
in the eyes of countless citizens mostly republicans but including many democrats basic liberties seemed to be in jeopardy.
god bless the supreme court was a fervent prayer.
the response to roosevelts court packing plan 1937 even the democratic donkey kicked up a storm in opposition to president roosevelts plan to expand the supreme court to as many as fteen judges.
chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 yet formidable obstacles lay in the path of southern industrialization.
one was the paper barrier of regional rate setting systems imposed by the northerndominated railroad interests.
railroads gave preferential rates to manufactured goods moving southward from the north but in the opposite direction they discriminated in favor of southern raw materials.
the net effect was to keep the south in a kind of servitude to the northeast as a supplier of raw materials to the manufacturing metropolis unable to develop a substantial industrial base of its own.
a bitter example of this economic discrimination against the south was the pittsburgh plus pricing system in the steel industry.
rich deposits of coal and iron ore near birmingham alabama worked by lowwage southern labor should have given steel manufacturers there a competitive edge especially in southern markets.
but the steel lords of pittsburgh brought pressure to bear on the compliant railroads.
as a result birmingham steel no matter where it was delivered was charged a ctional fee as if it had been shipped from pittsburgh.
this stunting of the souths natural economic advantages throttled the growth of the birmingham steel industry.
in manufacturing cotton textiles the south fared considerably better.
southerners had long resented shipping their ber to new eng land and now their cry was bring the mills to the cotton beginning about 1880 northern capitalists began to erect cotton mills in the south largely in response to tax benets and the prospect of cheap and nonunionized labor see figure 24 2 and figure 24 3.
henry w grady 1851 1889 editor of the atlanta constitution urged the new south to industrialize.
in a boston speech in 1889 he described the burial in georgia of a confederate veteran the south didnt furnish a thing on earth for that funeral but the corpse and the hole in the ground.
they buried him in a new york coat and a boston pair of shoes and a pair of breeches from chicago and a shirt from cincinnati leaving him nothing to carry into the next world with him to remind him of the country in which he lived and for which he fought for four years but the chill of blood in his veins and the marrow in his bones.
such generosity to trinity college near his birthplace in durham north carolina that the trustees gratefully changed its name to duke university.
industrialists tried to coax the agricultural south out of the elds and into the factories but with only modest success.
the region remained overwhelmingly rural.
prominent among the boosters of a new south was silver tongued henry w grady editor of the atlanta constitution.
he tirelessly exhorted the exconfederates to become georgia yankees and outplay the north at the commercial and industrial game.
spindles in cotton states by thousands spindles in new england by thousands 8 632 figure 24 2 cotton manufacturing moves south 1880 1980 textile manufacturing usually looms large in the early stages of industrial development.
in the later stages it gives way to higher technology businesses.
this trend can be seen here both in the migration of textile manufacturing to the southern united states and in the decline in the number of spindles in the united states as a whole since the 1930s as developing third world countries became major textile producers.
10 934 13 171 15 735 18 287 11 351 5 279 3 739 1 570 4 368 10 494 15 231 18 586 17 641 17 673 16 795 daily life in industrial america world cotton production 1903 bales of approx.
500 lbs in thousands other 5 801 the impact of the new industrial revolution on america china 7 1 200 russia 2 342 egypt 7 1 168 india 19 3 367 america 60 10 758 total 17 636 figure 24 3 world cotton production 1903 cotton manufacturing grew in the united states in the early twentieth century and raw cotton production reached higher levels than anywhere else in the world.
source john a todd the worlds cotton crops london a.
c black 1915 395 396.
the textile mills proved to be a mixed blessing to the economically blighted south.
they slowly wove an industrial thread into the fabric of southern life but at a considerable human cost.
cheap labor was the souths major attraction for potential investors and keeping labor cheap became almost a religion among southern industrialists.
the mills took root in the chronically depressed piedmont region of southern appalachia and came to dominate utterly the communities in which they were located.
rural southerners virtually all of them white for blacks were excluded from all but the most menial jobs in the mills poured out of the hills and hollows to seek employment in the hastily erected company mill towns.
entire families often derided as hillbillies or lintheads worked from dawn to dusk amid the whirring spindles.
they were paid at half the rate of their northern counterparts and often received their compensation in the form of credit at a company store to which they were habitually in debt.
but despite their depressed working conditions and poor pay many southerners saw employment in the mills as a salvation the rst steady jobs and wages they had ever known.
with many mills anxious to tap the cheap labor of women and children mill work often offered destitute farm fugitive families their only chance to remain together.
economic miracles wrought during the decades after the civil war enormously increased the wealth of the republic.
the standard of living rose sharply and wellfed american workers enjoyed more physical com forts than their counterparts in any other industrial nation.
urban centers mushroomed as the insatiable factories demanded more american labor and as immigrants swarmed like honeybees to the new jobs see map 24 2 and makers of america the poles pp.
early jeffersonian ideals were withering before the smudgy blasts from the smokestacks.
as agriculture declined in relation to manufacturing america could no longer aspire to be a nation of small freehold farms.
jeffersons concepts of free enterprise with neither help nor hindrance from washington were being thrown out the factory window.
tariffs had already provided assistance but the long arm of federal authority was now committed to decades of corporation curbing and trust busting older ways of life also wilted in the heat of the factory furnaces.
the very concept of time was revolutionized.
rural american migrants and peasant european immigrants used to living by the languid clock of nature now had to regiment their lives by the factory whistle.
the seemingly arbitrary discipline of industrial labor did not come easily and sometimes had to be forcibly taught.
one large corporation simultaneously instructed its polish immigrant workers in the eng lish language and in the obligations of factory work schedules i hear the whistle.
i must hurry.
i hear the ve minute whistle.
it is time to go into the shop.
i change my clothes and get ready to work.
the starting whistle blows.
i eat my lunch.
it is forbidden to eat until then.
i work until the whistle blows to quit.
i leave my place nice and clean.
i put all my clothes in the locker.
i must go home.
probably no single group was more profoundly affected by the new industrial age than women.
propelled into industry by recent inventions chiey the typewriter and the telephone switchboard millions of ag cu montana territory au au ag nevada c cu cu au california ag utah territory c colorado au ag cu o o pac i f ic ocean o arizona territory cu cu cu au ag cu 120w new mexico territory 30n o o o 110w products manufactured in 20 largest cities o texas o m exico o miss.
o o fe alabama n h rochester n y buffalo conn ocean 400 km.
florida o 100w mass.
gulf of mexico 90w n 80w natural resources iron and steel ag silver o oil petroleum printing and publishing au gold pb lead slaughtering and meatpacking c coal textiles cu copper mixed or other fe iron ore timber timber 20n states with 25 or more of employees in manufacturing map 24 2 american industry in 1900 by the end of the nineteenth century once rural america boasted the worlds largest industrial output a development with enormous consequences for politics diplomacy and family life.
stenographers and hello girls discovered new economic and social opportunities.
the gibson girl a magazine image of an independent and athletic new woman created in the 1890s by the artist charles dana gibson became the romantic ideal of the age.
for middle class women careers often meant delayed marriages and smaller families.
most women workers however toiled neither for independence nor for glamour but out of economic necessity.
they faced the same long hours and dangerous working conditions as did their mates and brothers and they earned less as wages for womens jobs were usually set below those for mens.
women canning shrimp 1893 long hours low pay and wretched working conditions were the common fate of women who labored not for pin money but to help support their families.
the family wage for the workingman was more a hope than a reality.
vt ontario georgia louisiana o o food beverage and tobacco processing mich detroit c o o flour milling foundry and machine shop products wisconsin o clothing xxx l boston providence r i o e milwaukee eri c new york l o iowa chicago pa cleveland brooklyn n j c nebraska o pittsburgh philadelphia ind.
c c ohio c c del.
illinois cincinnati c 70w md.
c c c w baltimore va kansas va c c st louis c c louisville c c o c missouri ky c n c o c tennessee o indian arkansas at l a n t i c s c territory minneapolis xxx wyoming territory maine l newark n uro au 40n san francisco dakota territory idaho territory jersey city p l su erior fe cu timber timb fe minn er h tim be r oregon canada l michigan tim be r washington territory ag pb cu interactive map examining the evidence the photography of lewis w hine he pell mell onrush of industrialization after the civil war spawned countless human abuses few more objectionable than the employment of children often in hazardous jobs.
for decades reformers tried to arouse public outrage against child labor and they made signicant headway at last with the help of photography especially the photographs of lewis w hine 1874 1940.
a native of wisconsin hine in 1908 became the staff photographer for the national child labor committee an orga ni zation committed to ending child labor.
this 1909 photo of young doffers whose job it was to remove fully wound bobbins from textile spinning machines is typical of hines work.
he shows the boys climbing dangerously on the whirling mechanism and his own caption for the photo names the mill bibb mill no.
1 macon georgia but not the boys as if to underline the impersonal dehumanizing nature of their work and the specic responsibilities of their employer.
his other subjects included child workers on colorado beet farms in pennsylvania coal mines and gulf coast sh canneries and in the glass tobacco and garment trades.
hines images contributed heavily to the eventual success of the campaign to end child labor in the new deal era.
he is also celebrated as one of the fathers of documentary photography.
why might hines graphic im t the clattering machine age likewise accentuated class division.
industrial buccaneers aunted bloated fortunes and their rags to riches spouses displayed glittering diamonds.
such extravagances evoked bitter criticism.
some of it was envious but much of it rose from a small but increasingly vocal group of socialists and other radicals many of whom were recent european immigrants.
the existence of an oligarchy of money was amply demonstrated by the fact that in 1900 about one tenth of the people owned nine tenths of the nations wealth.
ages have succeeded in stirring public opinion more powerfully than factual and statistical demonstrations of the evil of child labor.
given hines own reform objectives can his photographs or any socalled documentary images be taken at face value as literal accurate information about the past.
a nation of farmers and independent producers was becoming a nation of wage earners.
in 1860 half of all workers were self employed by the centurys end two of every three working americans depended on wages.
real wages were rising and times were good for workers who were working.
but with dependence on wages came vulnerability to the swings of the economy and the whims of the employer.
the fear of unemployment was never distant.
a breadwinners illness could mean catastrophe for an entire family.
nothing more sharply dened the growing difference between chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 st petersburg 502 000 1 439 000 moscow 373 000 e u r op e 1 120 000 vienna 426 000 1 662 000 arctic circle 60n london 2 320 000 6 480 000 north america chicago 29 963 1 717 000 los angeles 1 610 107 000 30n tropic of cancer berlin 446 000 2 424 000 paris 1 314 000 3 330 000 new york 682 000 4 242 000 mexico city 170 000 344 000 at l a n t i c ocean o c e an 1 500 3 000 mi.
500 000 to 1 000 000 1 to 2 million n buenos aires 74 000 806 000 3 000 km.
city population under 100 000 so paulo 205 000 30s ocean 100 000 to 500 000 tropic of capricorn 1 500 120e 90e indian south america shanghai 250 000 837 000 calcutta 413 000 1 085 000 lagos 25 000 40 000 pac i f ic tokyo 567 000 1 497 000 beijing 1 648 000 1 100 000 bombay 575 000 780 000 africa 0 equator asi a 2 to 3 million 3 to 5 million over 6 million 150w 120w 90w 60w 30w 0 30e 60e 60s 413 000 population 1 085 000 map 25 1 size of world cities since 1850 sources united nations world urbanization prospects the 2005 revision tertius chandler and gerald fox 3000 years of urban growth new york academic press 1974 u s census spencer h brown public health in lagos 1850 1900 perceptions patterns and perspectives international journal of african historical studies 25 no.
1992 345 josephine olu abiodun the challenges of growth and development in metropolitan lagos in the urban challenge in africa growth and management of its large cities ed.
carole rakodi new york united nations university press 1997 193 195 united nations demographic yearbook.
rst as a ten story building in chicago in 1885 the skyscraper was made usable by the perfecting of the electric elevator.
an opinionated chicago architect louis sullivan 1856 1924 contributed formidably to the further development of the skyscraper with his famous principle that form follows function nesting loftily above city streets in the new steel skeleton high rises that sullivan helped to make popular many americans were becoming modern cliff dwellers.
americans were also becoming commuters carted daily between home and job on the mass transit lines that radiated out from central cities to surrounding suburbs.
electric trolleys powered by wagging antennae from overhead wires propelled city limits explosively outward.
by the end of the century the nations rst subway opened in boston london had led the way interactive map by building a subway as early as 1863 the compact and communal walking city its boundaries xed by the limits of leg power gave way to the immense and impersonal megalopolis carved into distinctly different districts for business industry and residential neighborhoods which were in turn segregated by race ethnicity and social class.
rural life could not compete with the siren song of the city see figure 25 1.
industrial jobs above all drew people off farms in america as well as abroad and into factory centers.
but the urban lifestyle also held powerful attractions.
the predawn milking of cows had little appeal when compared with the late night glitter of city lights particularly alluring to young adults yearning for independence.
electricity indoor plumbing and telephones whose numbers leapt from the growth of cities lower broadway 1875 horses still abounded in new york and other cities when this lithograph was made but they would soon be displaced by street railways and automobiles.
some 50 000 in 1880 to over 1 million in 1900 all made life in the big city more enticing.
engineering marvels like the skyscraper and new yorks awesome brooklyn bridge a harplike suspension span dedicated in 1883 further added to the seductive glamour of the gleaming cities.
cavernous department stores such as macys in new york and marshall fields in chicago attracted urban middle class shoppers and provided urban workingclass jobs many of them for women.
the bustling emporiums also heralded a dawning era of consumerism and accentuated widening class divisions.
when carrie meeber novelist theodore dreisers ctional heroine in sister carrie 1900 escapes from rural boredom to chicago just before the turn of the century it is the spectacle of the citys dazzling department stores that awakens her fateful yearning for a richer more elegant way of life for entry into the privileged urban middle class whose existence she had scarcely imagined in the rustic countryside.
the move to the city introduced americans to new ways of living.
country dwellers produced little household waste.
domestic animals or scavenging pigs ate food scraps on the farm.
rural women mended and darned worn clothing rather than discard it.
household products were sold in bulk at the local store without wrapping.
mail order houses such as sears and montgomery ward which increasingly displaced the rural general store in the late nineteenth century at rst did not list trash barrels or garbage cans in their catalogues.
in the city however goods came in throwaway bottles boxes bags and cans.
apartment houses had no adjoining barnyards where residents might toss garbage to the hogs.
cheap ready to wear clothing and swiftly changing fashions pushed old suits and dresses out of the closet and onto the trash heap.
waste disposal in short was an issue new to the urban age.
and the mountains of waste that urbanites generated further testied to a cultural shift away from the virtues of thrift to the conveniences of consumerism.
chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 driven from every other corner of the earth freedom of thought and the right of private judgment in matters of conscience direct their course to this happy country as their last asylum.
t he common term thirteen original colonies is misleading.
britain ruled thirty two colonies in north america by 1775 including canada the floridas and various caribbean islands.
but only thirteen of them unfurled the standard of rebellion.
a few of the nonrebels such as canada and jamaica were larger wealthier or more populous than some of the revolting thirteen.
why then did some british colonies eventually strike for their independence while others did not.
part of the answer is to be found in the distinctive social economic and political structures of the thirteen atlantic seaboard colonies and in the halting gradual appearance of a recognizably american way of life.
conquest by the cradle among the distinguishing characteristics that the eventually rebellious settlements shared was lusty population growth.
in 1700 they contained fewer than 300 000 souls about 20 000 of whom were black.
by 1775 2 5 million people inhabited the thirteen colonies of whom about half a million were black.
white immigrants made up nearly 400 000 of the increased number and black forced immigrants accounted for almost as many again.
but most of the spurt stemmed from the remarkable natural fertility of all americans white and black.
to the amazement and dismay of europeans the colonists were doubling their numbers every twenty ve years.
unfriendly dr samuel johnson back in eng land growled that the americans were multiplying like their own rattlesnakes.
they were also a youthful people whose average age in 1775 was about sixteen.
this population boom had political consequences.
in 1700 there were twenty eng lish subjects for each american colonist.
by 1775 the eng lish advantage in numbers had fallen to three to one setting the stage for a momentous shift in the balance of power between the colonies and britain.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website immigration to the colonies ce r en st l aw abenaki maine mass.
n h 200 mi.
new york de er i e l pennsylvania n 70w new york n j hi o sh aw ne e or.
mo un tai ns philadelphia n md.
r i newport conn la se mass.
ra ario tu wa sca ro re nt l o a mingling of the races del.
virginia to philadelphia germans scots irish to the chesapeake africans british convicts at l a n t i c oc ean ta ch north carolina ca ero ap kee pal ach ian n 35 w ba south carolina to charleston africans germans charleston scots irish scots cr colonial america was a melting pot and had been from the outset.
the population although basically eng lish in stock and language was picturesquely mottled with numerous foreign groups see map 5 1.
heavy accented germans constituted about 6 percent of the total population or 150 000 by 1775 fleeing religious persecution economic oppression and the ravages of war they had ocked to america in the early 1700s and had settled chiey in pennsylvania.
they belonged to several different protestant sects primarily lutheran and thus further enhanced the religious diversity of the colony.
known popularly but erroneously as the pennsylvania dutch a corruption of the german word deutsch for german they totaled about onethird of the colonys population.
in parts of philadelphia the street signs were painted in both german and eng lish.
these german newcomers moved into the backcountry of pennsylvania where their splendid stone barns gave and still give mute evidence of industry and prosperity.
not having been brought up eng lish they had no deep rooted loyalty to the british crown and they clung tenaciously to their german language and customs.
the scots irish who in 1775 numbered around 175 000 or 7 percent of the population were an important non eng lish group although they spoke eng lish.
they were not irish at all but turbulent scots lowlanders.
over many decades they had been transplanted to northern ireland where they had not prospered.
the irish catholics already there hating scottish presbyterianism resented the intruders and still do the source of many of the modern day troubles in the northern ireland province of ulster.
the economic life of the scots irish was severely hampered especially when the eng lish government placed burdensome restrictions on their production of linens and woolens.
n r ne ca ca yu on ga on on dag ei a mo da ha wk the bulk of the population was cooped up east of the alleghenies although by 1775 a vanguard of pioneers had trickled into the stump studded clearings of tennessee and kentucky.
the most populous colonies in 1775 were virginia massachusetts pennsylvania north carolina and maryland in that order.
only four communities could properly be called cities philadelphia including suburbs was rst with about 34 000 residents trailed by new york boston and charleston.
about 90 percent of the people lived in rural areas.
ee k 80w georgia savannah creek indian lands 30n 75w predominant immigrant group african scots irish dutch english and welsh german scottish no european settlement map 5 1 immigrant groups in 1775 america was already a nation of diverse nationalities in the colonial period.
this map shows the great variety of immigrant groups especially in pennsylvania and new york.
it also illustrates the tendency of later arrivals particularly the scots irish to push into the backcountry.
interactive map chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 while she drilled the fuselage of a heavy bomber or joined the links of a tank track.
when the war ended rosie and many of her sisters were in no hurry to put down their tools.
they wanted to keep on working and often did.
the war thus foreshadowed an eventual revolution in the roles of women in american society.
yet the wars immediate impact on womens lives has frequently been exaggerated.
the great majority of american women especially those with husbands present in the home or with small children to care for did not work for wages in the wartime economy but continued in their traditional roles.
in both britain and the soviet union a far greater percentage of women including mothers were pressed into industrial employment as the gods of war laid a much heavier hand on those societies than they did on the united states.
a poll in 1943 revealed that a majority of american women would not take a job in a war plant if it were offered.
at wars end two thirds of women war workers left the labor force.
many of them were forced out of their jobs by employers and unions eager to reemploy returning ser vicemen.
but half of them told census takers that they quit their jobs voluntarily because of family obligations.
the immediate postwar period witnessed not a permanent widening of womens employment opportunities but a widespread rush into suburban domesticity and the mothering of the baby boomers who were born by the tens of millions in the decade and a half after 1945 america was destined to experience a thoroughgoing revolution in womens status later in the postwar period but that epochal change was only beginning to gather momentum in the war years.
6 billion of federally nanced industrial facilities.
here were the seeds of the postwar blossoming of the sunbelt see map 35 1.
despite this economic stimulus in the south some 1 6 million blacks left the land of their ancient enslavement to seek jobs in the war plants of the west and north.
forever after race relations constituted a national not a regional issue.
explosive tensions developed over employment housing and segregated facilities.
black leader a philip randolph head of the brotherhood of sleeping car porters threatened a massive negro march on washington in 1941 to demand wartime migrations the war also proved to be a demographic cauldron churning and shifting the american population.
many of the 15 million men and women in uniform having seen new sights and glimpsed new horizons chose not to go home again at wars end.
war industries sucked people into boomtowns like los angeles detroit seattle and baton rouge.
cal i fornias population grew by nearly 2 million.
the south experienced especially dramatic changes.
franklin roosevelt had called the south the nations number one economic problem in 1938 when war came he seized the opportunity to accelerate the regions economic development.
the states of the old confederacy received a disproportionate share of defense contracts including nearly segregation in the military a white ofcer reviews the 99th pursuit squadron the famed tuskegee airmen they ew more than sixteen hundred ghtersupport missions in north africa and compiled an outstanding record never losing a bomber to enemy aircraft.
but these iers were among the few african americans who saw combat duty in world war ii when a still strictly segregated military assigned most blacks to construction longshoreman and mess hall service.
population shifts equal opportunities for blacks in war jobs and in the armed forces.
roosevelts response was to issue an executive order forbidding discrimination in defense industries.
in addition the president established the fair employment practices commission fepc to monitor compliance with his edict.
blacks were also drafted into the armed forces though they were still generally assigned to ser vice branches rather than combat units and subjected to petty degradations such as segregated blood banks for the wounded.
but in general the war helped to embolden blacks in their long struggle for equality.
they rallied behind the slogan double v victory over the dictators abroad and over racism at home.
membership in the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp shot up almost to the half million mark and a new 0 north west why is it we negro soldiers who are as much a part of uncle sams great military machine as any cannot be treated with equality and the respect due us.
the same respect which white soldiers expect and demand from us.
there is great need for drastic change in this mans army.
how can we be trained to protect america which is called a free nation when all around us rears the ugly head of segregation.
detroit new york washington d c denver 64 0 0 0 san francisco an african american soldier angrily complained about segregation in the armed forces during world war ii 910 000 000 los angeles san diego 0 memphis 00 south fort worth dallas average population increase of fast growing cities 1940 1950 baton rouge mobile houston over 400 000 200 000 400 000 100 000 200 000 50 000 100 000 map 35 1 internal migration in the united states during world war ii few events in american history have moved the american people about so massively as world war ii.
the west and the south boomed and several warindustry cities grew explosively.
a majority of migrants from the south were blacks 1 6 million african americans left the region in the 1940s.
source united states department of labor bureau of labor statistics.
interactive map chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 180 160w 140w 120w 100w 20w 40w 60w 80w newfoundland hudson bay n nova scotia port 0n royal 4 qubec montral missouri r.
m ip iss iss pi r.
acadia which the british renamed nova scotia or new scotland and the wintry wastes of newfoundland and hudson bay.
these immense tracts pinched the st lawrence settlements of france foreshadowing their ultimate doom.
a generation of peace ensued during which britain provided its american colonies with decades of salutary neglect fertile soil for the roots of independence.
by the treaty of 1713 the british also won limited trading rights in spanish america but these later involved much friction over smuggling.
ill feeling ared up when the british captain robert jenkins encountering spanish revenue authorities had one ear sliced off by a sword.
the spanish commander reportedly sneered carry this home to the king your master whom if he were present i would serve in like fashion the victim with a tale of woe on his tongue and a shriveled ear in his hand aroused furious resentment when he returned home to britain.
the war of jenkinss ear curiously but aptly named broke out in 1739 between the british and the spaniards.
it was con ned to the caribbean sea and to the much buffeted buffer colony of georgia where philanthropist soldier james oglethorpe fought his spanish foe to a standstill.
this small scale scufe with spain in america soon merged with the large scale war of austrian succession in europe see table 6 2 and came to be called king georges war in america.
once again france allied itself with spain.
and once again a rustic force of new eng landers invaded new france.
with help from a british eet and with a great deal of good luck the raw and sometimes drunken recruits captured the reputedly impregnable french fortress of louisbourg which was on cape breton island and commanded the approaches to the st lawrence river see map 6 3 on p 113.
when the peace treaty of 1748 handed louisbourg back to their french foe the victorious new eng landers n r io oh atlantic ocean pacific ocean g ul f of me x i co n 20 jamaica territorial claims gr.
c a rib b e a n sea british french spanish 500 1000 km.
map 6 4 north america after two wars 1713 interactive map were outraged.
the glory of their arms never terribly lustrous in any event seemed tarnished by the wiles of old world diplomats.
worse louisbourg was still a cocked pistol pointed at the heart of the american continent.
france powerful and unappeased still clung to its vast holdings in north america.
table 6 2 the nine world wars dates in europe in america 1688 1697 1701 1713 1740 1748 1756 1763 1778 1783 1793 1802 1803 1815 1914 1918 1939 1945 war of the league of augsburg war of spanish succession war of austrian succession seven years war war of the american revolution wars of the french revolution napoleonic wars world war i world war ii king williams war 1689 1697 queen annes war 1702 1713 king georges war 1744 1748 french and indian war 1754 1763 american revolution 1775 1783 undeclared french war 1798 1800 war of 1812 1812 1814 world war i 1917 1918 world war ii 1941 1945 the french indian showdown new englanders capture louisbourg 1745 when the nal peace settlement of 1748 returned this fortress to france the american colonists felt betrayed by their british masters.
george washington inaugurates war with france as the dogght intensied in the new world the ohio valley became the chief bone of contention between the french and british.
the ohio country was the critical area into which the westward pushing british colonists would inevitably penetrate.
for france it was also the key to the continent that the french had to retain particularly if they were going to link their canadian holdings with those of the lower mississippi valley.
by the mid 1700s the british colonists painfully aware of these basic truths were no longer so reluctant to bear the burdens of empire.
alarmed by french landgrabbing and cutthroat fur trade competition in the ohio valley they were determined to ght for their economic security and for the supremacy of their way of life in north america.
rivalry for the lush lands of the upper ohio valley brought tensions to the snapping point.
in 1749 a group of british colonial speculators chiey inuential virginians including the washington family had secured shaky legal rights to some 500 000 acres in this region.
in the same disputed wilderness the french were in the process of erecting a chain of forts commanding the strategic ohio river.
especially formidable was fort duquesne at the pivotal point where the monongahela and allegheny rivers join to form the ohio the later site of pittsburgh.
in 1754 the governor of virginia ushered george washington a twenty one year old surveyor and fellow virginian onto the stage of history.
to secure the virginians claims washington was sent to the ohio country as a lieutenant colonel in command of about 150 virginia militiamen.
encountering a small detachment of french troops in the forest about forty miles from fort duquesne see map 6 5 the virginians red the rst shots of the globe girdling new war.
the french leader was killed and his men retreated.
an exultant washington wrote i heard the bullets whistle and believe me there is something charming in the sound it soon lost its charm.
chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 prohibiting alcohol and promoting reform alarming gains by demon rum spurred the temperance reformers to redoubled zeal.
especially obnoxious to them was the shutter doored corner saloon appropriately called the poor mans club the barroom helped keep both him and his family poor.
liquor consumption had increased during the nerve racking days of the civil war and immigrant groups accustomed to alcohol in the old country were hostile to restraints.
whiskey loving foreigners in boston would rudely hiss temperance lecturers.
many tipplers charged with some accuracy that temperance reform amounted to a middle class assault on working class lifestyles.
the national prohibition party orga nized in 1869 polled a sprinkling of votes in some of the ensuing presidential elections.
among the favorite songs of these sober souls were ill marry no man if he drinks vote down the vile trafc and the drunkards doom typical was this now all young men a warning take and shun the poisoned bowl twill lead you down to hells dark gate and ruin your own soul.
ida b wells 1862 1931 in 1892 wells spearheaded a protest against the heinous lynching of three respected black businessmen in memphis.
faced with threats on her life wells ed from the south persevering with her tenacious antilynching campaign from the north and from england see below or p 626.
nation to grant women equal suffrage rights further inspiring american reformers.
the reborn suffrage movement and other womens orga ni zations largely excluded black women from their ranks.
fearful that an integrated campaign would compromise its efforts to get the vote the national american woman suffrage association limited membership to whites.
black women however created their own associations.
journalist and teacher ida b wells inspired black women to mount a nationwide antilynching crusade.
she also helped launch the black womens club movement which culminated in the establishment of the national association of colored women in 1896 militant women entered the alcoholic arena notably when the womans christian temperance union wctu was orga nized in 1874 the white ribbon was its symbol of purity the saintly frances e willard also a champion of planned parenthood was its leading spirit.
less saintly was the muscular and mentally deranged kansas cyclone carrie a nation whose rst husband had died of alcoholism.
with her hatchet she boldly smashed saloon bottles and bars and her hatchetations brought considerable disrepute to the prohibition movement because of the violence of her one woman crusade.
but rum was now on the run.
the potent anti saloon league was formed in 1893 with its members singing the saloon must go and vote for cold water boys female supporters sang the lips that touch liquor must never touch mine statewide prohibition which had made surprising gains in maine and elsewhere before the civil war was sweeping new states into the dry column.
the great triumph but only a temporary one came in 1919 when the national prohibition amendment eighteenth was attached to the constitution.
the prohibition crusade doused for the cause minnesota 1878 these umbrella toting temperance crusaders stood their ground despite the water poured on them by the indignant wife of the billiard hall owner.
artistic triumphs carrie nation advertised as a lecturer nation took her antidrink crusade to several universities including harvard and yale which she denounced as hellholes predictably the students greeted her with wild burlesque.
all nations welcome but carrie became a standard saying in saloons throughout the land.
banners of other social crusaders were aloft.
the american society for the prevention of cruelty to animals aspca was created in 1866 after its founder had witnessed brutality to horses in russia.
the american red cross was launched in 1881 with the dynamic and diminutive ve foot tall clara barton the angel of civil war battleelds at the helm.
john adams had anticipated that his generations preoccupation with nation building would allow art to ourish in the future but the results long proved unspectacular.
portrait painting continued to appeal as it had since the colonial era but many of americas nest painters made their living abroad.
james whistler 1834 1903 did much of his work including the celebrated portrait of his mother in eng land.
this eccentric and quarrelsome massachusetts yankee had earlier been dropped from west point after failing chemistry.
had silicon been a gas he later jested i would have been a major general another gifted portrait painter likewise self exiled in eng land was john singer sargent 1856 1925.
his attering but somewhat supercial likenesses of the british nobility were highly prized.
mary cassatt an american in exile in paris painted sensitive portrayals of women and children that earned her a place in the pantheon of the french impressionist painters whose work revolutionized the european art world after their 1874 debut.
other brush wielders no less talented brightened the artistic horizon.
self taught george inness 1825 chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the road to revolution 1763 1775 the revolution was effected before the war commenced.
the revolution was in the minds and hearts of the people.
john adams 1818 v ictory in the seven years war made britain the master of a vastly enlarged imperial domain in north america.
but victory including the subsequent need to garrison ten thousand troops along the sprawling american frontier was painfully costly.
the london government therefore struggled after 1763 to compel the american colonists to shoulder some of the nancial costs of empire.
this change in british colonial policy reinforced an emerging sense of american political identity and helped to precipitate the american revolution.
the eventual con ict was by no means inevitable.
indeed given the tightening commercial military and cultural bonds between colonies and mother country since the rst crude settlements a century and a half earlier it might be considered remarkable that the revolution happened at all.
the truth is that americans were reluctant revolutionaries.
until late in the day they sought only to claim the rights of eng lishmen not to separate from the mother country.
but what began as a squabble about economic policies soon exposed irreconcilable differences between americans and britons over cherished political principles.
the ensuing clash gave birth to a new nation.
the deep roots of revolution in a broad sense america was a revolutionary force from the day of its discovery by europeans.
the new world nurtured new ideas about the nature of society citizen and government.
in the old world many humble folk had long lived in the shadow of graveyards that contained the bones of their ancestors for a thousand years past.
few people born into such changeless surroundings dared to question their social status.
but european immigrants in the new world were not so easily subdued by the scowl of their superiors.
in the american wilderness they encountered a world that was theirs to make afresh.
two ideas in particular had taken root in the minds of the american colonists by the mid eighteenth century one was what historians call republicanism.
looking to the models of the ancient greek and roman this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website new ideas in the new world republics exponents of republicanism de ned a just society as one in which all citizens willingly subordinated their private selsh interests to the common good.
both the stability of society and the authority of government thus depended on the virtue of the citizenry its capacity for selessness self sufciency and courage and especially its appetite for civic involvement.
by its very nature republicanism was opposed to hierarchical and authoritarian institutions such as aristocracy and monarchy.
a second idea that fundamentally shaped american political thought derived from a group of british political commentators known as radical whigs.
widely read by the colonists the whigs feared the threat to liberty posed by the arbitrary power of the monarch and his ministers relative to elected representatives in parliament.
the whigs mounted withering attacks on the use of patronage and bribes by the kings ministers symptoms of a wider moral failure in society that they called corruption in the sense of rot or decay.
the whigs warned citizens to be on guard against corruption and to be eternally vigilant against possible conspiracies to denude them of their hardwon liberties.
together republican and whig ideas predisposed the american colonists to be on hairtrigger alert against any threat to their rights.
the circumstances of colonial life had done much to bolster those attitudes.
dukes and princes barons and bishops were unknown in the colonies while property ownership and political participation were relatively accessible.
the americans had also grown accustomed to running their own affairs largely unmolested by remote ofcials in london.
distance weakens authority great distance weakens authority greatly.
so it came as an especially jolting shock when britain after 1763 tried to enclose its american colonists more snugly in its grip.
mercantilism and colonial grievances britains empire was acquired in a t of absentmindedness an old saying goes and there is much truth in the jest.
not one of the original thirteen colonies except georgia was formally planted by the british government.
all the others were haphazardly founded by trading companies religious groups or land speculators.
the british authorities nevertheless embraced a theory called mercantilism that justied their control over the colonies.
mercantilists believed that wealth the female combatants 1776 britain is symbolized as a lady of fashion her rebellious daughter america as an indian princess.
their shields of obedience and liberty seem mutually exclusive standards.
compare this cartoon with the one on p 168 was power and that a countrys economic wealth and hence its military and political power could be mea sured by the amount of gold or silver in its treasury.
to amass gold or silver a country needed to export more than it imported.
possessing colonies thus conferred distinct advantages since the colonies could both supply raw materials to the mother country thereby reducing the need for foreign imports and provide a guaranteed market for exports.
the london government looked on the american colonists more or less as tenants.
they were expected to furnish products needed in the mother country such as tobacco sugar and ships masts to refrain from making for export certain products such as woolen cloth or beaver hats to buy imported manufactured goods exclusively from britain and not to indulge in bothersome dreams of economic self sufciency or worse self government.
from time to time parliament passed laws to regulate the mercantilist system.
the rst of these the navigation law of 1650 was aimed at rival dutch shippers chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 lakotas receiving rations at standing rock reservation ca.
1881 once the scourge of the plains the lakota part of the sioux tribes were reduced by the 1890s to the humiliation of living on government handouts.
native american women the art of sewing and to preach the virtues of chastity and hygiene.
the dawes act struck directly at tribal orga ni zation and tried to make rugged individualists out of the indians.
this legislation ignored the inherent reliance of traditional indian culture on tribally held land liter ally pulling the land out from under them.
by 1900 indians had lost 50 percent of the 156 million acres they had held just two decades earlier see map 26 2.
the forced assimilation doctrine of the dawes act remained the cornerstone of the governments ofcial indian policy for nearly half a century until the indian the indian removal act of 1830 eliminated all indian land rights east of the mississippi river.
the dawes act in 1887 changed common tribal lands into individual allotments.
nearly 90 million acres of tribal land were lost before the act was repealed in 1932 since then through court battles and federal recognition of old claims some indian lands have been restored to the tribes.
indian lands present day boundaries white settlement map 26 2 vanishing lands once masters of the continent native americans have been squeezed into just 2 percent of u s territory.
source copyright 2000 by the new york times.
reprinted by permission.
interactive map the mining and cattle frontiers the indian spokesman plenty coups 1848 1932 said in 1909 i see no longer the curling smoke rising from our lodge poles.
i hear no longer the songs of the women as they prepare the meal.
the antelope have gone the buffalo wallows are empty.
only the wail of the coyote is heard.
the white mans medicine is stronger than ours.
we are like birds with a broken wing.
reorga ni zation act the indian new deal of 1934 partially reversed the individualistic approach and belatedly tried to restore the tribal basis of indian life see p 838.
under these new federal policies defective though they were the indian population started to mount slowly.
the total number had been reduced by 1887 to about 243 000 the result of bullets bottles and bacteria but the census of 2000 counted more than 1 5 million native americans urban and rural.
mining from dishpan to ore breaker the conquest of the indians and the coming of the railroad were life giving boons to the mining frontier.
the golden gravel of cal i fornia continued to yield pay dirt and in 1858 an electrifying discovery convulsed colorado.
avid fty niners or pikes peakers rushed west to rip at the ramparts of the rockies.
but there were more miners than minerals and many goldgrubbers with pikes peak or bust inscribed on the canvas of their covered wagons creaked wearily back with the added inscription busted by gosh yet countless bearded fortune seekers stayed on some to strip away the silver deposits others to extract nonmetallic wealth from the earth in the form of golden grain.
fifty niners also poured feverishly into nevada in 1859 after the fabulous comstock lode had been uncovered.
a fantastic amount of gold and silver worth more than 340 million was mined by the kings of the comstock from 1860 to 1890 the scantily populated state of nevada child of the comstock lode was prematurely railroaded into the union in 1864 partly to provide three electoral votes for president lincoln.
hydraulic mining nevada 1866 once miners had panned and dredged the most accessible gold from streambeds they ripped open the earth itself in search of other deposits.
highpressure streams of water delivered through huge nozzles called monitors washed away entire hillsides and created the nightmarish debris strewn landscapes that still scar western mountains and foothills.
chapter 17 manifest destiny and its legacy 1841 1848 westward the course of empire takes its way this romantic tribute to the spirit of manifest destiny was commissioned by congress in 1860 and may still be seen in the capitol.
character and a slaveowner.
their own candidate polk also owned slaves a classic case of the pot calling the kettle black.
the whigs as noisemakers took no backseat.
they countered with such slogans as hooray for clay and polk slavery and texas or clay union and liberty they also spread the lie that a gang of tennessee slaves had been seen on their way to a southern market branded with the initials j k p james k polk.
on the crucial issue of texas the acrobatic clay tried to ride two horses at once.
the great compromiser appears to have compromised away the presidency when he wrote a series of confusing letters.
they seemed to say that while he personally favored annexing slaveholding texas an appeal to the south he also favored postponement an appeal to the north.
he might have lost more ground if he had not straddled but he certainly alienated the more ardent antislaveryites.
in the stretch drive dark horse polk nipped henry clay at the wire 170 to 105 votes in the electoral college and 1 338 464 to 1 300 097 in the popular column.
clay would have won if he had not lost new york state by a scant 5 000 votes.
there the tiny antislavery liberty party absorbed nearly 16 000 votes many of which would otherwise have gone to the unlucky kentuckian.
ironically the anti texas liberty party by spoiling clays chances and helping to ensure the elec tion of pro texas polk hastened the annexation of texas.
land hungry democrats ushed with victory proclaimed that they had received a mandate from the voters to take texas.
but a presidential election is seldom if ever a clear cut mandate on anything.
the only way to secure a true reection of the voters will is to hold a special election on a given issue.
the picture that emerged in 1844 was one not of mandate but of muddle.
what else could there have been when the results were so close the personalities so colorful and the issues so numerous including oregon texas the tariff slavery the bank and internal improvements.
yet this unclear mandate was interpreted by president tyler as a crystal clear charge to annex texas and he signed the joint resolution three days before leaving the white house.
polk the purposeful young hickory polk unlike old hickory jackson was not an impressive gure.
of middle height ve feet eight inches lean white haired worn long grayeyed and stern faced he took life seriously and drove himself mercilessly into a premature grave.
his burdens were increased by an unwillingness to delegate authority.
methodical and hard working but not bril polk takes command total against 130w 60n 120w 110w focus of dispute by 1846 300 km.
area of original dispute over oregon 300 mi.
alaska russia british north america canada 544 n.
treat y of 1818 mo b i a r oregon un ft country vancouver ta i ore ns a tr il ad a m s n willamette valley go 42n y ri pac i f ic ocean n ck ve u compromise line 1846 r r co 49n ro frase 50n n va liant he was shrewd narrow minded conscientious and persistent.
what he went for he fetched wrote a contemporary.
purposeful in the highest degree he developed a positive four point program and with remarkable success achieved it completely in less than four years.
one of polks goals was a lowered tariff.
his secretary of the treasury wispy robert j walker devised a tariff for revenue bill that reduced the average rates of the tariff of 1842 from about 32 percent to 25 percent.
with the strong support of low tariff southerners the walker tariff bill made its way through congress though not without loud complaints from the clayites especially in new eng land and the middle states who cried that american manufacturing would be ruined see table 17 1.
but these prophets of doom missed the mark.
the walker tariff of 1846 proved to be an excellent revenue producer largely because it was followed by boom times and heavy imports.
a second objective of polk was the restoration of the independent treasury unceremoniously dropped by the whigs in 1841 pro bank whigs in congress raised a storm of opposition but victory at last rewarded the presidents efforts in 1846 the third and fourth points on polks must list were the acquisition of cal i fornia and the settlement of the oregon dispute see map 17 2.
reoccupation of the whole of oregon had been promised northern democrats in the campaign of 1844 but southern democrats once they had annexed texas rapidly cooled off.
polk himself a southerner had no intention of insisting on the 54 40 pledge of his own platform.
but feeling bound by the three offers of his predecessors to london he again proposed the compromise line of 49.
the british minister in washington on his own initiative brusquely spurned this olive branch.
the next move on the oregon chessboard was up to britain.
fortunately for peace the ministry began to experience a change of heart.
british anti expansionists r new eng land middle states west and northwest south and southwest for.
m i s s o u r i r yellow sto ne r united states k e region little eng landers were now persuaded that the columbia river was not after all the st lawrence of the west and that the turbulent american hordes might one day seize the oregon country.
why ght a hazardous war over this wilderness on behalf of an unpopular monopoly the hudsons bay company which had already furred out much of the area anyhow.
early in 1846 the british hat in hand came around and themselves proposed the line of 49.
president polk irked by the previous rebuff threw the decision squarely into the lap of the senate.
the senators speedily accepted the offer and approved the subsequent treaty despite a few diehard shouts of fifty four forty forever and every foot or not an inch the fact that the united states was then a month deep in a war with mexico doubtless inuenced the senates nal vote.
satisfaction with the oregon settlement among amer icans was not unanimous.
the northwestern states hotbed of manifest destiny and fty four fortyism joined the antislavery forces in condemning what they regarded as a base betrayal by the south.
why all colu m table 17 1 house vote on tariff of 1846 ons tr e a t y o f 18 1 sna 40n mexico map 17 2 the oregon controversy 1846 interactive map chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 samuel adams 1722 1803 a second cousin of john adams he contributed a potent pen and tongue to the american revolution as a political agitator and organizer of rebellion.
he was the leading spirit in hosting the boston tea party.
a failure in the brewing business he was sent by massachusetts to the first continental congress of 1774 he signed the declaration of independence and served in congress until 1781 the ill timed townshend acts had failed to produce revenue though they did produce near rebellion.
net proceeds from the tax in one year were a paltry 295 while in that same year britains military costs in the colonies had mounted to 170 000.
nonimportation agreements though feebly enforced were pinching british manufacturers.
the government of lord north bowing to various pressures nally persuaded parliament to repeal the townshend revenue duties.
but the three pence toll on tea the tax the colonists found most offensive was retained to keep alive the principle of parliaments right to tax the colonies.
flames of discontent in america continued to be fanned by numerous incidents including the redoubled efforts of the british ofcials to enforce the nav igation laws.
resistance was further kindled by a master propagandist and engineer of rebellion samuel portrait traditionally said to be that of abigail adams 1744 1818 the wife of revolutionary war leader and future president john adams she was a prominent patriot in her own right.
she was also among the rst americans to see however faintly the implications of revolutionary ideas for changing the status of women.
adams of boston a cousin of john adams.
unimpressive in appearance his hands trembled he lived and breathed only for politics.
his friends had to buy him a presentable suit of clothes when he left massachusetts on intercolonial business.
zealous tenacious and courageous he was ultrasensitive to infractions of colonial rights.
cherishing a deep faith in the common people he appealed effectively to what was called his trained mob samuel adamss signal contribution was to organize in massachusetts the local committees of correspondence.
after he had formed the rst one in boston during 1772 some eighty towns in the colony speedily set up similar orga ni zations.
their chief function was to spread the spirit of resistance by exchanging letters and thus keep alive opposition to british policy.
one critic referred to the committees as the foulest subtlest and most venomous serpent ever issued from the egg of sedition uniting for rebellion intercolonial committees of correspondence were the next logical step.
virginia led the way in 1773 by creating such a body as a standing committee of the house of burgesses.
within a short time every colony had established a central committee through which it could exchange ideas and information with other colonies.
these intercolonial groups were supremely signicant in stimulating and disseminating sentiment in favor of united action.
they evolved directly into the rst american congresses.
tea brewing in boston thus far that is by 1773 nothing had happened to make rebellion inevitable.
nonimportation was weakening.
increasing numbers of colonists were reluctantly paying the tea tax because the legal tea was now cheaper than the smuggled tea even cheaper than tea in eng land.
a new ogre entered the picture in 1773 the powerful british east india company overburdened with 17 million pounds of unsold tea was facing bankruptcy.
if it collapsed the london government would lose heavily in tax revenue.
the ministry therefore decided to assist the company by awarding it a complete monopoly of the american tea business.
the giant corporation would now be able to sell the coveted leaves more cheaply than ever before even with the three pence tax tacked on.
but many american tea drinkers rather than rejoicing at the lower prices cried foul.
they saw this british move as a shabby attempt to trick the americans with the bait of cheaper tea into swallowing the principle of the detested tax.
for the determined americans principle remained far more important than price.
if the british ofcials insisted on the letter of the law violence would certainly result.
fatefully the british colonial authorities decided to enforce the law.
once more the colonists rose up in wrath to defy it.
not a single one of the several thousand chests of tea shipped by the east india company ever reached the hands of the consignees.
in philadelphia and new york mass demonstrations forced the tea bearing ships to return to eng land with their cargo holds still full.
at annapolis marylanders burned both cargo and vessel while proclaiming liberty and independence or death in pursuit of it in charleston south carolina ofcials seized the tea for nonpayment of duties after intimidated local merchants refused to accept delivery.
ironically the conscated charleston tea was later auctioned to raise money for the revolutionary army.
only in boston did a british ofcial stubbornly refuse to be cowed.
massachusetts governor thomas hutchinson had already felt the fury of the mob when stamp act protesters had destroyed his home in 1765 this time he was determined not to budge.
ironically hutchinson agreed that the tea tax was unjust but he believed even more strongly that the colonists had no right to out the law.
hutchinson infuriated bostons radicals when he ordered the tea ships not to clear boston harbor until they had unloaded their cargoes.
sentiment against him was further inamed when hutchinsons enemies published one of his private letters in which he declared that an abridgement of what are called eng lish liberties was necessary for the preservation of law and order in the colonies apparently con rming the darkest conspiracy theories of the american radicals.
on december 16 1773 roughly a hundred bostonians loosely disguised as indians boarded the docked ships smashed open 342 chests of tea and dumped their contents into the atlantic an action that came to be known as the boston tea party.
a crowd of several hundred watched approvingly from the shore as boston harbor became a vast teapot.
donning indian disguise provided protesters with a threatening image and a convenient way of avoiding detection.
tea was the perfect symbol to rally around as almost every colonist rich or poor consumed this imported caffeinated beverage.
ann hulton d.
a loyalist described colonial political divisions and her hopes and fears for her own future in a letter she sent to a friend in england in 1774 those who are well disposed towards government are termed tories.
they daily increase have made some efforts to take the power out of the hands of the patriots but they are intimidated overpowered by numbers.
however i dont despair of seeing peace tranquility in america tho they talk very high furious at present.
they are all preparing their arms ammunition say if any of the leaders are seized they will make reprisals on the friends of government.
chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 acres 11 000 000 10 000 000 9 000 000 8 000 000 7 000 000 6 000 000 frontier line ends 5 000 000 4 000 000 3 000 000 2 000 000 figure 26 1 homesteads from the public lands acreage legally transferred to private ownership see related map 26 5 on p 658.
1 000 000 their land from the railroads the land companies or the states see figure 26 1.
the homestead act often turned out to be a cruel hoax.
the standard 160 acres quite adequate in the well watered mississippi basin frequently proved pitifully inadequate on the rain scarce great plains.
thousands of homesteaders perhaps two out of three were forced to give up the one sided struggle against drought.
uncle sam it was said bet 160 acres against ten dollars that the settlers could not live on their homesteads for ve years.
one of these unsuccessful gambles in greer county western oklahoma inspired a folk song hurrah for greer county.
the land of the free the land of the bedbug grasshopper and ea ill sing of its praises ill tell of its fame while starving to death on my government claim.
naked fraud was spawned by the homestead act and similar laws.
perhaps ten times more of the public domain wound up in the clutches of land grabbing promoters than in the hands of bona de farmers.
unscrupulous corporations would use dummy homesteaders often their employees or aliens bribed with cash or a bottle of beer to grab the best properties containing timber minerals and oil.
settlers would later swear that they had improved the property by erecting a twelve by fourteen dwelling which turned out to mea sure twelve by fourteen inches.
the railways also played a major role in developing the agricultural west largely through the protable marketing of crops.
some railroad companies induced americans and european immigrants to buy the cheap land earlier granted to the railroads by the government.
the northern pacic railroad at one time had nearly a thousand paid agents in europe distributing roseate leaets in various languages.
shattering the myth of the great american desert opened the gateways to the agricultural west even wider.
the windswept prairies were for the most part treeless and the tough sod had been pounded solid by millions of buffalo hooves.
pioneer explorers and trappers had assumed that the soil must be sterile simply because it was not heavily watered and did not support immense forests.
but once the prairie sod was broken with heavy iron plows pulled by four yokes of oxen the plow that broke the plains the earth proved astonishingly fruitful.
sodbusters poured onto the prairies.
lacking trees for lumber and fuel they built homes from the very sod they dug from the ground and burned corncobs for warmth.
in making the arduous journey across the western prairies many women settlers discovered new condence in their abilities.
early on in her trek mary richardson walker 1811 1897 conded in her diary that my circumstances are rather trying.
so much danger attends me on every hand.
a long journey before me going i know not whither without mother or sister to attend me can i expect to survive it all.
only a month later she recorded that in the afternoon we rode thirty ve miles without stopping.
pretty well tired out all of us.
stood it pretty well myself.
landmark land laws 120w 110w 100w 90w 80w 50n c a n a d a r g r eat basi n wine wheat beef cattle beef cattle fruit wheat wine pac i f ic beef cattle beef cattle wheat wheat beef cattle 60 80 under 10 40 60 20 inch rainfall line 20 40 corn major agricultural product corn wheat corn corn wheat tobacco tobacco beef cattle n wheat hogs corn wheat corn wheat hay corn wheat tobacco tobacco wheat rice corn cotton beef cattle at l a n t i c ocean cotton corn beef cattle beef cattle mean annual rainfall inches 10 20 n 40 wheat hogs corn sheep cotton cotton corn cotton over 80 hay dairy beef cattle ocean wheat dairy n s p l a i wheat n s t a i u n m o coa s ta l k y sheep wheat dairy c wheat a t g r e ran o ge 70w 30n sugar cane rice rice gu lf o f m exic o m e x i c o 100w 400 km.
map 26 4 average annual precipitation with major agricultural products 1900 northern hemisphere storms typically circle the globe in a west to east direction.
much of the life nourishing water in these storms is dumped as rainfall on the western slopes of the pacic coastal ranges and the rocky mountains creating huge rain shadows in the great basin and in the western great plains.
westward faring pioneers had to learn new agricultural techniques when they pushed settlement into the drought prone regions west of the 100th meridian as reected in the patterns of crop distribution by 1900 interactive map the homesteaders wife by harvey dunn women as well as men toiled without shade or respite on the sunscorched and wind parched great plains.
chapter of frontier history.
a fresh day dawned for western farmers with the homestead act of 1862 the new law allowed a settler to acquire as much as 160 acres of land a quarter section by living on it for ve years improving it and paying a nominal fee of about 30.
the homestead act marked a drastic departure from previous policy.
before the act public land had been sold primarily for revenue now it was to be given away to encourage a rapid lling of empty spaces and to provide a stimulus to the family farm the backbone of democracy the new law was a godsend to a host of farmers who could not afford to buy large holdings.
during the forty years after its passage about half a million families took advantage of the homestead act to carve out new homes in the vast open stretches.
yet ve times that many families purchased chapter 18 renewing the sectional struggle 1848 1854 gold.
gold they began tearing frantically at the yellow graveled streams and hills.
a fortunate few of the bearded miners struck it rich at the diggings but the luckless many who netted blisters instead of nuggets probably would have been money well ahead if they had stayed at home unaffected by gold fever which was often followed by more deadly fevers.
the most reliable prots were made by those who mined the miners notably by charging outrageous rates for laundry and other personal ser vices.
some soiled clothing was even sent as far away as the hawaiian islands for washing.
many of the forty niners who opped in cal i fornia kept chasing their dream of gold in even more distant places notably australia in 1851.
40n nor t negro bar french corral r yuba rough and ready r you bet dutch flat r.
r bear damascus coloma sutter s mill placerville hangtown a texas hill sutter s michigan r bar ft n es m r su ne jsus k e lu m maria o m e v a co d r ver a s rawhide cala slaus r i n sta.
tuolumne r angels camp sonora 38n chinese camp n.
ui aq jo r.
sa n r e s n g r a 122w dr rce me a san francisco n pac i f i c ocean lake tahoe n california sacramento utah territory gods country er i ca n m en to pyramid lake 50 mi.
k for m sacra clear lake 50 km.
r a e r s i h californy gold tobacco chewing president taylor with his stumpy legs rough features heavy jaw black hair ruddy complexion and squinty gray eyes was a military square peg in a political round hole.
he would have been spared much turmoil if he could have continued to sit on the slavery lid.
but the discovery of gold on the american river near sutters mill cal i fornia early in 1848 blew the cover off see map 18 1.
a horde of adventurers poured into the valleys of cal i fornia.
singing o susannah and shouting gold.
t a s c o newly acquired western territories with african americans.
it also contained a large element of conscience whigs heavily inuenced by the abolitionist crusade who condemned slavery on moral grounds.
the freesoilers trotted out wizened former president van buren and marched into the fray shouting free soil free speech free labor and free men these freedoms provided the bedrock on which the free soilers built their party.
they condemned slavery not so much for enslaving blacks but for destroying the chances of free white workers to rise up from wage earning dependence to the esteemed status of self employment.
they argued that only with free soil in the west could a traditional american commitment to upward mobility continue to ourish.
if forced to compete with slave labor more costly wage labor would inevitably wither away and with it the chance for the american worker to own property.
as the rst widely inclusive party orga nized around the issue of slavery and con ned to a single section the free soil party foreshadowed the emergence of the republican party six years later.
with the slavery issue ofcially shoved under the rug by the two major parties the politicians on both sides opened re on personalities.
the amateurish taylor had to be carefully watched lest his indiscreet pen puncture the reputation won by his sword.
his admirers puffed him up as a gallant knight and a napoleon and sloganized his remark allegedly uttered during the battle of buena vista general taylor never surrenders taylors wartime popularity pulled him through.
he harvested 1 360 967 popular and 163 electoral votes as compared with casss 1 222 342 popular and 127 electoral votes.
free soiler van buren although winning no state polled 291 263 ballots and apparently diverted enough democratic strength from cass in the crucial state of new york to throw the election to taylor.
feather r m a os arip mormon bar 120w extent of gold mining region 1849 gold mine map 18 1 california gold rush country miners from all over the world swarmed over the rivers that drained the western slope of californias sierra nevada.
their nationalities and religions their languages and their ways of life are recorded in the colorful place names they left behind.
interactive map the california gold rush placer miners in california cheap but effective placer mining consisted of literally washing the gold out of surface deposits.
no deep excavation was required.
this crew of male and female miners in california in 1852 was using a long tom sluice that washed relatively large quantities of ore the california gold rush attracted tens of thousands of people to the future golden state almost overnight completely overwhelming the one horse territorial government.
a distressingly high proportion of the newcomers were lawless men accompanied or followed by virtueless women.
a contemporary song ran oh what was your name in the states.
was it thompson or johnson or bates.
did you murder your wife and y for your life.
say what was your name in the states.
a married woman wrote from the california goldelds to her sister in new england in 1853 i tell you the woman are in great demand in this country no matter whether they are married or not you need not think strange if you see me coming home with some good looking man some of these times with a pocket full of rocks.
it is all the go here for ladys to leave there husbands two out of three do it there is a rst rate chance for a single woman she can have her choice of thousands i wish mother was here she could marry a rich man and not have to lift her hand to do her work.
an outburst of crime inevitably resulted from the presence of so many miscreants and outcasts.
robbery claim jumping and murder were commonplace and such violence was only partly discouraged by rough vigilante justice.
in san francisco from 1848 to 1856 there were scores of lawless kill ings but only three semilegal hangings.
a majority of cal i fornians as decent and lawabiding citizens needing protection grappled earnestly with the problem of erecting an adequate state government.
privately encouraged by president taylor they drafted a constitution in 1849 that excluded slavery and then boldly applied to congress for admission.
cal ifornia would thus bypass the usual territorial stage thwarting southern congressmen seeking to block free soil.
southern politicians alarmed by the cal i fornians impertinent stroke for freedom arose in violent opposition.
would cal i fornia prove to be the golden straw that broke the back of the union.
the idea that many neer do wells went west is found in the journals january 1849 of ralph waldo emerson 1803 1882 if a man is going to california he announces it with some hesitation because it is a confession that he has failed at home.
chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 mother country of britain played a leading role colonial unity was poor and open rebellion was dangerous especially against a formidable britain.
irish rebels of that day were customarily hanged drawn and quartered.
american rebels might have fared no better.
as late as january 1776 ve months before independence was declared the kings health was being toasted by the ofcers of washingtons mess near boston.
god save the king had not yet been replaced by god save the congress gradually the americans were shocked into recognizing the necessity of separating from the crown.
their eyes were jolted open by harsh british acts like the burning of falmouth and norfolk and especially by the hiring of the hessians.
then in 1776 came the publication of common sense one of the most inuential pamphlets ever written.
its author was the radical thomas paine once an impoverished corset makers apprentice who had come over from britain a year earlier.
he began his incendiary tract with a treatise on the nature of government and eloquently anticipated thomas jeffersons declaration that the only lawful states were those that derive their just powers from the consent of the governed as for the king whom the americans professed to revere he was nothing but the royal brute of great britain common sense became a whirlwind best seller.
within a few months the astonishing total of 120 000 copies were sold.
in common sense thomas paine 1737 1809 argued for the superiority of a republic over a monarchy the nearer any government approaches to a republic the less business there is for a king.
it is somewhat difcult to nd a proper name for the government of england.
sir william meredith calls it a republic but in its present state it is unworthy of the name because the corrupt inuence of the crown by having all the places in its disposal hath so effectively swallowed up the power and eaten out the virtue of the house of commons the republican part of the constitution that the government of england is nearly as monarchical as that of france or spain.
thomas paine by auguste millire paine atly branded the shilly shallying of the colonists as contrary to common sense nowhere in the physical universe did the smaller heavenly body control the larger one.
so why should the tiny island of britain control the vast continent of america.
paines pen went a long way toward convincing the american colonists that their true cause was independence rather than reconciliation with britain not least because without independence they could not hope for foreign assistance.
paine could thus be said to have drafted the foundational document not only of american independence but of american foreign policy as well.
paine and the idea of republicanism paines passionate protest was as compelling as it was eloquent and radical even doubly radical.
it called not simply for independence but for the creation of a new kind of political society a republic where power owed from the people themselves not from a corrupt and jefferson s declaration despotic monarch.
in language laced with biblical imagery familiar to common folk he argued that all government ofcials governors senators and judges not just representatives in a house of commons should derive their authority from popular consent.
paine was hardly the rst person to champion a republican form of government.
political philosophers had advanced the idea since the days of classical greece and rome.
revived in the renaissance and in seventeenth century eng land republican ideals had uneasily survived within the british mixed government with its delicate balance of king nobility and commons.
republicanism particularly appealed to british politicians critical of excessive power in the hands of the king and his advisers.
their writings found a responsive audience among the american colonists who interpreted the vengeful royal acts of the previous decade as part of a monarchical conspiracy to strip them of their liberties as british subjects.
paines radical prescription for the colonies to reject monarchy and empire and embrace an independent republic fell on receptive ears.
the colonists experience with governance had prepared them well for paines summons to create a republic.
many settlers particularly new eng landers had practiced a kind of republicanism in their democratic town meetings and annual elections while the popularly elected committees of correspondence during 1774 and 1775 had demonstrated the feasibility of republican government.
the absence of a hereditary aristocracy and the relative equality of condition enjoyed by landowning farmers meshed well with the republican repudiation of a xed hierarchy of power.
most americans considered citizen virtue fundamental to any successful republican government.
because political power no longer rested with the central all powerful authority of the king individuals in a republic needed to sacrice their personal self interest to the public good.
the collective good of the people the french philosophe abb raynal 1713 1796 wrote in 1770 if any fortunate revolution should take place in the world it will begin in america.
it will become the asylum of our people who have been oppressed by political establishments or driven away by war.
mattered more than the private rights and interests of individuals.
paine inspired his contemporaries to view america as fertile ground for the cultivation of such civic virtue.
yet not all patriots agreed with paines ultrademocratic approach to republicanism.
some favored a republic ruled by a natural aristocracy of talent.
republicanism for them meant an end to hereditary aristocracy but not an end to all social hierarchy.
these more conser vative republicans feared that the fervor for liberty would overwhelm the stability of the social order.
they watched with trepidation as the lower orders of society poorer farmers tenants and laboring classes in towns and cities seemed to embrace a kind of runaway republicanism that amounted to radical leveling the contest to de ne the nature of american republicanism would noisily continue for at least the next hundred years.
jeffersons explanation of independence members of the philadelphia congress instructed by their respective colonies gradually edged toward a clean break.
on june 7 1776 ery richard henry lee of virginia moved that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states after considerable debate the motion was adopted nearly a month later on july 2 1776 the passing of lees resolution was the formal declaration of independence by the american colonies and technically this was all that was needed to cut the british tie.
john adams wrote condently that ever thereafter july 2 would be celebrated annually with reworks.
but something more was required.
an epochal rupture of this kind called for some formal explanation.
an inspirational appeal was also needed to enlist other british colonies in the americas to invite assistance from foreign nations and to rally resistance at home.
shortly after lee made his memorable motion on june 7 congress appointed a committee to prepare a more formal statement of separation.
the task of drafting it fell to thomas jefferson a tall freckled sandyhaired virginia lawyer of thirty three.
despite his youth he was already recognized as a brilliant writer and he measured up splendidly to the awesome assignment.
after some debate and amendment the declaration of independence was formally approved by the congress on july 4 1776 it might better have been chapter 18 renewing the sectional struggle 1848 1854 table 18 1 compromise of 1850 concessions to the north concessions to the south cal i fornia admitted as a free state the remainder of the mexican cession area to be formed into the territories of new mexico and utah without restriction on slavery hence open to popular sovereignty texas to receive 10 million from the federal government as compensation a more stringent fugitive slave law going beyond that of 1793 territory disputed by texas and new mexico to be surrendered to new mexico abolition of the slave trade but not slavery in the district of columbia newspaper avowed that it loathed the union and hated the north as much as it did hell itself.
a movement in the south to boycott northern goods gained some headway but in the end the southern unionists assisted by the warm glow of prosperity prevailed.
in june 1850 the assemblage of southern extremists met in nashville ironically near the burial place of andrew jackson.
the delegates not only took a strong position in favor of slavery but condemned the compromise mea sures then being hammered out in con henry clay proposing the compromise of 1850 this engraving captures one of the most dramatic moments in the history of the united states senate.
vice president millard fillmore presides while on the oor sit several of the senatorial giants of the era including daniel webster stephen a douglas and john c calhoun.
meeting again in november after the bills had passed the convention proved to be a dud.
by that time southern opinion had reluctantly accepted the verdict of congress.
like the calm after a storm a second era of good feelings dawned.
disquieting talk of secession subsided.
peace loving people both north and south were determined that the compromises should be a nality and that the explosive issue of slavery should be buried.
but this placid period proved all too brief.
the fugitive slave law was a modest sum.
the immense area in dispute had been torn from the side of slaveholding texas and was almost certain to be free.
the south had halted the drive toward abolition in the district of columbia at least temporarily by permitting the outlawing of the slave trade in the federal district.
but even this move was an entering wedge toward complete emancipation in the nations capital.
most alarming of all the drastic new fugitive slave law of 1850 the bloodhound bill stirred up a storm of opposition in the north.
the eeing slaves could not testify in their own behalf and they were denied a jury trial.
these harsh practices some citizens feared threatened to create dangerous precedents for white americans.
the federal commissioner who handled the case of a fugitive would receive ve dollars if the runaway were freed and ten dollars if not an arrangement that strongly resembled a bribe.
freedomloving northerners who aided the slave to escape were balancing the compromise scales who got the better deal in the compromise of 1850.
the answer is clearly the north see map 18 3.
cal ifornia as a free state tipped the senate balance permanently against the south.
the territories of new mexico and utah were open to slavery on the basis of popular sovereignty.
but the iron law of nature the highest law of all had loaded the dice in favor of free soil.
southerners urgently needed more slave territory to restore the sacred balance if they could not carve new states out of the recent conquests from mexico where else might they get them.
the caribbean was one answer.
even the apparent gains of the south rang hollow.
disgruntled texas was to be paid 10 million toward discharging its indebtedness but in the long run this map 18 3 slavery after the compromise of 1850 regarding the fugitive slave law provisions of the compromise of 1850 ralph waldo emerson declared in may 1851 at concord massachusetts the act of congress.
is a law which every one of you will break on the earliest occasion a law which no man can obey or abet the obeying without loss of self respect and forfeiture of the name of gentleman privately he wrote in his journal this lthy enactment was made in the nineteenth century by people who could read and write.
i will not obey it by god 120w 110w 100w 90w interactive map 80w 70w british north america canada pennsylvania ohio indiana illinois virginia missouri kentucky north carolina tennessee indian south territory arkansas carolina georgia 6 miss.
5 alabama texas louisiana florida i c p a c i f iowa utah territory california e a o c new mexico territory n 30n free state or territory 141 representatives 32 senators slave state or territory 90 representatives 30 senators territory open to slavery gadsden purchase gu lf o f m exic o mexico 400 km.
number of representatives 400 mi.
r i conn 2 new jersey del.
n o c e a n michigan vt 3 n h new york at l a n t i c wisconsin unorganized territory 40n maine minnesota territory oregon territory chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 chronology ca.
1700 new indian peoples move onto great plains 1889 north dakota south dakota montana washington idaho and wyoming admitted to union census bureau declares frontier line ended emergence of peoples party populists pikes peak gold rush nevada comstock lode discovered homestead act battle of wounded knee construction of trans siberian railroad begins sand creek massacre nevada admitted to union populist party candidate james b weaver polls more than 1 million votes in presidential election frederick jackson turner publishes the signicance of the frontier in american history coxeys army marches on washington pullman strike utah admitted to union mckinley defeats bryan for presidency dingley tariff act gold standard act oklahoma admitted to union national grange orga nized battle of the little bighorn colorado admitted to union nez perce war helen hunt jackson publishes a century of dishonor federal government outlaws indian sun dance canadian pacic railway rst transcontinental rail line completed across canada.
1885 local chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 to learn more dee brown bury my heart at wounded knee an indian history of the american west 1970 william cronon natures metropolis chicago and the great west 1991 lawrence goodwyn the populist moment a short history of the agrarian revolt in america 1978 steven hahn the roots of southern populism yeoman farmers and the transformation of the georgia upcountry 1850 1890 1983 robert v hine the american west a new interpretive history 2nd ed 1984 patricia nelson limerick legacy of conquest the unbroken past of the american west 1987 frederick jackson turner the signicance of the frontier in american history 1893 elliott west the contested plains indians goldseekers and the rush to colorado 1998 richard white its your misfortune and none of my own a new history of the american west 1991 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 to learn more dean acheson present at the creation 1969 lizabeth cohen a consumers republic the politics of mass consumption in postwar america 2003 john lewis gaddis the cold war a new history 2005 herbert j gans the levittowners 1967 kenneth t jackson crabgrass frontier the suburbanization of the united states 1985 kevin kruse and thomas sugrue eds the new suburban history 2006 marvyn p lefer a preponderance of power national security the truman administration and the cold war 1945 1950 1980 thomas mccormick americas half century u s foreign policy in the cold war and after 1995 ellen schrecker many are the crimes 1998 bruce schulman from cotton belt to sunbelt federal policy economic development and the transformation of the south 1991 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter.
interactive map business connections with the south were thus intimidated into voting for buchanan.
innate conservatism triumphed assisted by so called southern bullyism.
it was probably fortunate for the union that secession and civil war did not come in 1856 following a republican victory.
frmont an ill balanced and second rate gure was no abraham lincoln.
and in 1856 the north was more willing to let the south depart in peace than in 1860 dramatic events from 1856 to 1860 were to arouse hundreds of thousands of stillapathetic northerners to a ghting pitch.
yet the republicans in 1856 could rightfully claim a victorious defeat the new party a mere two yearold toddler had made an astonishing showing against the well oiled democratic machine.
whittier exulted then sound again the bugles call the muster roll anew if months have well nigh won the eld what may not four years do.
the election of 1856 cast a long shadow forward and politicians north and south peered anxiously toward 1860 the dred scott bombshell the dred scott v stanford decision handed down by the supreme court on march 6 1857 abruptly ended the two day presidential honeymoon of the unlucky bachelor james buchanan.
this pronouncement was one of the opening paper gun blasts of the civil war.
basically the case was simple.
dred scott a black slave had lived with his master for ve years in illinois and wisconsin territory.
backed by interested abolitionists he sued for freedom on the basis of his long residence on free soil.
the supreme court proceeded to twist a simple legal case into a complex political issue.
it ruled not surprisingly that dred scott was a black slave and not a citizen and hence could not sue in federal courts.
the tribunal could then have thrown out the case on these technical grounds alone.
but a majority decided to go further under the leadership of emaciated chief justice roger b taney from the slave state of maryland.
a sweeping judgment on the larger issue of slavery in the territories seemed desirable particularly to forestall arguments by two free soil justices who were preparing dissenting opinions.
the prosouthern majority evidently hoped in this way to lay the odious question to rest.
taneys thunderclap rocked the free soilers back on their heels.
a majority of the court decreed that because a slave was private property he or she could be taken into any territory and legally held there in slavery.
the reasoning was that the fifth amendment clearly forbade congress to deprive people of their property without due process of law.
the court to be consistent went further.
the missouri compromise banning slavery north of 36 30 had been repealed three years earlier by the kansas nebraska act.
but its spirit was still venerated in the north.
now the court ruled that the compromise of 1820 had been unconstitutional all along congress had no power to ban slavery from the territories regardless even of what the territorial legislatures themselves might want.
southerners were delighted with this unexpected victory.
champions of popular sovereignty were aghast including senator douglas and a host of northern democrats.
another lethal wedge was thus driven between this part of the ruling denying blacks their citizenship seriously menaced the precarious position of the souths quarter million free blacks.
chapter 37 the eisenhower era 1952 1960 produced a troublesome combination of private opulence amid public squalor.
americans had televisions in their homes but garbage in their streets.
they ate rich food but breathed foul air.
but galbraiths call for social spending to match private purchasing fell on mostly deaf ears in the giddily afuent 1950s.
the advent of eisenhower democratic prospects in the presidential election of 1952 were blighted by the military deadlock in korea trumans clash with macarthur war bred ination and whiffs of scandal from the white house.
dispirited democrats nominated a reluctant adlai e stevenson the eloquent and idealistic governor of illinois.
republicans enthusiastically chose war hero general dwight d eisenhower on the rst ballot.
ikes running mate was cal i fornia senator richard m nixon who had gained notoriety as a relentless red hunter.
eisenhower was already the most popular american of his time as i like ike buttons every where testied.
striking a grandfatherly nonpartisan pose eisenhower left the rough campaigning to nixon who relished bare knuckle political combat.
the vicepresidential candidate lambasted his opponents with charges that they had cultivated corruption caved in on korea and coddled communists.
he particularly blasted the cerebral stevenson as adlai the appeaser with a ph d.
from secretary of state dean achesons college of cowardly communist containment nixon himself faltered late in the campaign amid accusations that he had accepted illegal donations.
responding with a self pitying live address on television nixon denied the charges and solemnly declared that the only campaign gift he had ever received was the family cocker spaniel checkers.
the shameless and mawkish checkers speech saved nixons spot on the ticket and spotlighted a fundamental change in american politics.
television was now a formidable political tool that much more than radio allowed candidates to bypass traditional party machinery and speak directly to voters.
soon even eisenhower was reluctantly appearing in short tightly scripted televised spots that foreshadowed the future of political advertising.
devoid of substance they vastly oversimplied complicated economic and social issues.
they amounted as one critic observed to selling the president like toothpaste and given televisions origins in entertainment the republicans choice 1952 nominee eisenhower and his vice presidential running mate nixon greet the delegates.
and advertising political messages would be increasingly tuned to the standards of show business and commercialism.
the outcome of the presidential election of 1952 was never really in doubt.
given an extra prod by eisenhowers last minute pledge to go personally to korea to end the war the voters overwhelmingly declared for ike.
he garnered 33 936 234 votes to stevensons 27 314 992 ringing up 442 electoral votes to 89 for his opponent see map 37 1.
ike also managed to pull enough republican legislators into ofce on his military coattails to gain gop control of the new congress by a hairbreadth.
true to his campaign pledge president elect eisenhower undertook a ying three day visit to korea in december 1952 but even a glamorous ike could not immediately budge the peace negotiations off dead center.
seven long months later after eisenhower had hinted that he might use atomic weapons an armistice was nally signed.
subsequent inquiries suggested that ikes hints were so artfully veiled that the chinese ike as president wa mt or id nv ca nd wy ut az mn sd ia ne co wi ks ok nm tx il mi in mo la oh ky ms al wv va nc tn ar me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 16 ri pa nj ct 4 16 8 ga de md map 37 1 presidential election of 1952 with electoral vote by state a democrat quipped that if the voters liked the republicans the way they liked ike the two party system would be in bad shape fortunately for democrats eisenhower scored a personal not a party victory.
republicans won minuscule majorities in congress which disappeared in the congressional elections two years later.
interactive map sc fl candidate party electoral vote popular vote eisenhower republican 83 33 936 234 55 1 17 27 314 992 44 4 stevenson democrat never understood them.
they agreed to end the war for reasons of their own especially its burdensome nancial costs.
the brutal and futile ghting had lasted three years.
about fty four thousand americans lay dead korean war scene a grief stricken american soldier whose buddy has been killed is being comforted while a medical corpsman lls out casualty tags.
joined by perhaps more than a million chinese north koreans and south koreans.
tens of billions of american dollars had been poured down the asian sinkhole.
yet this terrible toll in blood and trea sure bought only a return to the conditions of 1950 korea remained divided at the thirty eighth parallel communist in the north western looking in the south.
americans took what little comfort they could from the fact that communism had been contained and that the bloodletting had been limited to something less than full scale global war.
the shooting had ended but the cold war still remained frigidly frozen.
as a military commander eisenhower had cultivated a leadership style that self consciously projected an image of sincerity fairness and optimism.
he had been widely perceived during world war ii as an unmilitary general and in the white house he similarly struck the pose of an unpolitical president serenely above the petty partisan fray.
he also shrewdly knew that his greatest asset was his enjoyment of the affection and respect of our citizenry as he conded to his diary in 1949 ike thus seemed ideally suited to soothe the anxieties of troubled americans much as a distinguished and well loved grandfather brings stability to his family.
he played this role well as he presided over a decade of shaky peace and shining prosperity.
yet critics charged that he unwisely hoarded the asset of his chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 banner paraded by the society of pewterers in new york city 1788 this silk banner was carried by members of the society of pewterers in a parade in new york city on july 23 1788 to celebrate the impending ratication of the united states constitution by new york state.
the enthusiasm of these craftsmen for the constitution conrms that not all federalists were well to do.
the first coin authorized by congress 1787 the fugio cent was minted by a private company and remained in circulation until the 1850s.
the word fugio i y and the sundial show that time ies mind your business urges diligence.
they were to change their course albeit unwillingly only after the new government had been in operation for some months.
the race for ratication despite much apathy was close and quite bitter in some localities.
no lives were lost but riotous disturbances broke out in new york and pennsylvania involving bruises and bloodshed.
there was much behind the scenes pressure on delegates who had promised their constituents to vote against the constitution.
the last four states ratied a triumphant cartoon this cartoon appeared in the massachusetts centinel on august 2 1788 note the two laggards especially the sorry condition of rhode island.
the new constitution not because they wanted to but because they had to.
they could not safely exist outside the fold.
a conservative triumph the minority had triumphed twice.
a militant minority of american radicals had engineered the military revolution that cast off the unwritten british constitution.
a militant minority of conser vatives now embracing many of the earlier radicals had engineered two massachusetts citizens took opposite positions on the new constitution.
jonathan smith a farmer unsympathetic to shayss rebellion of 1787 wrote i am a plain man and i get my living by the plow.
i have lived in a part of the country where i have known the worth of good government by the want of it.
the black cloud of shays rebellion rose last winter in my area.
it brought on a state of anarchy that led to tyranny.
when i saw this constitution i found that it was a cure for these disorders.
i got a copy of it and read it over and over.
i dont think the worse of the constitution because lawyers and men of learning and moneyed men are fond of it.
they are all embarked in the same cause with us and we must all swim or sink together.
amos singletary 1721 1806 who described himself as a poor man argued against the constitution we fought great britain some said for a three penny tax on tea but it was not that.
it was because they claimed a right to tax us and bind us in all cases whatever.
and does not this constitution do the same.
these lawyers and men of learning and money men that talk so nely and gloss over matters so smoothly to make us poor illiterate people swallow down the pill.
they expect to be the managers of the constitution and get all the power and money into their own hands.
and then they will swallow up all us little folks just as the whale swallowed up jonah.
the peaceful revolution that overthrew the inadequate constitution known as the articles of confederation.
eleven states in effect had seceded from the confederation leaving the two still in actually out in the cold.
a majority had not spoken.
only about one fourth of the adult white males in the country chiey the propertied people had voted for delegates to the ratifying conventions.
careful estimates indicate that if the new constitution had been submitted to a manhoodsuffrage vote as in new york it would have encountered much more opposition probably defeat.
conservatism was victorious.
safeguards had been erected against mob rule excesses while the republican gains of the revolution were conserved.
radicals such as patrick henry who had ousted british rule saw themselves in turn upended by american conser vatives.
the federalists were convinced that by setting the drifting ship of state on a steady course they could restore economic and political stability.
yet if the architects of the constitution were conservative it is worth emphasizing that they conserved the principle of republican government through a redenition of popular sovereignty.
unlike the antifederalists who believed that the sovereignty of the people resided in a single branch of government the legislature the federalists contended that every branch executive judiciary and legislature effectively represented the people.
by ingeniously embedding the doctrine of selfrule in a self limiting system of checks and balances among these branches the constitution reconciled the potentially con icting principles of liberty and order.
it represented a marvelous achievement one that elevated the ideals of the revolution even while setting boundaries to them.
one of the distinctive and enduring paradoxes of american history was thus revealed in the united states conser vatives and radicals alike have championed the heritage of republican revolution.
chapter 20 girding for war the north and the south 1861 1865 the direst effects of the cotton famine in britain were relieved in several ways.
hunger among unemployed workers was partially eased when certain kindhearted americans sent over several cargoes of foodstuffs.
as union armies penetrated the south they captured or bought considerable supplies of cotton and shipped them to britain the confederates also ran a limited quantity through the blockade.
in addition the cotton growers of egypt and india responding to high prices increased their output and captured a share of the world cotton market that they held on to well after the wars conclusion.
finally booming war industries in eng land which supplied both the north and the south relieved unemployment.
king wheat and king corn the monarchs of northern agriculture proved to be more potent potentates than king cotton.
during these war years the as the civil war neared the end of its third year the london times january 7 1864 could boast we are as busy as rich and as fortunate in our trade as if the american war had never broken out and our trade with the states had never been disturbed.
cotton was no king notwithstanding the prerogatives which had been loudly claimed for him.
north blessed with ideal weather produced bountiful crops of grain and harvested them with mccormicks mechanical reaper.
in the same period the british suffered a series of bad harvests.
they were forced to import huge quantities of grain from america which happened to have the cheapest and most abundant supply.
if the british had broken the blockade to gain cotton they would have provoked the north to war and would have lost this precious granary.
unemployment for some seemed better than hunger for all.
hence one yankee journal could exult wave the stars and stripes high oer us let every freeman sing.
old king cottons dead and buried brave young corn is king.
the decisiveness of diplomacy the pending conict 1863 great britain and france look on while the americans struggle.
despite repeated pleas from confederate diplomats for recognition and aid both france and britain refrained from intervening in the american conict not least because of the unions demonstrated strength on the battleeld and its economic importance to european importers.
americas diplomatic front has seldom been so critical as during the civil war.
the south never wholly abandoned its dream of foreign intervention and europes rulers schemed to take advantage of americas distress.
the rst major crisis with britain came over the trent affair late in 1861 a union warship cruising on the high seas north of cuba stopped a british mail steamer the trent and forcibly removed two confederate diplomats bound for europe.
britons were outraged upstart yankees could not so boldly offend the mistress of the seas.
war preparations buzzed and red coated troops embarked for canada with bands blaring i wish i was in dixie the london foreign ofce prepared an ultimatum demanding surrender of the prisoners and an apology.
but luckily slow communications gave passions on both sides a chance to cool.
lincoln came to see the diplomatic crises while an angered north had to divert naval strength from its blockade for wild goose chases.
the barnacled alabama nally accepted a challenge from a stronger union cruiser off the coast of france in 1864 and was quickly destroyed.
the alabama was beneath the waves but the issue of british built confederate raiders stayed aoat.
under prodding by the american minister charles francis adams the british gradually perceived that allowing such ships to be built was a dangerous precedent that might someday be used against them.
in 1863 london openly violated its own leaky laws and seized another raider being built for the south.
but despite greater ofcial efforts by britain to remain truly neutral confederate commerce destroyers chiey british built captured more than 250 yankee ships severely crippling the american merchant marine which never fully recovered.
glowering northerners looked farther north and talked openly of securing revenge by grabbing canada when the war was over.
battle of the uss kearsarge and the css alabama off the normandy coast 1864 by edouard manet the alabama sank sixty four union ships before it was destroyed off the coast of cherbourg france in 1864 the kearsarge rescued most of the alabamas crew from their sinking vessel but confederate captain raphael semmes managed to escape aboard an english yacht that had been observing the sea battle.
trent prisoners as white elephants and reluctantly released them.
one war at a time he reportedly said.
another major crisis in anglo american relations arose over the unneutral building in britain of confederate commerce raiders notably the alabama.
these vessels were not warships within the meaning of loopholed british law because they left their shipyards unarmed and picked up their guns elsewhere.
the alabama escaped in 1862 to the portuguese azores and there took on weapons and a crew from two british ships that followed it.
although ying the confederate ag and ofcered by confederates it was manned by britons and never entered a confederate port.
britain was thus the chief naval base of the confederacy.
the alabama lighted the skies from europe to the far east with the burning hulks of yankee merchantmen.
all told this british pirate captured over sixty vessels.
competing british shippers were delighted foreign flare ups a nal anglo american crisis was touched off in 1863 by the laird rams two confederate warships being constructed in the shipyard of john laird and sons in great britain.
designed to destroy the wooden ships of the union navy with their iron rams and large caliber guns they were far more dangerous than the swift but lightly armed alabama.
if delivered to the south they probably would have sunk the blockading squadrons and then brought northern cities under their re.
in retaliation the north doubtless would have invaded canada and a full dress war with britain would have erupted.
but minister adams took a hard line warning that this is war if the rams were released.
at the last minute the london government relented and bought the two ships for the royal navy.
everyone seemed satised except the disappointed confederates.
britain also eventually repented its sorry role in the alabama business.
it agreed in 1871 to submit the alabama dispute to arbitration and in 1872 paid american claimants 15 5 million for damages caused by wartime commerce raiders.
american rancor was also directed at canada where despite the vigilance of british authorities southern agents plotted to burn northern cities.
one confederate raid into vermont left three banks plundered and one american citizen dead.
hatred of eng land burned especially ercely among irish americans and they chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 freedom ride 1961 rampaging whites near anniston alabama burned this bus carrying an interracial group of freedom riders on may 14 1961 dispatched federal marshals to protect the freedom riders.
reluctantly but fatefully the kennedy administration had now joined hands with the civil rights movement.
because of that partnership the kennedys proved ultrawary about the political associates of martin luther king jr fearful of embarrassing revelations that some of kings advisers had communist af liations robert kennedy ordered fbi director j edgar hoover to wiretap kings phone in late 1963 but for the most part the relationship between king and the kennedys was a fruitful one.
encouraged by robert kennedy and with nancial backing from kennedyprodded private foundations sncc and other civil rights groups inaugurated the voter education project to register the souths historically disfranchised blacks.
because of his support for civil rights president kennedy told a group of black leaders in 1963 i may lose the next election.
i dont care integrating southern universities threatened to provoke wholesale slaughter.
some desegregated painlessly but the university of mississippi ole miss became a volcano.
a twenty nine year old air force veteran james meredith encountered violent opposition when he attempted to register in october 1962 in the end president kennedy was forced to send in four hundred federal marshals and three thousand troops to enroll meredith in his rst class in colonial american history.
in the spring of 1963 martin luther king jr launched a campaign against discrimination in birmingham alabama the most segregated big city in america.
although blacks constituted nearly half of the citys population they made up fewer than 15 percent of the citys voters.
previous attempts to crack the citys rigid racial barriers had produced more than fty cross burnings and eighteen bomb attacks since 1957.
some of the people sitting here will not come back alive from this campaign king advised his organizers.
events soon con rmed this grim prediction of violence.
watching developments on television screens a horried world saw peaceful civil rights marchers repeatedly repelled by police with attack dogs and electric cattle prods.
most fearsome of all were the high pressure water hoses directed at the civil rights demonstrators.
they delivered water with enough force to knock bricks loose from buildings or strip bark from trees at a distance of one hundred feet.
water from the hoses bowled little children down the street like tumbleweeds.
jolted by these vicious confrontations president kennedy delivered a memorable televised speech to the nation on june 11 1963 in contrast to eisenhowers cool aloofness from the racial question kennedy called the situation a moral issue and committed his personal and presidential prestige to nding a solution.
drawing on the same spiritual traditions as martin luther king jr kennedy declared that the marching to washington hosing down civil rights demonstrators birmingham alabama 1963 principle at stake is as old as the scriptures and is as clear as the american constitution he called for new civil rights legislation to protect black citizens.
in august king led more than 200 000 black and white demonstrators on a peaceful march on washington in support of the proposed legislation.
in an electrifying speech from the lincoln memorial king declared i have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character still the violence continued.
on the very night of kennedys stirring television address a white gunman shot down medgar evers a black mississippi civil rights martin luther king jr addresses the march on washington august 1963 this was the occasion of kings famous i have a dream speech in which he declared when the architects of our great republic wrote the magnicent words of the constitution and the declaration of independence they were signing a promissory note to which every american was to fall heir.
this note was a promise that all men yes black men as well as white men would be guaranteed the inalienable rights of life liberty and the pursuit of happiness chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 in his civil rights address of june 11 1963 president john f kennedy 1917 1963 said if an american because his skin is dark cannot eat lunch in a restaurant open to the public if he cannot send his children to the best public school available if he cannot vote for the public ofcials who represent him if in short he cannot enjoy the full and free life which all of us want then who among us would be content to have the color of his skin changed and stand in his place.
in september 1963 an explosion blasted a baptist church in birmingham kill ing four black girls who had just nished their lesson called the love that forgives by the time of kennedys death his civil rights bill was making little headway and frustrated blacks were growing increasingly impatient.
the killing of kennedy violence haunted america in the mid 1960s and it stalked onto center stage on november 22 1963 while riding in an open limousine in downtown dallas texas president kennedy was shot in the brain by a concealed rieman and died within seconds.
as a stunned nation grieved the tragedy grew still more unbelievable.
the alleged assassin a furtive gure named lee harvey oswald was himself shot to death in front of television cameras by a self appointed avenger jack ruby.
so bizarre were the events surrounding the two murders that even an elaborate ofcial investigation conducted by chief justice warren could not quiet all doubts and theories about what had really happened.
vice president johnson was promptly sworn in as president on a waiting airplane and own back to washington with kennedys body.
although he mistrusted the harvards johnson retained most of the bright kennedy team.
the new president managed a dignied and efcient transition pledging continuity with his slain predecessors policies.
for several days the nation was steeped in sorrow.
not until then did many americans realize how fully their young vibrant president and his captivating wife had cast a spell over them.
chopped down in his prime after only slightly more than a thousand days in the white house kennedy was acclaimed more for the ideals he had enunciated and the spirit he had kindled than for the concrete goals he had achieved.
he had laid one myth to rest forever that a catholic could not be trusted with the presidency of the united states.
in later years revelations about kennedys womanizing and allegations about his involvement with organized crime gures tarnished his reputation.
but despite those accusations his apparent vigor charisma and idealism made him an inspirational gure for the generation of americans who came of age in the 1960s including bill clinton who as a boy had briey met president kennedy and would himself be elected president in 1992 the lbj brand on the presidency the torch passed to craggy faced lyndon baines johnson a texan who towered six feet three inches.
the new president hailed from the populist hill country west of austin texas whose people had rst sent him to washington as a twenty nine year old congressman in 1937 franklin d roosevelt was his political daddy johnson claimed and he had supported new deal mea sures down the line.
but when lbj lost a senate race in 1941 he learned the sobering lesson that liberal political beliefs did not necessarily win elections in texas.
he trimmed his sails to the right and squeezed himself into a senate seat in 1948 with a questionable eighty seven vote margin hence the ironic nickname landslide lyndon entrenched in the senate johnson developed into a masterful wheeler dealer.
he became the democratic majority leader in 1954 wielding power second only to that of eisenhower in the white house.
he could move mountains or checkmate opponents as the occasion demanded using what came to be known as the johnson treatment a ashing display of backslapping esh pressing and arm twisting that overbore friend and foe alike.
his ego and vanity were legendary.
on a visit to the pope johnson was presented with a precious fourteenth century painting from the vatican art collection in return lbj gave the pope a bust of lbj.
as president johnson quickly shed the conser vative coloration of his senate years to reveal the latent liberal underneath.
no memorial oration or eulogy johnson declared to congress could more eloquently conflicting press accounts of the march on washington 1963 he day after the march on washington of august 28 1963 see p 981 newspapers all over the country carried reports of this historic assembly of more than 200 000 people to demand civil rights and equal job opportunities for african americans.
although the basic outlines of the story were the same in most papers ancillary articles photographs and editorials revealed deep seated biases in coverage.
shown here are continuations from the front page stories in the new york times a bastion of northeastern liberalism below and the atlanta constitution a major southern newspaper right.
while the times called the march orderly in its headline the constitutions story in its right columns highlighted the potential for violence and the precautions taken by police.
the article read there was such a force of uniformed ofcers on hand to cope with any possible trouble that one senator was prompted to comment it almost looks like we had a military coup dtat during the night in addition to stressing the marchs potential for disruption the constitution ran an advertisement right below the march on washington story for a national ku klux klan rally two days hence featuring promi nent speakers and a cross burning.
this comparison of newspaper coverage of a controversial event serves as a reminder that press reporting t top new york times above atlanta constitution must always be scrutinized for biases when it is used as historical evidence.
what other differences in coverage separated these two newspapers.
what factors contribute to press biases.
chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 overshadowed by the federal colossus.
now out of resentment against hamiltons revenue raising and centralizing policies an orga nized opposition began to build.
what once was a personal feud between hamilton and jefferson developed into a full blown and frequently bitter political rivalry.
national political parties in the modern sense were unknown in america when george washington took his inaugural oath.
there had been whigs and tories federalists and antifederalists but these groups were factions rather than parties.
they had sprung into existence over hotly contested special issues they had faded away when their cause had triumphed or zzled.
the founders at philadelphia had not envisioned the existence of permanent political parties.
organized opposition to the government especially a democratic government based on popular consent seemed tainted by disloyalty.
opposition to the government affronted the spirit of national unity that the glorious cause of the revolution had inspired.
the notion of a formal party apparatus was thus a novelty in the 1790s and when jefferson and madison rst orga nized their opposition to the hamiltonian program they con ned their activities to congress and did not anticipate creating a long lived and popular party.
but as their antagonism to hamilton stiffened and as the amazingly boisterous and widely read newspapers of the day spread their political message and hamiltons among the people primitive semblances of political parties began to emerge.
the two party system has existed in the united states since that time see table 10 2.
ironically in light of early suspicions about the very legitimacy of parties their competition for power has actually proved to be among the indispensable ingredients of a sound democracy.
the party out of power the loyal opposition traditionally plays the invaluable role of the balance wheel on the machinery of government ensuring that politics never drifts too far out of kilter with the wishes of the people.
the impact of the french revolution when washingtons rst administration ended in early 1793 hamiltons domestic policies had already stimulated the formation of two political camps jeffersonian democratic republicans and hamiltonian federalists.
as washingtons second term began foreign policy issues brought the differences between them to a fever pitch.
only a few weeks after washingtons inauguration in 1789 the curtain had risen on the rst act of the french revolution.
see thinking globally two revolutions pp.
twenty six years were to pass before the seething continent of europe collapsed into table 10 2 evolution of major parties year hamiltonians jeffersonians ca.
1792 federalists ca.
1816 death of federalists ca.
1820 democratic republicans republicans one party era of good feelings ca.
1825 national republicans whigs republicans to present see the appendix presidential elections for third parties.
democratic republicans jacksonian democrats democrats to present the french revolution a peace of exhaustion.
few non american events have left a deeper scar on american political and social life.
in a sense the french revolution was misnamed it was a historic global revolution that sent tremors through much of the western world and beyond.
in its early stages the upheaval was surprisingly peaceful involving as it did a successful attempt to impose constitutional shackles on louis xvi.
the american people loving liberty and deploring despotism cheered.
they were attered to think that the outburst in france was but the second chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 sd 4 ne 5 nm 4 ca wi in ok 8 tx oh md mt or id ri nv ca ks ok nm tx il in mo la oh ky ms al wv va nc tn ar me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 14 ri pa nj ct 4 17 8 mi ak fl ak ia ne co wi d c sc ga ut mn sd de va 12 al nd wy az nc 13 tn 11 ms wa nj wv ky 9 la me pa mo ar nh ma 14 ct il ks 7 az 5 ut wy nv 4 3 co 6 or 6 ny mi ia 9 id mt 4 4 nd 4 wa 9 mn 10 vt ga sc de md dc fl hi hi candidate party electoral vote popular vote johnson democrat 90 3 43 129 566 61 1 9 7 27 178 188 38 5 goldwater republican map 38 2 presidential election of 1964 in the map on the left the size of each state is distorted according to its weight in the electoral college.
in new orleans toward the end of the campaign a gutsy johnson displayed his commitment to civil rights when he told a story about an old senator who once said of his deep south constituents i would like to go back down there and make them just one more democratic speech.
the poor old state they havent heard a democratic speech in 30 years.
all they hear at election time is negro negro negro johnsons open voicing of sentiments like this contributed heavily to his losses in the traditionally democratic solid south the great society congress johnsons huge victory temporarily smashed the conservative congressional coalition of southern democrats and northern republicans.
a wide open legislative road stretched before the great society programs as the president skillfully ringmastered his two to one democratic majorities.
congress poured out a ood of legislation comparable only to the output of the new dealers in the hundred days congress of 1933 johnson condent that a growing economy gave him ample scal and political room for maneuver delivered at last on long deferred democratic promises of social reform.
escalating the war on poverty congress doubled the appropriation of the ofce of economic opportunity to 2 billion and granted more than 1 billion to redevelop the gutted hills and hollows of appalachia.
johnson also prodded congress into creating two new cabinet ofces the department of transportation and the department of housing and urban development interactive map hud to which he named the rst black cabinet secretary in the nations history respected economist robert c weaver.
other noteworthy laws established the national endowments for the arts and the humanities designed to lift the level of american cultural life.
even more impressive were the big four legislative achievements that crowned lbjs great society program aid to education medical care for the elderly and indigent immigration reform and a new voting rights bill.
johnson neatly avoided the thorny question of separation of church and state by channeling educational aid to students not schools thus allowing funds to ow to hard pressed parochial institutions.
catholic john f kennedy had not dared to touch this prickly issue.
with a keen eye for the dramatic lbj signed the education bill in the humble one room texas schoolhouse he had attended as a boy.
medicare for the elderly accompanied by medicaid for the poor became a reality in 1965 like the new deals social security program medicare and medicaid created entitlements that is they conferred the great society giving thanks for medicare an elderly woman showed her gratitude to president lyndon b johnson for his signing of the medicare bill in april 1965 providing basic medical care for the aged.
in tribute to former president trumans unsuccessful effort to pass a national medical insurance program twenty years earlier johnson ew to trumans missouri home to sign the bill that he claimed would deliver care for the sick and serenity for the fearful no one acknowledged that trumans earlier plan had been much more comprehensive or that johnson then a young texas congressman had opposed it.
rights on certain categories of americans virtually in perpetuity without the need for repeated congressional approval.
these programs were part of a spreading rights revolution that materially improved the lives of millions of americans but also eventually undermined the federal governments nancial health.
immigration reform was the third of johnsons big four feats.
the immigration and nationality act of 1965 abolished at last the national origins quota system that had been in place since 1921 see p 773.
the act also doubled to 290 000 the number of immigrants allowed to enter annually while for the rst time setting limits on immigrants from the western hemisphere 120 000.
the new law further provided for the admission of close relatives of united states citizens outside those numerical limits.
to the surprise of many of the acts architects more than 100 000 persons per year took advantage of its family unication provisions in the decades after 1965 and the immigrant stream swelled beyond expectations.
even more surprising to the acts sponsors the sources of immigration soon shifted heavily from europe to latin america and asia dramatically changing the racial and ethnic composition of the american population.
great society programs came in for rancorous political attack in later years.
conservatives charged that the billions spent for social engineering had simply been ushed down the waste pipe.
yet the poverty rate declined measurably in the ensuing decade see figure 38 1.
medicare made especially dramatic reductions in the incidence of poverty among americas millions percent number in poverty poverty rate figure 38 1 poverty in the united states 1960 2006 in 2000 the poverty rate fell to 11 3 percent its lowest level since 1979 in the new century it increased by a percentage point.
these gures refer to the number of people who live in families whose total income is lower than a set poverty threshold which is tied to the consumer price index so it varies with ination.
the poverty rate means the percentage of all americans living below that threshold.
source u s bureau of the census.
other antipoverty programs among them project head start sharply improved the educational perfor mance of underprivileged youth.
infant mortality rates also fell in minority communities as general health conditions improved.
lyndon johnson was not chapter 28 progressivism and the republican roosevelt 1901 1912 money in circulation and those with ample reserves were reluctant to lend to their less fortunate competitors.
congress in 1908 responded by passing the aldrich vreeland act which authorized national banks to issue emergency currency backed by various kinds of collateral.
the path was thus smoothed for the momentous federal reserve act of 1913 see p 733.
the rough rider thunders out still warmly popular in 1908 roosevelt could easily have won a second presidential nomination and almost certainly the election.
but he felt bound by his impulsive postelection promise after his victory in 1904 the departing president thus naturally sought a successor who would carry out my policies the man of his choice was amiable ample girthed and hugeframed william howard taft secretary of war and a mild progressive.
as an heir apparent he had often been called upon in roosevelts absence to sit on the lid all 350 pounds of him.
at the republican convention of 1908 in chicago roosevelt used his control of the party machinery the steamroller to push through tafts nomination on the rst ballot.
three weeks later in mile high denver in the heart of silver country the democrats nominated twice beaten william jennings bryan.
the dull campaign of 1908 featured the rotund taft and the now balding boy orator both trying to don the progressive roosevelt mantle.
the solid judge taft read cut and dried speeches while bryan griped that roosevelt had stolen his policies from the bryanite camp.
a majority of voters chose stability with roosevelt endorsed taft who polled 321 electoral votes to 162 for bryan.
the victors popular count was 7 675 320 to 6 412 294 the elections only surprise came from the socialists who amassed 420 793 votes for eugene v debs the hero of the pullman strike of 1894 see pp.
roosevelt ever in the limelight left soon after the election for a lion hunt in africa.
his numerous enemies clinked glasses while toasting health to the lions and a few irreverently prayed that some big cat would do its duty but tr survived still bursting with energy at the age of fty one in 1909 roosevelt was branded by his adversaries as a wild eyed radical but his reputation as an eater of errant industrialists now seems inated.
he fought many a sham battle and the number of laws he inspired was baby kiss papa good bye theodore roosevelt leaves his baby my policies in the hands of his chosen successor william howard taft.
friction between taft and roosevelt would soon erupt however prompting roosevelt to return to politics and challenge taft for the presidency.
certainly not in proportion to the amount of noise he emitted.
he was often under attack from the reigning business lords but the more enlightened of them knew that they had a friend in the white house.
roosevelt should be remembered rst and foremost as the cowboy who started to tame the bucking bronco of adolescent capitalism thus ensuring it a long adult life.
trs enthusiasm and perpetual youthfulness like an overgrown boy scouts appealed to the young of all ages.
you must always remember a british diplomat cautioned his colleagues that the president is about six he served as a political lightning rod to protect capitalists against popular indignation and against socialism which roosevelt regarded as ominous he strenuously sought the middle road between taft as president unbridled individualism and paternalistic collectivism.
his conservation crusade which tried to mediate between the romantic wilderness preservationists and the rapacious resource predators was probably his most typical and his most lasting achievement.
several other contributions of roosevelt lasted beyond his presidency.
first he greatly enlarged the power and prestige of the presidential ofce and masterfully developed the technique of using the big stick of publicity as a political bludgeon.
second he helped shape the progressive movement and beyond it the liberal reform campaigns later in the century.
his square deal in a sense was the grandfather of the new deal later launched by his fth cousin franklin d roosevelt.
finally to a greater degree than any of his predecessors tr opened the eyes of americans to the fact that they shared the world with other nations.
as a great power they had fallen heir to responsibilities and had been seized by ambitions from which there was no escaping.
taft a round peg in a square hole william howard taft with his ruddy complexion and upturned mustache at rst inspired widespread condence.
everybody loves a fat man the saying goes and the jovial taft with mirthquakes of laughter bubbling up from his abundant abdomen was personally popular.
he had graduated second in his class at yale and had established an enviable reputation as a lawyer and judge though he was widely regarded as hostile to labor unions.
he had been a trusted administrator under roosevelt in the philippines at home and in cuba where he had served capably as a troubleshooter.
but good old will suffered from lethal political handicaps.
roosevelt had led the con icting elements of the republican party by the sheer force of his personality.
taft in contrast had none of the arts of a dashing political leader and none of roosevelts zest for the fray.
recoiling from the clamor of controversy he generally adopted an attitude of passivity toward congress.
he was a poor judge of public opinion and his candor made him a chronic victim of foot inmouth disease.
peaceful bill was no doubt a mild progressive but at heart he was more wedded to the status quo than to change.
signicantly his cabinet did not contain a single representative of the partys insurgent wing which was on re for reform of current abuses especially the tariff.
the dollar goes abroad as a diplomat though ordinarily lethargic taft bestirred himself to use the lever of american investments to boost american political interests abroad an approach to foreign policy that his critics denounced as dollar diplomacy.
washington warmly encouraged wall street bankers to sluice their surplus dollars into foreign areas of strategic concern to the united states especially in the far east and in the regions critical to the security of the panama canal.
by preempting investors from rival powers such as germany new york bankers would thus strengthen american defenses and foreign policies while bringing further prosperity to their homeland and to themselves.
the almighty dollar thereby supplanted the big stick.
chinas manchuria was the object of tafts most spectacular effort to inject the reluctant dollar into the far eastern theater.
newly ambitious japan and imperialistic russia recent foes controlled the railroads of this strategic province.
president taft saw in the manchurian railway monopoly a possible strangulation of chinese economic interests and a consequent slamming of the open door in the faces of u s merchants.
in 1909 secretary of state philander c knox blunderingly proposed that a group of american and foreign bankers buy the manchurian railroads and then turn them over to china under a self liquidating arrangement.
both japan and russia unwilling to be jockeyed out of their dominant position bluntly rejected knoxs overtures.
taft was showered with ridicule.
another dangerous new trouble spot was the revolution riddled caribbean now virtually a yankee lake.
hoping to head off trouble washington urged wall street bankers to pump dollars into the nancial vacuums in honduras and haiti to keep out foreign funds.
the united states under the monroe doctrine would not permit foreign nations to intervene and consequently felt obligated to put its money where its mouth was to prevent economic and political instability.
again necessity was the mother of armed caribbean intervention.
sporadic disorders in palm fronded cuba honduras and the dominican republic brought american forces to these countries to restore order and protect american investment.
a revolutionary chapter 29 wilsonian progressivism at home and abroad 1912 1916 completely achieved.
the new president called for an all out assault on what he called the triple wall of privilege the tariff the banks and the trusts.
he tackled the tariff rst summoning congress into special session in early 1913 in a precedentshattering move he did not send his presidential message over to the capitol to be read loudly by a bored clerk as had been the custom since jeffersons day.
instead he appeared in person before a joint session of congress and presented his appeal with stunning eloquence and effectiveness.
moved by wilsons aggressive leadership the house swiftly passed the underwood tariff which provided for a substantial reduction of rates.
when a swarm of lobbyists descended on the senate seeking to disembowel the bill wilson promptly issued a combative message to the people urging them to hold their elected representatives in line.
the tactic worked.
the force of public opinion aroused by the presidents oratory secured late in 1913 nal approval of the bill wilson wanted.
the new underwood tariff substantially reduced import fees.
it also was a landmark in tax legislation.
under authority granted by the recently ratied sixteenth amendment congress enacted a graduated income tax beginning with a modest levy on incomes over 3 000 then considerably higher than the average familys income.
by 1917 revenue from the income tax shot ahead of receipts from the tariff.
this gap has since been vastly widened.
wilson battles the bankers woodrow wilson 1856 1924 at princeton commencement with andrew carnegie 1906 before his election to the presidency of the united states in 1912 wilson left served as president of princeton university 1902 1910 and governor of new jersey 1910 1912.
in all three ofces he undertook substantial reforms.
fighting desperately later for the league of nations at the cost of his health wilson said i would rather fail in a cause that i know some day will triumph than to win in a cause that i know some day will fail a second bastion of the triple wall of privilege was the antiquated and inadequate banking and currency system long since outgrown by the republics lusty economic expansion.
the countrys nancial structure still creaking along under the civil war national banking act revealed glaring defects.
its most serious shortcoming as exposed by the panic of 1907 was the inelasticity of the currency.
banking reserves were heavily concentrated in new york and a handful of other large cities and could not be mobilized in times of nancial stress into areas that were badly pinched.
in 1908 congress had authorized an investigation headed by a mossback banker republican senator aldrich.
three years later aldrichs special commission recommended a gigantic bank with numerous branches in effect a third bank of the united states.
for their part democratic banking reformers heeded the ndings of a house committee chaired by congressman arsene pujo which traced the tentacles of the money monster into the hidden vaults of american banking and business.
president wilsons condant progressive minded massachusetts attorney louis d brandeis further fanned the ames of reform with his incendiary though scholarly book other peoples money and how the bankers use it 1914.
in june 1913 in a second dramatic personal appearance before both houses of congress the president delivered a stirring plea for sweeping reform of the banking system.
he ringingly endorsed demo wilsons economic reforms the amount of money in circulation could be swiftly increased as needed for the legitimate requirements of business.
the federal reserve act was a red letter achievement.
it carried the nation with ying banners through the nancial crises of the first world war of 1914 1918.
without it the republics progress toward the modern economic age would have been seriously retarded.
the president tames the trusts reading the death warrant this cartoon appeared in a new york newspaper soon after woodrow wilson called for dramatic reform of the banking system before both houses of congress.
with the money trust of bankers and businessmen cowed wilson was able to win popular and congressional support for the federal reserve act of 1913 cratic proposals for a decentralized bank in government hands as opposed to republican demands for a huge private bank with fteen branches.
again appealing to the sovereign people wilson scored another triumph.
in 1913 he signed the epochal federal reserve act the most important piece of economic legislation between the civil war and the new deal.
the new federal reserve board appointed by the president oversaw a nationwide system of twelve regional reserve districts each with its own central bank.
although these regional banks were actually bankers banks owned by member nancial institutions the nal authority of the federal reserve board guaranteed a substantial mea sure of public control.
the board was also empowered to issue paper money federal reserve notes backed by commercial paper such as promissory notes of businesspeople.
thus without pausing for breath wilson pushed toward the last remaining rampart in the triple wall of privilege the trusts.
early in 1914 he again went before congress in a personal appearance that still carried drama.
nine months and thousands of words later congress responded with the federal trade commission act of 1914 the new law empowered a presidentially appointed commission to turn a searchlight on industries engaged in interstate commerce such as the meatpackers.
the commissioners were expected to crush monopoly at the source by rooting out unfair trade practices including unlawful competition false advertising mislabeling adulteration and bribery.
the knot of monopoly was further cut by the clayton anti trust act of 1914 it lengthened the shopworn sherman acts list of business practices that were deemed objectionable including price discrimination and interlocking directorates whereby the same individuals served as directors of supposedly competing rms an end often achieved through holding companies see figure 29 1.
the clayton act also conferred long overdue benets on labor.
conservative courts had unexpectedly voting stock super holding company other stock holds more than 50 of voting stock holding company a holding company b holding company c holds more than 50 of voting stock corp a corp b corp c corp d corp e corp f corp g corp h corp i figure 29 1 organization of holding companies keep in mind that the voting stock of a corporation is often only a fraction of the total stock.
chapter 29 wilsonian progressivism at home and abroad 1912 1916 u s marines in haiti 1919 the united states sent the marines to haiti in 1915 to protect american economic interests.
they remained for nineteen years.
moralistic diplomacy in mexico rie bullets whining across the southern border served as a constant reminder that all was not quiet in mexico.
for decades mexico had been sorely exploited by foreign investors in oil railroads and mines.
by 1913 american capitalists had sunk about a billion dollars into the underdeveloped but generously endowed country.
but if mexico was rich the mexicans were poor.
fed up with their miserable lot they at last revolted.
their revolution took an ugly turn in early 1913 when a conscienceless clique with the support of president tafts ambassador to mexico murdered the popular new revolutionary president and installed general victoriano huerta an indian in the presidents chair.
all this chaos accelerated a massive migration of mexicans to the united states.
more than a million spanishspeaking newcomers tramped across the southern border in the rst three decades of the twentieth century.
settling mostly in texas new mexico arizona and cal i fornia they swung picks building highways and railroads or followed the fruit harvests as pickers.
though often segregated in spanish speaking enclaves they helped to create a unique borderland culture that blended mexican and american folkways.
the revolutionary bloodshed also menaced american lives and property in mexico.
cries for intervention burst from the lips of american jingoes.
prominent among those chanting for war was the inuential chain newspaper publisher william randolph hearst whose views presumably were colored by his ownership of a mexican ranch larger than rhode island.
yet once again president wilson refused to practice the same old dollar diplomacy of his predecessors deeming it perilous to determine foreign policy in the terms of material interest wilson strove as best he could to steer a moral course in mexico.
he sent his aggressive ambassador packing imposed an arms embargo and refused to recognize ofcially the murderous government of that brute huerta even though most foreign powers acknowledged huertas bloody handed regime.
i am going to teach the south american republics to elect the mexican imbroglio good men the former professor declared.
he put his munitions where his mouth was in 1914 when he allowed american arms to ow to huertas principal rivals white bearded venustiano carranza and the rebrand francisco pancho villa.
the mexican volcano erupted at the atlantic seaport of tampico in april 1914 when a small party of american sailors was arrested.
the mexicans promptly released the captives and apologized but they refused the affronted american admirals demand for a salute of twenty one guns.
wilson heavy hearted but stubbornly determined to eliminate huerta asked congress for authority to use force against mexico.
before congress could act wilson ordered the navy to seize the mexican port of veracruz to thwart the arrival of a german steamer carrying huerta bound guns and ammunition.
huerta as well as carranza hotly protested against this high handed yankee maneuver.
just as a full dress shooting con ict seemed inevitable wilson was rescued by an offer of mediation from the abc powers argentina brazil and chile.
huerta collapsed in july 1914 under pressure from within and without.
he was succeeded by his archrival venustiano carranza still ercely resentful of wilsons military meddling.
the whole sorry tampico incident did not augur well for the future of united states mexican relations.
pancho villa a combination of bandit and robin hood had meanwhile stolen the spotlight.
he emerged as the chief rival to president carranza whom wilson now reluctantly supported.
challenging carranzas authority while also punishing the gringos villas men ruthlessly hauled sixteen young american mining en in october 1913 president woodrow wilson 1856 1924 addressed the southern commercial congress in mobile alabama and drew a connection between the battle against the trusts at home and the travails of countries south of the border we have seen material interests threaten constitutional freedom in the united states.
therefore we will now know how to sympathize with those in the rest of latin america who have to contend with such powers not only from within their borders but from outside their borders also.
wilson confronts huerta a mexican view of the tense standoff between wilson and the mexican president victoriano huerta.
the artists rendering seems to reect the famous observation of long time mexican leader porrio diaz poor mexico.
so far from god so close to the united states gineers off a train traveling through northern mexico in january 1916 and killed them.
a month later villa and his followers hoping to provoke a war between wilson and carranza blazed across the border into columbus new mexico and murdered another nineteen americans.
general john j.
black jack pershing a grimfaced and ramrod erect veteran of the cuban and philippine campaigns was ordered to break up the bandit band.
his hastily orga nized force of several so called from his earlier ser vice as an ofcer with the crack black 10th cavalry.
chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 key terms new frontier 972 peace corps 973 apollo 974 berlin wall 975 european economic community eec 975 bay of pigs invasion 978 cuban missile crisis 979 freedom riders 979 voter education project 980 march on washington 981 civil rights act of 1964 984 people to know afrmative action 984 great society 984 freedom summer 988 mississippi freedom democratic party 988 voting rights act of 1965 989 black panther party 989 black power 990 six day war 992 stonewall rebellion 998 students for a democratic society sds 998 robert f kennedy robert s mcnamara ngo dinh diem james meredith lee harvey oswald malcolm x eugene mccarthy george c wallace the sixties constructive or destructive.
t he 1960s were convulsed by controversy and they have remained controversial ever since.
con icts raged in that turbulent decade between social classes races sexes and generations.
more than three decades later the shock waves from the 1960s still reverberate through american society.
the contract with america that swept conser vative republicans to power in 1994 amounted to nothing less than a wholesale repudiation of the government activism that marked the sixties and a resounding reaf rmation of the traditional values that sixties culture supposedly trashed.
liberal democrats on the other hand continue to press af rmative action for women and minorities protection for the environment an expanded welfare state and sexual tolerance all legacies of the stormy sixties.
four issues dominate historical discussion of the 1960s the struggle for civil rights the great societys war on poverty the vietnam war and the antiwar movement and the emergence of the counterculture although most scholars praise the civil rights achievements of the 1960s they disagree over the civil rights movements turn away from nonviolence and its embrace of separatism and black power.
the freedom riders and martin luther king jr nd much more approval in most history books than do malcolm x and the black panther party.
but some scholars notably william l van deburg in new day in babylon the black power movement and american culture 1965 1975 1992 argue that the ank effect of radical black power advocates like stokely carmichael actually enhanced the bargaining position of moderates like dr king.
deburg also suggests that the enthusiasm of black power advocates for african american cultural uniqueness reshaped both black self consciousness and the broader culture as it provided a model for the feminist and multiculturalist movements of the 1970s and later.
johnsons war on poverty has found its liberal defenders in scholars like allen matusow the unraveling of america 1984 and john schwarz americas to learn more hidden success 1988.
schwarz demonstrates for example that medicare and social security reforms virtually eliminated poverty among americas elderly.
but the great society has also provoked strong criticism from writers such as charles murray losing ground 1984 and lawrence meade beyond entitlements 1986.
as those conser vative critics see the poverty issue the great society was part of the problem not part of the solution.
in their view the war on poverty did not simply fail to eradicate poverty among the so called underclass it actually deepened the dependency of the poor on the welfare state and even generated a multigenerational cycle of poverty.
in this argument johnsons great society stands indicted of creating in effect a permanent welfare class.
for many young people of the 1960s the antiwar movement protesting americas policy in vietnam provided their initiation into politics and their introduction to movement culture with its sense of community and shared purpose.
but scholars disagree over the movements real effectiveness in checking the war.
writers like john lewis gaddis strategies of containment 1982 explain americas eventual withdrawal from vietnam essentially without reference to the protesters in the streets.
others like todd gitlin the sixties years of hope days of rage 1987 insist that mass protest was the force that nally pressed the war to a conclusion.
debate over the counterculture not only pits liberals against conser vatives but also pits liberals against radicals.
a liberal historian like william oneill coming apart 1971 might sympathize with what he considers some of the worthy values pushed by student activists such as racial justice nonviolence and the antiwar movement but he also claims that much of the sixties youth culture degenerated into hedonism arrogance and social polarization.
in contrast younger historians such as michael kazin and maurice isserman argue that cultural radicalism and political radicalism were two sides of the same coin.
many young people in the sixties made little distinction between the personal and the political.
as sara evans demonstrates in personal politics 1980 the personal was the political for many women.
she nds the roots of modern feminism in the sexism women activists encountered in the civil rights and antiwar movements.
although scholars rightly see the 1960s as a liberal decade some have also started to focus on the other side of the political spectrum.
historians like lisa mcgirr suburban warriors 2001 argue that even though barry goldwater lost in a landslide in 1964 the conser vative movement he kick started laid the foundation for later successes by ronald reagan and both george bushes.
rebecca klatch shows in a generation divided 1999 how the new right fed off the new left reshaping american politics in profound ways.
liberal policies toward minorities women and the poor fueled the res of traditionalists who wanted a return to the good old days and the hedonistic counterculture sparked a religious revival that led to politically powerful groups like the moral majority by the 1970s.
while critics may argue over the good versus the bad sixties there is no denying the degree to which that tumultuous time for better or worse shaped the world in which we now live.
to learn more dan carter the politics of rage george wallace the origins of the new conservatism and the transformation of american politics 1995 robert dallek an unnished life john f kennedy 1917 1963 2003 alex haley the autobiography of malcolm x 1966 maurice isserman and michael kazin america divided the civil war of the 1960s 2000 robert f kennedy thirteen days 1969 lisa mcgirr suburban warriors the origins of the new american right 2001 james miller democracy is in the streets from port huron to the siege of chicago 1987 ann moody coming of age in mississippi 1968 bruce schulman lyndon b johnson and american liberalism 1994 jeremi suri power and protest global revolution and the rise of dtente 2003 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 shields between them and vindictive treatment by the victors.
the assassination unfortunately increased the bitterness in the north partly because of the fantastic rumor that jefferson davis had plotted it.
a few historians have argued that andrew johnson now president by bullet was crucied in lincolns stead.
the implication is that if the rail splitter had lived he would have suffered johnsons fate of being impeached by the embittered members of his own party who demanded harshness not forbearance toward the south.
the cruci xion thesis does not stand up under scrutiny.
lincoln no doubt would have clashed with congress in fact he had already found himself in some hot water.
the legislative branch normally struggles to win back the power that has been wrested from it by the executive in time of crisis.
but the surefooted and experienced lincoln could hardly have blundered into the same quicksands that engulfed johnson.
lincoln was a victorious president and there is no arguing with victory.
in addition to his powers of leadership re ned in the war crucible lincoln possessed in full mea sure tact sweet reasonableness and an uncommon amount of common sense.
andrew johnson hot tempered and impetuous lacked all of these priceless qualities.
prisoners from the front by winslow homer 1866 this celebrated painting reects the artists rsthand observations of the war.
homer brilliantly captured the enduring depths of sectional animosity.
the union ofcer somewhat disdainfully asserts his command of the situation the beaten and disarmed confederates exhibit an out at the elbows pride and deance.
fords theater with its tragic murder of lincoln set the stage for the wrenching ordeal of reconstruction.
the aftermath of the nightmare the civil war took a grisly toll in gore about as much as all of americas subsequent wars combined.
over 600 000 men died in action or of disease and in all over a million were killed or seriously wounded.
the number of dead amounting to 2 percent of the entire nations population greatly exceeded the number of americans killed in world war ii.
the modern equivalent would be a loss of some 6 million american lives.
to its lasting hurt the nation lost the cream of its young manhood and potential leadership.
in addition tens of thousands of babies went unborn because potential fathers were at the front.
direct monetary costs of the con ict totaled about 15 billion.
but this colossal gure does not include continuing expenses such as pensions and interest on the national debt.
the intangible costs dislocations disunities wasted energies lowered ethics blasted lives bitter memories and burning hates cannot be calculated.
the legacy of war nora august the fruits of emancipation an unidentied union soldier carved this ivory bust of the freedwoman nora august during the civil war.
note the elaborately braided hair a direct adaptation of a west african style.
the anonymous sculptor etched the following legend into the base of the statue carved from life.
retreat plantation.
presented to the nurses of darien ga in the year of our lord 1865 nora august slave.
age 23 years.
purchased from the market st augustine florida april 17th 1860 now a free woman the greatest constitutional decision of the century in a sense was written in blood and handed down at appomattox courthouse near which lee surrendered.
the extreme states righters were crushed.
the national government tested in the ery furnace of war emerged unbroken.
nullication and secession those twin nightmares of previous decades were laid to rest.
beyond doubt the civil war the nightmare of the republic was the supreme test of american democracy.
it nally answered the question in the words of lincoln at gettysburg whether a nation dedicated to such principles can long endure the preservation of democratic ideals though not an ofcially announced war aim was subconsciously one of the major objectives of the north.
victory for union arms also provided inspiration to the champions of democracy and liberalism the world over see thinking globally the era of nationalism pp.
the great eng lish reform bill of 1867 under which britain became a true political democracy was passed two years after the civil war ended.
american democracy had proved itself and its success was an additional argument used by the disfranchised british masses in securing similar blessings for themselves.
the lost cause of the south was lost but few americans today would argue that the result was not for the best.
the shameful cancer of slavery was sliced away by the sword and african americans were at last in a position to claim their rights to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
the nation was again united politically though for many generations still divided spiritually by the passions of the war.
grave dangers were averted by a union victory including the inde nite prolongation of the peculiar institution the unleashing of the slave power on weak caribbean neighbors and the transformation of the area from panama to hudson bay into an armed camp with several heavily armed and hostile states constantly snarling and sniping at one another.
america still had a long way to go to make the promises of freedom a reality for all its citizens black and white.
but emancipation laid the necessary groundwork and a united and democratic united states was free to ful ll its destiny as the dominant republic of the hemisphere and eventually of the world.
chapter 11 the triumphs and travails of the jeffersonian republic 1800 1812 unprepared to ght refused the request.
the british warship thereupon red three devastating broadsides at close range kill ing three americans and wounding eighteen.
four deserters were dragged away and the bloody hulk called the chesapeake limped back to port.
britain was clearly in the wrong as the london foreign ofce admitted.
but londons contrition availed little a roar of national wrath went up from infuriated americans.
jefferson the peace lover could easily have had war if he had wanted it.
the hated embargo national honor would not permit a slavish submission to british and french mistreatment.
yet a large scale foreign war was contrary to the settled policy of the new republic and in addition it would be futile.
the navy was weak thanks largely to jeffersons antinavalism and the army was even weaker.
a disastrous defeat would not improve americas plight.
the warring nations in europe depended heavily upon the united states for raw materials and foodstuffs.
in his eager search for an alternative to war jefferson seized upon this essential fact.
he reasoned that if america voluntarily cut off its exports the offending powers would be forced to bow hat in hand and agree to respect its rights.
responding to the presidential lash congress hastily passed the embargo act late in 1807 this rigorous law forbade the export of all goods from the united states whether in american or foreign ships.
more than just a compromise between submission and shooting the embargo embodied jeffersons idea of peaceful coercion if it worked the embargo would vindicate the rights of neutral nations and point to a new way of conducting foreign affairs.
if it failed jefferson feared the republic would perish subjugated to the european powers or sucked into their ferocious war.
the american economy staggered under the effect of the embargo long before britain or france began to bend.
forests of dead masts gradually lled new eng the prairie dog sickened at the sting of the hornet 1806 in this anti jefferson satire criticizing his negotiations for the purchase of west florida in 1804 napoleon in the form of a hornet stings jefferson and makes him cough up 2 million in gold coins the amount of the secret appropriation that jefferson sought from congress.
the negotiations eventually failed.
the embargo launching of the ship fame by george ropes jr 1802 shipyards like this one stirring bitter resentment.
lands once bustling harbors docks that had once rumbled were deserted except for illegal trade and soup kitchens cared for some of the hungry unemployed.
jeffersonian republicans probably hurt the commerce of new eng land which they avowedly were trying to protect far more than britain and france together were doing.
farmers of the south and west the strongholds of jefferson suffered no less disastrously than new eng land.
they were alarmed by the mounting piles of unexportable cotton grain and tobacco.
jefferson seemed to be waging war on his fellow citizens rather than on the offending foreign powers.
a federalist circular in massachusetts against the embargo cried out let every man who holds the name of america dear to him stretch forth his hands and put this accursed thing this embargo from him.
be resolute act like sons of liberty of god and your country nerve your arm with vengeance against the despot jefferson who would wrest the inestimable germ of your independence from you and you shall be conquerors.
jeffersons embargo throttled thriving new england an enormous illicit trade mushroomed in 1808 especially along the canadian border where bands of armed americans on loaded rafts overawed or overpowered federal agents.
irate citizens cynically transposed the letters of embargo to read o grab me go bar em and mobrage while heartily cursing the dambargo jefferson nonetheless induced congress to pass iron toothed enforcing legislation.
it was so inquisitorial and tyrannical as to cause some americans to think more kindly of george iii whom jefferson had berated in the declaration of independence.
one indignant new hampshirite denounced the president with this ditty our ships all in motion once whitend the ocean they saild and returnd with a cargo now doomd to decay they are fallen a prey to jefferson worms and embargo.
the embargo even had the effect of reviving the moribund federalist party.
gaining new converts its leaders hurled their nullication of the embargo into the teeth of the virginia lordlings in washington.
in 1804 the discredited federalists had polled only 14 electoral votes out of 176 in 1808 the embargo year the gure rose to 47 out of 175 new eng land seethed with chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 members of the armed forces were to be volunteers greatly easing anxieties among draft age youth.
the arab oil embargo and the energy crisis the long rumbling middle east erupted anew in october 1973 when the rearmed syrians and egyptians unleashed surprise attacks on israel in an attempt to regain the territory they had lost in the six day war of 1967 with the israelis in desperate retreat kissinger who had become secretary of state in september hastily ew to moscow in an effort to restrain the soviets who were arming the attackers.
believing that the kremlin was poised to y combat troops to the suez area nixon placed americas nuclear forces on alert and ordered a gigantic airlift of nearly 2 billion in war materials to the israelis.
this assistance helped save the day as the israelis aggressively turned the tide and threatened cairo itself before american diplomacy brought about an uneasy cease re to what became known as the yom kippur war.
americas policy of backing israel against its oilrich neighbors exacted a heavy penalty.
late in october 1973 the opec nations announced an embargo on oil shipments to the united states and several european allies supporting israel especially the netherlands.
what was more the oil rich arab states cut their oil production further ratcheting up pressure on the entire west whose citizens suffered a long winter uncle sams bed of nails the oil crises of the 1970s tortured the american economy.
of lowered thermostats and speedometers.
lines at gas stations grew longer as tempers grew shorter.
the shortage triggered a major economic recession not just in america but also in france and britain.
although the latter two countries had not supported israel and had thus been exempted from the embargo in an increasingly globalized interconnected world all nations soon felt the crunch.
the energy crisis suddenly energized a number of long deferred projects.
congress approved a costly alaska pipeline and a national speed limit of fty ve miles per hour to conserve fuel.
agitation mounted for heavier use of coal and nuclear power despite the environmental threat they posed.
the ve months of the arab blackmail embargo in 1974 clearly signaled the end of an era the era of cheap and abundant energy.
a twenty year surplus of world oil supplies had masked the fact that since 1948 the united states had been a net importer of oil.
amer ican oil production peaked in 1970 and then began an irreversible decline.
blissfully unaware of their dependence on foreign suppliers americans like revelers on a binge had more than tripled their oil consumption since the end of world war ii.
the number of automobiles increased 250 percent between 1949 and 1972 and detroits engineers gave nary a thought to build ing more fuel efcient engines.
by 1974 america was oil addicted and extremely vulnerable to any interruption in supplies.
that stark fact would deeply color the diplomatic and economic history of the next three decades and beyond as the the watergate scandal oil shock when opec dramatically jacked up oil prices in the 1970s many americans as represented by the henry kissinger gure in this cartoon were slow to realize that an era of low energy prices had ended forever.
middle east loomed ever larger on the map of americas strategic interests.
opec approximately quadrupled its price for crude oil after lifting the embargo in 1974 huge new oil bills wildly disrupted the u s balance of international trade and added further fuel to the already raging res of ination.
the united states took the lead in forming the international energy agency in 1974 as a counterweight to opec and various sectors of the economy including detroits carmakers began their slow grudging adjustment to the rudely dawning age of energy dependency.
but full reconciliation to that uncomfortable reality was a long time coming.
watergate and the unmaking of a president nixons electoral triumph in 1972 was almost immediately sullied and eventually undone by the socalled watergate scandal.
on june 17 1972 ve men were arrested in the watergate apartment ofce complex in washington after a bungled effort to plant electronic bugs in the democratic partys headquarters.
they were soon revealed to be working for the republican committee to re elect the president popularly known as creep.
the watergate break in turned out to be just one in a series of nixon administration dirty tricks that included forging documents to discredit democrats using the internal revenue service to harass innocent citizens named on a white house enemies list burglarizing the ofce of the psychiatrist who had treated the leaker of the pentagon papers and perverting the fbi and the cia to cover the tricksters tracks.
meanwhile the moral stench hanging over the white house worsened when vice president agnew was forced to resign in october 1973 for taking bribes from maryland contractors while governor and also as vice president.
in the rst use of the twenty fth amendment see the appendix nixon nominated and congress con rmed agnews successor a twelve term congressman from michigan gerald jerry ford.
amid a mood of growing national outrage a select senate committee conducted widely televised hearings about the watergate affair in 1973 1974.
nixon indignantly denied any prior knowledge of the breakin and any involvement in the legal proceedings against the burglars.
but john dean iii a former white house lawyer with a remarkable memory accused top white house ofcials including the president of obstructing justice by trying to cover up the watergate break in and silence its perpetrators.
then another former white house aide revealed that a secret taping system had recorded most of nixons oval ofce conversations.
now deans sensational testimony could be checked against the white house tapes and the senate committee could better determine who was telling the truth.
but nixon stubbornly citing his executive privilege refused to hand over the tapes.
then on october 20 1973 he ordered the saturday night massacre ring his own special prosecutor appointed to investigate the watergate scandal as well as his attorney general and deputy attorney general because they had refused to go along with ring the prosecutor.
responding at last to the house judiciary committees demand for the watergate tapes nixon agreed in the spring of 1974 to the publication of relevant portions of the tapes with many sections missing including nixons frequent obscenities which were excised with the phrase expletive deleted.
but on july 24 1974 the president suffered a disastrous setback when the supreme court unanimously ruled that executive privilege gave him no right to withhold evidence relevant to possible criminal activity.
skating on thin ice over hot water nixon reluctantly complied.
seeking to soften the impact of inevitable disclosure nixon now made public three subpoenaed tapes of conversations with his chief aide on june 23 1972 chapter 30 the war to end war 1917 1918 suffragists picket the white house 1917 militant feminists sometimes handcuffed themselves to the white house fence to dramatize their appeal for the vote to the president.
table 30 1 a chronology of womens right to vote in national elections in selected nations new zealand australia white women only until aborigines included in 1962 finland denmark iceland austria canada women of british and french extraction only until 1950 germany hungary poland russian federation united kingdom only women who were married householders or university graduates age 30 or over until 1928 netherlands sweden united states czechoslovakia mongolia south africa whites only until 1994 turkey spain but women lost the vote under the dictator francisco franco 1936 1976 brazil cuba france italy japan yugoslavia argentina mexico pakistan israel south korea china syrian arab republic haiti india greece lebanon egypt iran afghanistan revoked under taliban rule 1996 2001 switzerland jordan kuwait sources caroline daley and melanie nolan eds suffrage and beyond international feminist perspectives 1994 issues wmndocs suffrage htm womens history international woman suffrage timeline.
health care.
in doing so it also expanded the responsibility of the federal government for family welfare.
feminists continued to ex their political muscle in the postwar decade pressing for more laws to protect women in the workplace and prohibit child labor.
complete success often eluded them in those crusades but the developments of the world war i era nevertheless foreshadowed a future when womens wage labor and political power would reshape the american way of life.
forging a war economy mobilization relied as much on the heated emotions of patriotism as on the cool majesty of the laws.
the largely voluntary character of economic war orga ni zation testied to ocean insulated americas safe distance from the ghting as well as to the still modest scale of government powers in the progressive era republic.
but as the war wore on government took greater command of the nations resources to secure an allied victory.
as the larder of democracy america had to feed itself and its allies.
by a happy inspiration the man chosen to head the food administration was the quaker humanitarian herbert c hoover.
he was already considered a hero because he had successfully led a massive charitable drive to feed the starving people of war racked belgium.
in common with other american war administrators hoover preferred to rely on voluntary compliance rather than on compulsory edicts.
he deliberately rejected issuing ration cards a practice used in europe.
instead he waged a whirlwind propaganda campaign through posters billboards newspapers pulpits and doughboys in france movies.
to save food for export hoover proclaimed wheatless wednesdays and meatless tuesdays all on a voluntary basis.
even children when eating apples were urged to be patriotic to the core the country soon broke out in a rash of vegetable victory gardens as perspiring patriots hoed their way to victory in backyards and vacant lots.
congress severely restricted the use of foodstuffs for manufacturing alcoholic beverages and the war spawned spirit of self denial helped accelerate the wave of prohibition that was sweeping the country.
many leading brewers were german descended and this taint made the drive against alcohol all the more popular.
the reformers dream of a saloonless nation was nally achieved temporarily in 1919 with the passage of the eighteenth amendment prohibiting all alcoholic drinks.
thanks to the fervent patriotic wartime spirit hoovers voluntary approach worked.
farm production increased by one fourth and food exports to the allies tripled in volume.
hoovers methods were widely imitated in other war agencies.
the fuel administration exhorted americans to save fuel with heat less mondays lightless nights and gasless sundays the treasury department sponsored huge parades and invoked slogans like halt the hun to promote four great liberty loan drives followed by a victory loan campaign in 1919 together these efforts netted the then fantastic sum of about 21 billion or twothirds of the current cost of the war to the united states.
the remainder was raised by increased taxes which unlike the loan subscriptions were obligatory.
the ultimate bill including interest and veterans benets mounted to some 112 billion.
pressures of various kinds patriotic and otherwise were used to sell bonds.
the unfortunate german american who could not display a liberty bond button might nd his or her house bedaubed with yellow paint.
a number of reluctant investors in war bonds were roughly handled.
in at least one instance a man signed for a bond with a rope around his neck.
despite the wilson administrations preference for voluntary means of mobilizing the economy over the course of the war it expanded the federal government in size and power.
the war industries board issued production quotas allocated raw materials and set prices for government purchases.
following indescribable trafc snarls in late 1917 washington took over the railroads.
time itself came under uncle sams control when the entire country was ordered to observe daylight saving time to extend the workday and save on fuel.
making plowboys into doughboys food for thought wartime agencies ooded the country with posters like this in 1917 1918 exhorting women on the home front to grow their own and thus ease the pressure on food supplies.
most citizens at the outset did not dream of sending a mighty force to france.
as far as ghting went america would use its navy to uphold freedom of the seas.
it would continue to ship war materials to the allies and supply them with loans which nally totaled nearly 10 billion.
but in april and may of 1917 the european associates laid their cards on the table.
they confessed that they were scraping the bottom not only of their money chests but more ominously of chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 celebrating the camp david agreement september 1978 anwar sadat of egypt left and menachem begin of israel right join u s president jimmy carter in conrming the historic accord that brought the hope of peace to the war torn middle east.
the new presidents popularity remained exceptionally high during his rst few months in ofce even when he courted public disfavor by courageously keeping his campaign promise to pardon some ten thousand draft evaders of the vietnam war era.
but carters honeymoon did not last long.
an inexperienced outsider he had campaigned against the washington establishment and never quite made the transition to being an insider himself.
he repeatedly rubbed congressional fur the wrong way especially by failing to consult adequately with the leaders.
critics charged that he isolated himself in a shallow pool of fellow georgians whose ignorance of the ways of washington compounded the problems of their greenhorn chief.
carters humanitarian diplomacy as a committed christian president carter displayed from the outset an overriding concern for human rights as the guiding principle of his foreign policy.
in the african nations of rhodesia later zimbabwe and south africa carter and his eloquent u n am bassador andrew young championed the oppressed black majority.
the presidents most spectacular foreign policy achievement came in september 1978 when he invited president anwar sadat of egypt and prime minister menachem begin of israel to a summit conference at camp david the woodsy presidential retreat in the maryland highlands.
skillfully serving as go between carter persuaded the two visitors to sign an accord september 17 1978 that held considerable promise of peace.
israel agreed in principle to withdraw from territory conquered in the 1967 war and egypt in return promised to respect israels borders.
both parties pledged themselves to sign a formal peace treaty within three months.
the president crowned this diplomatic success by resuming full diplomatic relations with china in early 1979 after a nearly thirty year interruption.
carter also successfully pushed through two treaties to turn over the panama canal to the panamanians.
although these treaties were decried by conser vatives such as ronald reagan who stridently declared we bought it we paid for it we built it and we intend to keep it the united states gave up control of the canal on december 31 1999 carter s foreign and economic policies historical double take many americans who looked back reverently to theodore roosevelts rough rider diplomacy were outraged at the panama giveaway but the carter administration looking to the future argued persuasively that relinquishing control of the canal would be healthy for u s latin american relations.
despite these dramatic accomplishments trouble stalked carters foreign policy.
overshadowing all international issues was the ominous reheating of the cold war with the soviet union.
dtente fell into disrepute as thousands of cuban troops assisted by soviet advisers appeared in angola ethiopia and elsewhere in africa to support revolutionary factions.
arms control negotiations with moscow stalled in the face of this soviet military meddling.
economic and energy woes adding to carters mushrooming troubles was the failing health of the economy.
a stinging recession during fords presidency had brought the ination rate down slightly to just under 6 percent but from the moment carter took over prices resumed their dizzying ascent driv ing the ination rate well above 13 percent by 1980 see figure 39 2.
the soaring bill for imported oil plunged americas balance of payments deeply into the red an unprecedented 40 billion in 1978.
the oil shocks of the 1970s taught americans a painful but necessary lesson that they could never again seriously consider a policy of economic isolation as they had tried to do in the decades between the two world wars.
for most of american history foreign trade had accounted for no more than 10 percent of gross national product gnp.
but huge foreign oil bills drove that gure steadily upward in the 1970s and thereafter.
by centurys end some 27 percent of gnp depended on foreign trade.
unable to dominate international trade and nance as easily as they once had americans would have to master foreign languages and study foreign cultures if they wanted to prosper in the rapidly globalizing economy.
yawning decits in the federal budget reaching nearly 60 billion in 1980 further aggravated the u s economys inationary ailments.
the elderly and other americans living on xed incomes suffered from the shrinking dollar.
people with money to lend pushed interest rates ever higher hoping to protect themselves from being repaid in badly depreciated dollars.
the prime rate the rate of interest that banks charge their very best customers vaulted to an unheard of 20 percent in early 1980 the high cost of borrowing money shoved small businesses to the wall and strangled the construction industry which was heavily dependent on loans to nance new housing and other projects.
carter diagnosed americas economic disease as stemming primarily from the nations costly dependence on foreign oil.
unfortunately his legislative proposals for energy conservation in 1977 ignited a blaze of indifference among the american people who had already forgotten the long gasoline lines of 1973 events in iran jolted americans out of their complacency about energy supplies in 1979 the imperious mohammed reza pahlevi installed as shah of iran with help from americas cia in 1953 had long ruled his oil rich land with a will of steel.
his repressive regime was nally overthrown in january 1979 violent revolution was spearheaded in iran by muslim fundamentalists who ercely resented the shahs campaign to westernize and secularize his country.
denouncing the united states as the great satan that had abetted the shahs efforts these extremists engulfed iran in chaos in the wake of his departure.
the crippling upheavals soon spread to irans oil elds.
as iranian oil stopped owing into the stream of world commerce chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 quadrupled in size from 100 000 to 400 000 in the rst decade after emancipation.
these churches formed the bedrock of black community life and they soon gave rise to other benevolent fraternal and mutual aid societies.
all these orga ni zations helped blacks protect their newly won freedom.
emancipation also meant education for many blacks.
learning to read and write had been a privilege generally denied to them under slavery.
freedmen wasted no time establishing societies for self improvement which undertook to raise funds to purchase land build schoolhouses and hire teachers.
one member of a north carolina education society asserted that a schoolhouse would be the rst proof of their independence southern blacks soon found however that the demand outstripped the supply of qualied black teachers.
they accepted the aid of northern white women sent by the american missionary association who volunteered their ser vices as teachers.
they also turned to the federal government for help.
the freed blacks were going to need all the friends and power they could muster in washington.
the freedmens bureau abolitionists had long preached that slavery was a degrading institution.
now the emancipators were faced with the brutal reality that the freedmen were overwhelmingly unskilled unlettered without property or money and with scant knowledge of how to survive as free people.
to cope with this problem throughout the conquered south congress created the freedmens bureau on march 3 1865 on paper at least the bureau was intended to be a kind of primitive welfare agency.
it was to provide food clothing medical care and education both to freedmen and to white refugees.
heading the bureau was a women from the north enthusiastically embraced the opportunity to go south and teach in freedmens bureau schools for emancipated blacks.
one volunteer explained her motives i thought i must do something not having money at my command what could i do but give myself to the work.
i would go to them and give them my life if necessary.
warmly sympathetic friend of blacks union general oliver o howard who later founded and served as president of howard university in washington d c the bureau achieved its greatest successes in education.
it taught an estimated 200 000 blacks how to read.
many former slaves had a passion for learning partly because they wanted to close the gap between themselves and whites and partly because they longed to read the word of god.
in one elementary class in north carolina sat four generations of the same family ranging from a six year old child to a seventy ve yearold grandmother.
but in other areas the bureaus accomplishments were meager or even mischievous.
although the bureau was authorized to settle former slaves on forty acre tracts conscated from the confederates little land actually made it into blacks hands.
instead local administrators often collaborated with planters in expelling blacks from towns and cajoling them into signing labor contracts to work for their former masters.
still the white south resented the bureau as a meddlesome federal interloper that threatened to upset white racial dominance.
president andrew johnson who shared the white supremacist views of most white southerners repeatedly tried to kill it and it expired in 1872 johnson the tailor president few presidents have ever been faced with a more perplexing sea of troubles than that confronting andrew johnson.
what manner of man was this medium built dark eyed black haired tennessean now chief executive by virtue of the bullet that killed lincoln.
no citizen not even lincoln has ever reached the white house from humbler beginnings.
born to impoverished parents in north carolina and orphaned early johnson never attended school but was apprenticed to a tailor at age ten.
ambitious to get ahead he taught himself to read and later his wife taught him to write and do simple arithmetic.
like many another self made man he was inclined to overpraise his maker.
johnson early became active in politics in tennessee where he had moved when seventeen years old.
he shone as an impassioned champion of poor whites against the planter aristocrats although he himself ultimately owned a few slaves.
he excelled as a two sted stump speaker before angry and heckling crowds who on occasion greeted his political oratory with cocked pistols not just cocked ears.
elected to congress he attracted much favorable attention in the johnson s plans for the south crushed by the constitution president andrew johnson revered the u s constitution but eventually felt its awesome weight in his impeachment trial.
north but not the south when he refused to secede with his own state.
after tennessee was partially redeemed by union armies he was appointed war governor and served courageously in an at mosphere of danger.
political exigency next thrust johnson into the vice presidency.
lincolns union party in 1864 needed to attract support from the war democrats and other prosouthern elements and johnson a democrat seemed to be the ideal man.
unfortunately he appeared at the vice presidential inaugural ceremonies the following march in a scandalous condition.
he had recently been af icted with typhoid fever and although not known as a heavy drinker he was urged by his friends to take a stiff bracer of whiskey.
this he did with unfortunate results.
old andy johnson was no doubt a man of parts unpolished parts.
he was intelligent able forceful and gifted with homespun honesty.
steadfastly devoted to duty and to the people he was a dogmatic champion of states rights and the constitution.
he would often present a copy of the document to visitors and he was buried with one as a pillow.
yet the man who had raised himself from the tailors bench to the presidents chair was a mist.
a southerner who did not understand the north a tennessean who had earned the distrust of the south a democrat who had never been accepted by the republicans a president who had never been elected to the ofce he was not at home in a republican white house.
hotheaded contentious and stubborn he was the wrong man in the wrong place at the wrong time.
a reconstruction policy devised by angels might well have failed in his tactless hands.
presidential reconstruction even before the shooting war had ended the political war over reconstruction had begun.
abraham lincoln believed that the southern states had never legally withdrawn from the union.
their formal restoration to the union would therefore be relatively simple.
accordingly lincoln in 1863 proclaimed his 10 percent reconstruction plan.
it decreed that a state could be reintegrated into the union when 10 percent of its voters in the presidential election of 1860 had taken an oath of allegiance to the united states and pledged to abide by emancipation.
the next step would be formal erection of a state government.
lincoln would then recognize the puried regime.
lincolns proclamation provoked a sharp reaction in congress where republicans feared the restoration of the planter aristocracy to power and the possible reenslavement of blacks.
republicans therefore rammed through congress in 1864 the wade davis bill.
the bill required that 50 percent of a states voters take the oath of allegiance and demanded stronger safeguards for chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 in the full enjoyment of the gifts of heaven and the fruits of superior industry economy and virtue every man is equally entitled to protection by law but when the laws undertake to add to those natural and just advantages articial distinctions.
and exclusive privileges.
the humble members of society the farmers mechanics and laborers.
have a right to complain of the injustice of their government.
t he so called era of good feelings was never entirely tranquil but even the illusion of national consensus was shattered by the panic of 1819 and the missouri compromise of 1820 economic distress and the slavery issue raised the political stakes in the 1820s and 1830s.
vigorous political con ict once feared came to be celebrated as necessary for the health of democracy.
new political parties emerged.
new styles of campaigning took hold.
a new chapter 12 the second war for independence and the upsurge of nationalism 1812 1824 the nations rst writers of importance to use american scenes and themes.
school textbooks often british in an earlier era were now being written by americans for americans.
in the world of magazines the highly intellectual north american review began publication in 1815 the year of the triumph at new orleans.
even american painters increasingly celebrated their native landscapes on their canvases.
a fresh nationalistic spirit could be recognized in many other areas as well.
the rising tide of nationconsciousness even touched nance.
a revived bank of the united states was voted by congress in 1816 a more handsome national capital began to rise from the ashes of washington.
the army was expanded to ten thousand men.
the navy further covered itself with glory in 1815 when it administered a thorough beating to the piratical plunderers of north africa.
stephen decatur naval hero of the war of 1812 and of the barbary coast expeditions pungently captured the countrys nationalist mood in a famous toast made on his return from the mediterranean campaigns our country.
in her intercourse with foreign nations may she always be in the right but our country right or wrong the american system nationalism likewise manifested itself in manufacturing.
patriotic americans took pride in the factories that had recently mushroomed forth largely as a result of the self imposed embargoes and the war.
when hostilities ended in 1815 british competitors undertook to recover lost ground.
they began to dump the contents of their bulging warehouses on the united states often cutting their prices below cost in an effort to strangle the american war baby factories in the cradle.
the infant industries bawled lustily for protection.
to many red blooded americans it seemed as though the british having failed to crush yankee ghters on the battleeld were now seeking to crush yankee factories in the marketplace.
a nationalist congress out federalizing the old federalists responded by passing the path breaking tariff of 1816 the rst tariff in american history instituted primarily for protection not revenue.
its rates roughly 20 to 25 percent on the value of dutiable imports were not high enough to provide completely adequate safeguards but the law was a bold beginning.
a strongly protective trend was started that stimulated the appetites of the protected for more protection.
nationalism was further highlighted by a grandiose plan of henry clay for developing a protable home henry clay 1777 1852 by john neagle 1843 this painting hangs in the corridors of the house of representatives where clay worked as a glamorous eloquent and ambitious congressman for many years.
best known for promoting his nationalistic american system of protective tariffs for eastern manufactures and federally nanced canals and highways to benet the west clay is surrounded here by symbols of ourishing agriculture and burgeoning industries in the new nation.
still radiating the nationalism of war hawk days he threw himself behind an elaborate scheme known by 1824 as the american system.
this system had three main parts.
it began with a strong banking system which would provide easy and abundant credit.
clay also advocated a protective tariff behind which eastern manufacturing would ourish.
revenues gushing from the tariff would provide funds for the third component of the american system a network of roads and canals especially in the burgeoning ohio valley.
through these new arteries of transportation would ow foodstuffs and raw materials from the south and west to the north and east.
in exchange a stream legacies of the war of 1812 of manufactured goods would ow in the return direction knitting the country together economically and politically.
persistent and eloquent demands by henry clay and others for better transportation struck a responsive chord with the public.
the recent attempts to invade canada had all failed partly because of oath provoking roads or no roads at all.
people who have dug wagons out of hub deep mud do not quickly forget their blisters and backaches.
an outcry for better transportation rising most noisily in the road poor west was one of the most striking aspects of the nationalism inspired by the war of 1812 but attempts to secure federal funding for roads and canals stumbled on republican constitutional scruples.
congress voted in 1817 to distribute 1 5 million to the states for internal improvements but president madison sternly vetoed this handout mea sure as unconstitutional.
the individual states were thus forced to venture ahead with construction programs of their own including the erie canal triumphantly completed by new york in 1825 jeffersonian republicans who had gulped down hamiltonian loose constructionism on other important problems choked on the idea of direct federal support of intrastate internal improvements.
new eng land in particular strongly opposed federally constructed roads and canals because such outlets would further drain away population and create competing states beyond the mountains.
the so called era of good feelings james monroe six feet tall somewhat stooped courtly and mild mannered was nominated for the presidency in 1816 by the republicans.
they thus undertook to continue the so called virginia dynasty of washington jefferson and madison.
the fading federalists ran a candidate for the last time in their checkered history and he was crushed by 183 electoral votes to 34 the vanquished federalist party was gasping its dying breaths leaving the eld to the triumphant republicans and one party rule.
in james monroe the man and the times auspiciously met.
as the last president to wear an old style cocked hat he straddled two generations the bygone age of the founding fathers and the emergent age of nationalism.
never brilliant and perhaps not great the serene virginian with gray blue eyes was in intellect and personal force the least distinguished of the rst eight presidents.
but the times called for sober admin nationalist pride ca.
1820 nationalist sentiments swelled in the wake of the war of 1812 as americans dened their countrys very identity with reference to its antimonarchical origins.
istration not dashing heroics.
and monroe was an experienced levelheaded executive with an ear tothe ground talent for interpreting popular rumblings.
emerging nationalism was further cemented by a goodwill tour monroe undertook early in 1817 ostensibly to inspect military defenses.
he pushed northward deep into new eng land and then westward to detroit viewing en route niagara falls.
even in federalist new eng land the enemys country he received a heartwarming welcome a boston newspaper was so bostons columbian centinel was not the only newspaper to regard president monroes early months as the era of good feelings.
washingtons national intelligencer observed in july 1817 never before perhaps since the institution of civil government did the same harmony the same absence of party spirit the same national feeling pervade a community.
the result is too consoling to dispute too nicely about the cause.
chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 freedmen voting richmond virginia 1871 the exercise of democratic rights by former slaves constituted a political and social revolution in the south and was bitterly resented by whites.
employers and government and recruiting militias to protect black communities from white retaliation.
though african american women did not obtain the right to vote they too assumed new political roles.
black women faithfully attended the parades and rallies common in black communities during the early years of reconstruction and helped assemble mass meetings in the newly constructed black churches.
they even showed up at the constitutional conventions held throughout the south in 1867 monitoring the proceedings and participating in informal votes outside the convention halls.
but black men elected as delegates to the state constitutional conventions held the greater political authority.
they formed the backbone of the black political community.
at the conventions they sat down with whites to hammer out new state constitutions which most importantly provided for universal male suffrage.
though the subsequent elections produced no black governors or majorities in state senates black political participation expanded exponentially during reconstruction.
between 1868 and 1876 fourteen black congressmen and two black senators hiram revels and blanche k bruce both of mississippi served in washington d c blacks also served in state governments as lieutenant governors and representatives and in local governments as mayors magistrates sheriffs and justices of the peace.
the sight of former slaves holding ofce deeply offended their onetime masters who lashed out with particular fury at the freedmens white allies labeling them scalawags and carpetbaggers.
the so called scalawags were southerners often former unionists and whigs.
the former confederates accused them often with wild exaggeration of plundering the treasuries of the southern states through their political inuence in the radical governments.
the carpetbaggers on the other hand were supposedly sleazy northerners who had packed all their worldly goods into a carpetbag suitcase at wars end and had come south to seek personal power and prot.
in fact most were former union soldiers and northern businessmen and professionals who wanted to play a role in modernizing the new south how well did the radical regimes rule.
the radical legislatures passed much desirable legislation and introduced many badly needed reforms.
for the rst time in southern history steps were taken toward establishing adequate public schools.
tax systems were streamlined public works were launched and property rights radical reconstruction black reconstruction a composite portrait of the rst black senators and representatives in the forty rst and forty second congresses.
senator hiram revels on the left was elected in 1870 to the seat that had been occupied by jefferson davis when the south seceded.
were guaranteed to women.
many welcome reforms were retained by the all white redeemer governments that later returned to power.
despite these achievements graft ran rampant in many radical governments.
this was especially true in south carolina and louisiana where conscienceless promoters and other pocket padders used politically inexperienced blacks as pawns.
the worst black andwhite legislatures purchased as legislative supplies such stationery as hams perfumes suspenders bonnets corsets champagne and a cof n one thrifty carpetbag governor in a single year saved 100 000 from a salary of 8 000.
yet this sort of corruption was by no means con ned to the south in these postwar years.
the crimes of the reconstruction governments were no more outrageous than the scams and felonies being perpetrated in the north at the same time especially in boss tweeds new york.
the ku klux klan deeply embittered some southern whites resorted to savage mea sures against radical rule.
many whites resented the success and ability of black legislators as much as they resented alleged corruption a number of secret orga ni zations mushroomed forth the most notorious of which was the invisible empire of the south or ku klux klan founded in tennessee in 1866 besheeted nightriders their horses hooves mufed would approach the cabin of an upstart black and hammer on the door.
in ghoulish tones one thirsty horseman would demand a bucket of water.
then under pretense of drinking he would pour it into a rubber attachment concealed beneath his mask and gown smack his lips and declare that this was the rst water he had tasted since he was killed at the battle of shiloh.
if fright did not produce the desired effect force was employed.
such tomfoolery and terror proved partially effective.
many ex bondsmen and white carpetbaggers quick to take a hint shunned the polls.
those stubborn souls who persisted in their upstart ways were ogged mutilated or even murdered.
in one louisiana parish in 1868 whites in two days killed or wounded two hundred victims a pile of twenty ve bodies was found half buried in the woods.
by such atrocious practices were blacks kept in their place that is down.
the klan became a refuge for numerous bandits and cutthroats.
any scoundrel could don a sheet.
chapter 40 the resurgence of conservatism 1980 1992 disobedience.
protesters in the 1960s blocked entrances to draft ofces protesters in the 1980s blocked entrances to abortion clinics.
several leaders of the religious right fell from grace in the latter part of the decade.
one tearfully admitted to repeated trysts with prostitutes.
another went to prison following revelations of his own nancial and sexual misconduct.
but such scandals would not shake the faith of americas conser vative christians or diminish the new political clout of activist evangelical religionists.
conservatism in the courts if the budget was reagans chief weapon in the war against the welfare state the courts became his principal instrument in the cultural wars demanded by the religious right.
by the time he left ofce reagan had appointed a near majority of all sitting judges.
equally important he had named three conser vativeminded justices to the u s supreme court.
they included sandra day oconnor a brilliant public spirited arizona judge.
when she was sworn in on september 25 1981 she became the rst woman to ascend to the high bench in the courts nearly two hundred year history.
reaganism repudiated two great icons of the liberal political culture af rmative action and abortion.
the court showed its newly conser vative colors in 1984 when it decreed in a case involving memphis reghters that union rules about job seniority could outweigh af rmative action concerns in guiding promotion policies in the citys re department.
in two cases in 1989 wards cove packing v antonia and martin v wilks the court made it more difcult to prove that an employer practiced racial discrimination in hiring and made it easier for white males to argue that they were the victims of reverse discrimination by employers who followed af rmative action practices.
congress passed legislation in 1991 that partially reversed the effects of those decisions.
the contentious issue of abortion also reached the court in 1989 in the case of roe v wade in 1973 the supreme court had prohibited states from making laws that interfered with a womans right to an abortion during the early months of pregnancy.
for nearly two decades that decision had been the bedrock principle on which pro choice advocates built their case for abortion rights.
it had also provoked bitter criticism from roman catholics and various right to life the justice is a lady 1981 herblock hails sandra day oconnors appointment to the supreme court.
groups who wanted a virtually absolute ban on all abortions.
in webster v reproductive health services the court in july 1989 did not entirely overturn roe but it seriously compromised roes protection of abortion rights.
by approving a missouri law that imposed certain restrictions on abortion the court signaled that it was inviting the states to legislate in an area in which roe had previously forbidden them to legislate.
the court renewed that invitation in planned parenthood v casey in 1992 when it ruled that states could restrict access to abortion as long as they did not place an undue burden on the woman.
using this standard the court held that pennsylvania could not compel a wife to notify her husband about an abortion but could require a minor child to notify parents as well as other restrictions.
right to life advocates were at rst delighted by the webster decision.
but the courts ruling also galva reagan s legacy speaking to the national association of evangelicals president ronald reagan said the following about abortion more than a decade ago a supreme court decision roe v wade 1973 literally wiped off the books of fty states statutes protecting the rights of unborn children.
abortion on demand now takes the lives of up to 1 million unborn children a year.
human life legislation ending this tragedy will some day pass the congress and you and i must never rest until it does.
unless and until it can be proven that the unborn child is not a living entity then its right to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness must be protected.
nized pro choice orga ni zations into a new militancy.
bruising divisive battles loomed as state legislatures across the land confronted abortion.
this painful cultural con ict over the unborn was also part of the reagan eras bequest to the future.
referendum on reaganism in 1988 republicans lost control of the senate in the off year elections of november 1986 hopes rose among democrats that the reagan revolution might be showing signs of political vulnerability at last.
the newly democratic majority in the senate exed its political muscles in 1987 when it rejected an ultraconservative nominee for the supreme court.
democrats also relished the prospect of making political hay out of both the iran contra affair and disquieting signs of economic trouble.
the double mountain of decits the federal budget decit and the international trade decit continued to grow ominously.
falling oil prices blighted the economy of the southwest slashing real estate values and undermining hundreds of savings and loan s l institutions.
the damage to the s ls was so massive that a federal rescue operation was eventually estimated to carry a price tag of well over 500 billion.
meanwhile many american banks found themselves holding nearworthless loans they had unwisely foisted upon third world countries especially in latin america.
in 1984 it took federal assistance to save continental illinois bank from a catastrophic failure.
more banks and savings institutions were folding than at any time since the great depression of the 1930s.
a wave of mergers acquisitions and leveraged buyouts washed over wall street leaving many brokers and traders megarich and many companies saddled with megadebt.
a cold spasm of fear struck the money markets on black monday october 19 1987 when the leading stock market index plunged 508 points the largest one day decline in history to that point.
this crash said newsweek magazine heralded the nal collapse of the money culture.
the death knell of the 1980s but as mark twain famously commented about his own obituary this announcement proved premature.
hoping to cash in on these ethical and economic anxieties a pack of democrats dubbed the seven dwarfs by derisive republicans chased after their partys 1988 presidential nomination.
the handsome and charismatic democratic front runner former colorado senator gary hart was forced to drop out of the race in may 1987 after charges of sexual misconduct.
african american candidate jesse jackson a rousing speechmaker who hoped to forge a rainbow coalition of minorities and the disadvantaged campaigned energetically.
but the democratic nomination in the end went to the coolly cerebral governor of massachusetts michael dukakis.
republicans nominated reagans vice president george h w bush who ran largely on the reagan record of tax cuts strong defense policies toughness on crime opposition to abortion and a long running if hardly robust economic expansion.
dukakis made little headway exploiting the ethical and economic sore spots and came across to television hollywood director oliver stones b.
1946 lm wall street both romanticized and vilied the business culture of the 1980s.
the character of gordon gekko inspired by real life corporate raider ivan boesky captured the spirit of the times ladies and gentlemen greed is good.
greed works greed is right.
greed for life money love knowledge has marked the upward surge of mankind and greed mark my words will save the malfunctioning corporation called the u s a chapter 40 the resurgence of conservatism 1980 1992 still intimidating military muscles in tiny panama in december 1989 when he sent airborne troops to capture dictator and drug lord manuel noriega.
still more ominous events in the summer of 1990 severely tested bushs dream of a democratic and peaceful new world order.
on august 2 saddam hussein the brutal and ambitious ruler of iraq sent his armies to overrun kuwait a tiny oil rich desert sheikdom on iraqs southern frontier.
oil fueled saddams aggression.
financially exhausted by its eight year war with iran which had ended in a stalemate in 1988 iraq needed kuwaits oil to pay its huge war bills.
saddams larger design was ironsted control over the entire persian gulf region.
with his hand thus rmly clutching the worlds economic jugular vein he dreamed of dictating the terms of oil supplies to the industrial nations and perhaps of totally extinguishing the arabs enemy israel.
ironically the united states and its allies had helped supply saddam with the tools of aggression.
he was widely known to be a thug and assassin who intimidated his underlings by showing them the bodies of his executed adversaries hanging on meat hooks.
but in the 1980s american enmity for islamicfundamentalist iran was intense and saddam was at war with iran.
assuming that the enemy of my enemy is my friend american policymakers helped build saddams military machine into a formidable force.
on august 2 1990 saddams army roared into kuwait.
the speed and audacity of the invasion was stunning but the world responded just as swiftly.
the united nations security council unanimously condemned the invasion on august 3 and demanded the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of iraqs troops.
when an economic embargo failed to squeeze the iraqis into compliance by november the security council delivered an ultimatum to saddam to leave kuwait by january 15 1991 or u n forces would use all necessary means to expel his troops.
for perhaps the rst time in the post world war ii era the u n seemed to be ful lling its founders dreams that it could preserve international order by putting guns where its mouth was.
it also put them where the worlds critical oil supply was.
in a logistical operation of astonishing complexity the united states spearheaded a massive international military deployment on the sandy arabian peninsula.
as the january 15 deadline approached some 539 000 u s soldiers sailors and pilots many of them women and all of them members of the new post vietnam all volunteer american military swarmed into the persian gulf region.
they were joined by nearly 270 000 troops pilots and sailors from twenty eight other countries in the coalition opposed to iraq.
when all diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis failed the u s congress voted regretfully on january 12 to approve the use of force.
on january 16 the time bomb of war ticked off its last beats.
the united states and its u n allies unleashed a hellish air attack against iraq.
for thirty seven days warplanes pummeled targets in occupied kuwait and in iraq itself in an awesome display of high technology precision targeting modern warfare.
iraq responded to this pounding by launching several dozen scud short range ballistic missiles against military and civilian targets in saudi arabia and israel.
these missile attacks claimed several lives but did no signicant military damage.
yet if iraq made but a feeble military response to the air campaign the allied commander the beefy and blunt american general norman stormin norman schwarzkopf took nothing for granted.
saddam who had threatened to wage the mother of all battles had the capacity to inict awful damage.
iraq had stockpiled tons of chemical and biological weapons including poison gas and the means to spread epidemics of anthrax.
saddams tactics also included ecological warfare as he released a gigantic oil slick into the persian gulf to forestall amphibious assault and ignited hundreds of oil well res whose smoky plumes shrouded the ground from aerial view.
faced with these horrifying tactics schwarzkopfs strategy was starkly simple soften the iraqis with relentless bombing then suffocate them on the ground with a tidal wave rush of troops and armor.
on february 23 the dreaded and long awaited land war began.
dubbed operation desert storm it lasted only four days the hundred hour war see map 40 5.
with lightning speed the u n forces penetrated deep into iraq outanking the occupying forces in kuwait and blocking the enemys ability either to retreat or to reinforce.
allied casualties were amazingly light whereas much of iraqs remaining ghting force was quickly destroyed or captured.
on february 27 saddam accepted a cease re and kuwait was liberated.
most americans cheered the wars rapid and enormously successful conclusion.
many people echoed president bushs sentiments when he declared by god weve kicked the vietnam syndrome once and for all but when the smoke cleared saddam hussein had survived to menace the world another day.
america and its allies had agreed to the liberation of ku operation desert storm the highway of death the allied coalition wreaked gruesome destruction on iraqi forces eeing back to iraq after their defeat in kuwait in 1991 wait but bush fearing that a full assault on baghdad would cost many lives and much public support stopped well short of overthrowing the tyrant saddam.
the perpetually troubled middle east knew scarcely less trouble after desert storm had ceased to thunder and the united states for better or worse found itself even more deeply ensnared in the regions web of mortal hatreds and intractable con icts.
map 40 5 operation desert storm the ground war february 23 27 1991 30e 40e 50e soviet u n i o n baku yerevan tu r key tigris i r an i r aq basra nile ku wa i t kuwait city tabuk hafar al batin pe jubail dhahran se a riyadh rs ian gul f bah r ai n q atar abu doha dhabi 300 km.
o f ho uz d allied central command medina khafji king khalid military city rm re sa u d i a r a b ia 60e n baghdad aqaba si n ai egy p t egy p t primary scud missile target t damascus suez is r ael canal jor dan r cairo allied naval forces tehran l e banon beirut haifa tel aviv west ban k amman ga z a str i p jerusalem 30n main allied air base ate ai ean sea allied advances in ground war feb 24 28 1991 str iterran r syr ia c y p r us mosul major oil field.
med nicosia kurdish refugees flee iraq toward turkey and iran.
sr n cyprus euphr kurdish region ea pian s ankara incirlih allied troop build up aug 1990 feb.
1991 cas 40n interactive map gul u n it ed ar ab em i r at es f of oman muscat.

chapter 28 the nations culture too helped create a broad sense of stability and calm.
television which emerged in the 1950s as the most powerful medium of mass culture presented largely uncontroversial programming dominated by middle class images and traditional values.
movies theater popular magazines and newspapers all contributed to a broad sense of well being.
but the 1950s were not in the end as calm and contented as the politics and popular culture of the time suggested.
a powerful youth culture emerged in these years displaying a considerable level of restiveness and even disillusionment.
african americans began to escalate their protests against segregation and inequality.
the continuing existence of widespread poverty among large groups of americans attracted increasing attention as the decade progressed.
these pulsing anxieties combined with frustration over the continuing tensions of the cold war produced by the late 1950s a growing sense of impatience with the calm placid public culture of the time.
that was one reason for the growing desire for action and innovation as the 1960s began.
key terms people places events afl cio 681 apollo program 685 army mccarthy hearings 700 baby boom 680 beats 692 brinksmanship 700 brown v board of education of topeka 696 ddt 683 echo park 691 elvis presley 693 federal highway act of 1956 699 fidel castro 702 ho chi minh 701 icbms 685 john foster dulles 700 levittown s 687 martin luther king jr 698 rosa parks 697 sputnik 685 the organization man 692 the other america 694 u 2 crisis 702 univac 684 recall and reflect 1 how did the economic boom of the postwar era change american lifestyles.
2 what were some of the significant scientific and technological breakthroughs especially in medicine chemistry electronics weaponry and space exploration of the 1950s and 1960s.
how did these developments affect american life.
3 how did the increasing popularity of the automobile change the american landscape and american society.
4 how did the cold war progress under eisenhower.
the turbulent sixties expanding the liberal state the battle for racial equality response and the cold war the agony of vietnam the traumas of 1968 looking ahead 1 what was the domestic reform agenda of kennedys new frontier and how did johnsons great society programs continue and expand on that agenda.
2 why did the civil rights movement become increasingly assertive and militant over the course of the 1960s.
3 how did u s involvement in vietnam escalate through the 1960s.
what were the political and social consequences of that escalation in both vietnam and the united states.
by the late 1950s a growing restlessness was bubbling beneath the apparently placid surface of american society.
ultimately that restlessness would make the 1960s one of the most turbulent and divisive eras of the twentieth century.
but at first it contributed to a bold and confident effort by political leaders to attack social and international problems within the framework of conventional liberalism.
707 expanding the liberal state time line kennedy elected president freedom rides cuban missile crisis bay of pigs berlin wall erected march on washington johnson launches war on poverty civil rights act kennedy assassinated johnson becomes president civil rights demonstrations in birmingham gulf of tonkin resolution johnson elected president malcolm x assassinated voting rights act u s troops in vietnam racial violence in watts antiwar movement grows racial violence in detroit tet offensive martin luther king jr assassinated robert kennedy assassinated nixon elected president 708 those who yearned for a more active government in the late 1950s and who accused the eisenhower administration of allowing the nation to drift in matters of social affairs hoped for vigorous new leadership.
the two men who served in the white house through most of the 1960s john kennedy and lyndon johnson seemed for a time to embody these liberal hopes.
john kennedy the campaign of 1960 produced two young candidates who claimed to offer the nation active leadership.
the republican nomination went almost uncontested to vice president richard nixon who promised moderate reform.
the democrats in the meantime emerged from a spirited primary campaign united although somewhat uneasily behind john fitzgerald kennedy an attractive and articulate senator from massachusetts who had narrowly missed being the partys vice presidential candidate in 1956 john kennedy was the young son of the wealthy powerful and highly controversial joseph p kennedy former american ambassador to britain.
he premised his campaign he said on the single assumption that the american people are uneasy at the present drift in our national course but his appealing public image was at least as important as his political positions in attracting popular support.
kennedy regularly appeared on television talk shows before and during his run for president and his appearances helped comfort the american people despite his perceived weaknesses as a presidential candidate.
he overcame doubts about his youth he turned forty three in 1960 and religion he was catholic to win with a tiny plurality of the popular vote 49 7 percent to nixons 49 6 percent and only a slightly more comfortable electoral majority 303 to 219.
the turbulent sixties 709 27 13 25 7 1 8 12 candidate party john f kennedy democratic richard m nixon republican harry f byrd dixiecrat other candidates prohibition socialist labor constitution socialist workers states rights electoral vote popular vote 34 227 096 49 7 34 108 546 49 6 501 643 0 7 197 029 64 of electorate voting the election of 1960 the election of 1960 was in the popular vote at least one of the closest in american history.
john kennedys margin over richard nixon was less than one third of 1 percent of the total national vote but greater in the electoral college.
note the distribution of electoral strength of the two candidates.
kennedy was strong in the industrial northeast and the largest industrial states of the midwest and he retained at least a portion of his partys traditional strength in the south and southwest.
but nixon made significant inroads into the upper south carried florida and swept most of the plains and mountain states.
what was the significance of this distribution of strength to the future of the two parties.
kennedy had campaigned promising a set of domestic reforms he described as the new frontier but his thin popular mandate and a congress dominated by a coalition of republicans and conservative democrats frustrated many of his hopes.
kennedy did manage to win approval of tariff reductions his administration had negotiated and he began to build a legislative agenda including a call for a significant tax cut to promote economic growth.
more than any other president of the century except perhaps the two roosevelts and later ronald reagan kennedy made his own personality an integral kennedy assassination part of his presidency and a central focus of national attention.
nothing illustrated that more clearly than the popular reaction to the tragedy of november 22 1963 in texas with his wife and vice president lyndon johnson for a series of political appearances as the presidential motorcade rode slowly through the streets of dallas shots rang out.
two bullets struck the president one in the throat the other in the head.
he was sped to a nearby hospital where minutes later he was pronounced dead.
lee harvey oswald a young man who had spent time in the soviet union and later in cuba was arrested for 710 chapter 15 the network of black colleges and institutes that had taken root during reconstruction into an important educational system.
the chief spokesman for this commitment to education was booker t washington booker t washington founder and president of the tuskegee institute in alabama.
born into slavery washington had worked his way out of poverty after acquiring an education at virginias hampton institute.
he urged other blacks to follow the same road to selfimprovement.
washingtons message was both cautious and hopeful.
african americans should attend school learn skills and establish a solid footing in agriculture and the trades.
industrial not classical education should be their goal.
blacks should moreover refine their speech improve their dress and adopt habits of thrift and personal cleanliness they should in short adopt the standards of the white middle class.
only thus washington claimed could they win the respect of the white population.
in a famous speech in georgia in 1895 washington outlined a controversial philosophy of atlanta compromise race relations that became widely known as the atlanta compromise.
blacks he said should forgo agitation for political rights and concentrate on self improvement and preparation for equality.
washington offered a powerful challenge to those whites who wanted to discourage african americans from acquiring an education or winning any e conomic gains.
but his message was also intended to assure whites that blacks would not challenge the emerging system of segregation.
the birth of jim crow few white southerners had ever accepted the idea of racial equality.
that the former slaves acquired any legal and political rights at all after emancipation was in large part the result of their own efforts and crucial federal support.
that outside support all but vanished after 1877 when federal troops withdrew and the supreme court stripped the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments of much of their significance.
in the so called civil rights cases of 1883 the court ruled that the fourteenth amendment prohibited state governments from discriminating against people because of race but did not restrict private organizations or individuals from doing so.
popular culture reflected these frightening political developments.
the rise of minstrel shows slapstick dramatic representations of black culture typically embodied racist ideas.
corked up whites or whites using heavy makeup to appear black grossly caricatured african american culture as silly unintelligent sensual and immoral.
late in the 1800s however blacks founded their own minstrel shows in part to modify these stereotypes though with only modest success.
see patterns of popular culture the minstrel show eventually the court also validated state legislation that institutionalized the separaplessy v ferguson tion of the races.
in plessy v ferguson 1896 a case involving a louisiana law that required segregated seating on railroads the court held that separate accommodations did not deprive blacks of equal rights if the accommodations were equal.
in cumming v county board of education 1899 the court ruled that communities could establish schools for whites only even if there were no comparable schools for blacks.
even before these dubious decisions white southerners were working to separate the races to the greatest extent possible and were particularly determined to strip african americans of the right to vote.
in some states disenfranchisement had begun almost as soon as reconstruction ended.
but in other areas black voting continued for some time reconstruction and the new south 375 after reconstruction largely because conservative whites believed they could control the black electorate and use it to beat back the attempts of poor white farmers to take control of the democratic party.
in the 1890s however franchise restrictions became much more rigid.
during those years some small white farmers began to demand complete black black disenfranchisement disenfranchisement because they objected to the black vote being used against them by the bourbons.
at the same time many members of the conservative elite began to doubt their ability to influence black voters and fear that poor whites might unite politically with poor blacks to challenge them.
in devising laws to disenfranchise black males the southern states had to find ways to evade the fifteenth amendment which prohibited states from denying anyone the right to vote because of race.
two devices emerged before 1900 to accomplish this goal the poll tax or some form of property qualification few blacks were prosperous enough to meet such requirements and the literacy or understanding test which required voters to demonstrate an ability to read and to interpret the constitution.
even those african americans who could read had a hard time passing the difficult test white officials gave them which often required them to interpret an arcane part of the constitution to the satisfaction of a white elected official.
the laws affected poor white voters as well as blacks.
by the late 1890s the black vote had decreased by 62 percent the white vote by 26 percent.
laws restricting the franchise and segregating schools were only part of a network of state and local statutes collectively known as the jim crow laws that by jim crow laws the first years of the twentieth century had institutionalized an elaborate system of racial hierarchy reaching into almost every area of southern life.
blacks and whites could not ride together in the same railroad cars sit in the same waiting rooms use the same washrooms eat in the same restaurants or sit in the same theaters.
blacks had no access to many public parks beaches or picnic areas they could not be patients in many hospitals.
much of the new legal structure did no more than confirm what had already been widespread social practice in the south.
but the jim crow laws also stripped blacks of many of the modest social economic and political gains they had made in the late nineteenth century.
more than legal efforts were involved in this process.
the 1890s witnessed a dramatic increase in white violence against blacks which along with the jim crow laws served to inhibit black agitation for equal rights.
the worst such violence lynching of blacks by white mobs reached appalling levels.
in the nation as a whole in the 1890s there was an average of 187 lynchings each year more than 80 percent of them in the south.
the vast majority of victims were black.
those who participated in lynchings often saw their actions as a legitimate form of law enforcement and some victims of lynchings had in fact committed crimes.
but lynchings were also a means by which whites controlled the black population through terror and intimidation.
the rise of lynchings shocked the conscience of many white americans in a way that other forms of racial injustice did not.
in 1892 ida b wells a committed ida b wells black journalist published a series of impassioned articles after the lynching of three of her hometown friends in memphis tennessee her articles launched what became an international antilynching movement.
the movement gradually attracted substantial support from whites in both the north and the south particularly from white women.
its goal was a federal antilynching law which would allow the national government to do what state and local governments in the south were generally unwilling to do punish those responsible for lynchings.
patterns of popular culture the minstrel show the minstrel show was one of the most popular forms of entertainment in america in the second half of the nineteenth century.
it was also a testament to the high awareness of race and the high level of racism in american society both before and after the civil war.
minstrel performers were mostly white usually disguised as black.
but african american performers also formed their own minstrel shows and transformed them into vehicles for training black entertainers and developing new forms of music and dance.
before and during the civil war when minstrel shows consisted almost entirely of white performers performers blackened their faces with cork and presented grotesque stereotypes of the slave culture of the american south.
among the most popular of the stumbling ridiculously ignorant characters invented for these shows were such figures as zip coon and jim crow whose name later resurfaced as a label for late nineteenth century segregation laws.
a typical minstrel show presented a group of seventeen or more men seated in a semicircle facing the audience.
the man in the center ran the show played the straight man for the jokes of others and led the music lively minstrelsy at high tide the primrose west minstrel troupe a lavish and expensive entertainment that drew large crowds in the 1800s was one of many companies to offer this brand of entertainment to eager audiences all over the country.
although minstrelsy began with white musicians performing in blackface the popularity of real african american minstrels encouraged the impresarios of the troupe to include groups of white and black performers alike.
the library of congress 376 dances and sentimental ballads played on banjos castanets and other instruments and sung by soloists or the entire group.
after the civil war white minstrels began to expand their repertoire.
drawing from the famous and successful freak shows of p t barnum and other entertainment entrepreneurs some began to include siamese twins bearded ladies and even a supposedly 8 foot 2 inch chinese giant in their shows.
they also incorporated sex both by including women in some shows and even more popularly by recruiting female impersonators.
one of the most successful minstrel performers of the 1870s was francis leon who delighted crowds with his female portrayal of a flamboyant prima donna one reason white minstrels began to move in these new directions was that they were now facing competition from black performers who could provide more authentic versions of black music dance and humor.
they usually brought more talent to the task than white performers.
the georgia minstrels organized in 1865 was one of the first all black minstrel troupes and it had great success in attracting white audiences in the northeast for several years.
by the 1870s touring african american minstrel groups were numerous.
the black minstrels used many of the conventions of the white shows.
there were dances music comic routines and sentimental recitations.
some black performers even chalked their faces to make themselves look as dark as the white blackface performers with whom they were competing.
black minstrels sometimes denounced slavery at least indirectly and did not often speak demeaningly of the capacities of their race.
but they could not entirely escape caricaturing african american life as they struggled to meet the expectations of their white audiences.
the black minstrel shows had few openly political aims.
they did help develop some important forms of african american entertainment and transform them into a part of the national culture.
black minstrels introduced new forms of dance derived from the informal traditions of slavery and black community life.
they showed the buck and wing the stop time and the virginia essence which established the foundations for the tap and jazz dancing of the early twentieth century.
they also improvised musically and began experimenting with forms that over time contributed to the growth of ragtime jazz and rhythm and blues.
eventually black minstrelsy like its white counterpart evolved into other forms of theater including the beginnings of serious black drama.
at ambrose park in brooklyn in the 1890s for example the celebrated black comedian sam lucas a veteran of the minstrel circuit starred in the play darkest america which one black newspaper later described as a delineation of negro life carrying the race through all their historical phases from the plantation into reconstruction days and finally painting our people as they are today cultured and accomplished in the social graces holding the mirror faithfully up to nature but interest in the minstrel show did not die altogether.
in 1927 hollywood released the jazz singer the first feature film with sound.
it was about the career of a white minstrel performer and its star was one of the most popular singers of the twentieth century al jolson whose career had begun on the blackface minstrel circuit years before.
understand analyze evaluate 1 how did minstrel shows performed by white minstrels reinforce prevailing attitudes toward african americans.
2 minstrel shows performed by black minstrels often conformed to existing stereotypes of african americans.
3 can you think of any popular entertainments today that carry remnants of the minstrel shows of the nineteenth century.
377 378 chapter 29 the agony of vietnam george kennan who helped devise the containment doctrine in the name of which america went to war in vietnam once called the conflict the most disastrous of all americas undertakings over the whole 200 years of its history yet at first the conflict in vietnam seemed simply one more third world struggle on the periphery of the cold war.
america and diem having thrown its support to the new leader of south vietnam ngo dinh diem in the aftermath of the 1954 geneva accords and having supported diem in his blatant refusal to hold the elections in 1956 that the accords had required the united states found itself drawn steadily deeper into the unstable politics of this fractious new nation.
diem an aristocratic catholic from central vietnam and an outsider in the south was also a hard line nationalist uncontaminated by any collaboration with the french and bent on shoring up the authority of his regime.
and he was for a time apparently successful.
with the help of the american cia diem waged an effective campaign against some of the powerful religious sects and the south vietnamese organized crime syndicate which had challenged the authority of the central government.
as a result the united states came to regard diem as a powerful and impressive alternative to ho chi minh his communist rival in north vietnam.
america threw military and economic aid at diems feet.
diems early successes in suppressing sects led him in 1959 to begin a similar campaign to eliminate the supporters of ho chi minh who had stayed behind in the south after the partition.
that effort persuaded the vietminh or supporters of ho chi minh and the communist north to resume the armed struggle for national unification.
in 1959 the vietminh cadres in the south created the national liberation front nlf known to viet cong many americans as the viet cong an organization closely allied with the north vietnamese government.
in 1960 under orders from hanoi and with both material and manpower support from north vietnam the nlf began military operations in the south.
this marked the beginning of what americans know as the vietnam war.
by 1961 nlf forces had established effective control over many areas of the countryside and were threatening diems power.
by then diem was also losing the support of many other groups in south vietnam including his own military.
in 1963 a desperate diem regime precipitated a major crisis by trying to repress the south vietnamese buddhists in an effort to make catholicism the dominant religion of the country and limit political dissent.
the buddhists staged enormous antigovernment demonstrations during which a monk doused himself with gasoline sat cross legged in downtown saigon and set himself on fire in view of photographers and television cameras.
later other buddhists burned themselves in other areas.
alarmed american officials pressured diem to reform his now tottering government but the president made no significant concessions.
as a result in the fall of 1963 kennedy gave his approval to a plot by a group of south vietnamese generals to topple diem.
in diem assassinated early november 1963 the generals staged the coup assassinated diem along with his brother ngo dinh nhu killings the united states had not wanted or expected and established the first of a series of new governments which were for over ngo dinh diem the turbulent sixties 725 three years even less stable than the one they had overthrown.
a few weeks after the coup john kennedy was assassinated.
from aid to intervention lyndon johnson inherited what was already a substantial american commitment to the survival of an anticommunist south vietnam.
during his first months in office he expanded the american involvement in vietnam only slightly sending an additional 5 000 military advisers there and preparing to send 5 000 more.
then early in august 1964 the president announced that american destroyers on patrol in international waters in the gulf of tonkin had been attacked by north vietnamese torpedo boats.
later information raised serious doubts as to whether the administration reported the attacks accurately.
at the time however virtually no one questioned johnsons portrayal of the incident as a serious act of aggression.
by a vote of 416 to 0 in the house and 88 to 2 in the senate congress hurriedly passed the gulf of tonkin resolution which authorized gulf of tonkin resolution the president to take all necessary measures to protect american forces and prevent further aggression in southeast asia.
the resolution became in johnsons view at least an open ended legal authorization for escalation of the conflict.
with the south vietnamese leadership still in disarray and the communist military pressure growing stronger more and more of the burden of opposition to the viet cong fell on the united states.
in february 1965 after communist forces attacked an american military base at pleiku johnson ordered american bombings of the north in an attempt to destroy the depots and transportation lines responsible for the flow of north vietnamese soldiers and supplies into south vietnam.
the bombing continued intermittently until 1972 a month later in march 1965 two battalions of american marines landed at da nang in south vietnam bringing the total american troop strength to over 100 000 four months later the president announced that american soldiers would now begin playing an active role in the conflict.
by the end of the year there were more than 180 000 american combat troops in vietnam in 1966 that number doubled and by the end of 1967 over 500 000 american soldiers fought there.
in the meantime the air war intensified.
by the spring of 1966 more than 4 000 americans and an unknown number of vietnamese had been killed.
the quagmire central to the american war effort in vietnam was a strategy known as attrition a strategy premised on the belief that the united states could inflict more attrition strategy damage on the enemy than the enemy could absorb.
but the attrition strategy failed because the north vietnamese believing that they were fighting a war for national independence were willing to commit many more soldiers and resources to the conflict than the united states had predicted.
the united states also failed in expecting its bombing of the north to eliminate the communists war making capacity.
north vietnam was not a modern industrial society and it had relatively few of the sorts of targets against which bombing is effective.
the north vietnamese also responded to the bombing with great ingenuity.
they created a network of underground tunnels shops and factories.
the north vietnamese also were provided substantial aid from the soviet union and china.
they continually 726 chapter 2 shoemaker and margaret fell.
their followers came to be known as quakers from foxs instruction to them to tremble at the name of the lord.
unlike the puritans quakers rejected the concept of predestination and original sin.
all people they believed had divinity within themselves and needed only learn to cultivate it all could attain salvation.
the quakers had no formal church government and no paid clergy in their worship they the quakers spoke up one by one as the spirit moved them.
disregarding distinctions of gender and class they addressed one another with the terms thee and thou words commonly used in other parts of english society only in speaking to servants and social inferiors.
as confirmed pacifists they would not take part in wars.
unpopular in england the quakers began looking to america for asylum.
a few migrated to new england or carolina but most quakers wanted a colony of their own.
as members of a despised sect however they could not get the necessary royal grant without the aid of someone influential at the court.
fortunately for the quaker cause a number of wealthy and prominent men had converted to the faith.
one of them was william penn an outspoken evangelist who had been in prison several times.
penn worked with george fox on plans for a quaker colony in america and when penns father died in 1681 charles ii settled a large debt he had owed to the older penn by making an enormous grant to the son of territory between new york and maryland.
at the kings insistence the territory was to be named pennsylvania after penns late father.
through his informative and honest advertising penn soon made pennsylvania the pennsylvania established best known and most cosmopolitan of all the english colonies in america.
more than any other english colony pennsylvania prospered from the outset because of penns successful recruiting his careful planning and the regions mild climate and fertile soil.
penn sailed to pennsylvania in 1682 to oversee the laying out of the city he named philadelphia brotherly love between the delaware and schuylkill rivers.
penns relatively good relations with the indians were a result in large part of his religious beliefs.
quakerism was a faith that included a refusal to participate in war or any violence and that believed that all people whatever their background were capable of becoming christian.
penn worked to respect the natives and their culture.
he recognized indians claim to the land in the province and he was usually scrupulous in reimbursing the natives for their land.
in later years the relationships between the english residents of pennsylvania and the natives were not always so peaceful.
by the late 1690s some residents of pennsylvania were beginning to resist the nearly absolute power of the proprietor.
pressure from these groups grew to the point that in 1701 shortly before he departed for england for the last time penn agreed to a charter charter of liberties of liberties for the colony.
the charter established a representative assembly consisting alone among the english colonies of only one house that greatly limited the authority of the proprietor.
the charter also permitted the lower counties of the colony to establish their own representative assembly.
the three counties did so in 1703 and as a result became in effect a separate colony delaware although until the american revolution it continued to have the same governor as pennsylvania.
borderlands and middle grounds the english colonies clustered along the atlantic seaboard of north america eventually united expanded and became the beginnings of a powerful nation.
but in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries their future was not at all clear.
in those years they were small frail settlements surrounded by other competing societies and transplantations and borderlands 43 settlements.
the british empire in north america was in fact a much smaller and weaker one than the great spanish empire to the south and in many ways weaker than the enormous french empire to the north.
the continuing contests for control of north america were most clearly visible in areas around the borders of english settlement the caribbean and along the northern southern and western borders of the coastal colonies.
in the regions of complex cultural interactions the borderlands emerged societies very different from those in the english seaboard colonies areas described as middle grounds in which diverse civilizations encountered one another and for a time at least shaped one another.
the caribbean islands the chesapeake was the site of the first permanent english settlements in the north american continent.
throughout the first half of the seventeenth century however the most important destinations for english immigrants were the islands of the caribbean and the northern way station of bermuda.
more than half of the english migrants to the new world in the early seventeenth century settled on these islands.
before the arrival of europeans most of the caribbean islands had substantial native populations.
but beginning with christopher columbuss first visit in 1492 and accelerating after 1496 the native populations were all but wiped out by european epidemics.
the spanish empire claimed title to all the islands in the caribbean but spain created substantial settlements only in the largest of them cuba hispaniola and puerto rico.
english french and dutch traders began settling on some of the smaller islands early in the sixteenth century despite the spanish claim to them.
after spain and the netherlands went to war in 1621 distracting the spanish navy and leaving the the english caribbean english in the caribbean relatively unmolested the pace of english colonization increased.
by midcentury there were several substantial english settlements on the islands the most important of them on antigua st kitts jamaica and barbados.
in their first years in the caribbean english settlers experimented unsuccessfully with tobacco and cotton.
but they soon discovered that the most lucrative crop was sugar for which there was a substantial and growing market in europe.
sugarcane could also be distilled into rum for which there was also a booming market abroad.
planters devoted almost all of their land to sugarcane.
because sugar was a labor intensive crop english planters quickly found it necessary to import laborers.
as in the chesapeake they began by bringing indentured sugar and slavery servants from england.
but the arduous work discouraged white laborers.
by midcentury therefore the english planters in the caribbean like the spanish colonists were relying more and more heavily on an enslaved african workforce which soon substantially outnumbered them.
on barbados and other islands where a flourishing sugar economy developed the english planters were a tough aggressive and ambitious people.
since their livelihoods depended on their workforces they expanded and solidified the system of african slavery there remarkably quickly.
by the late seventeenth century there were four times as many african slaves as there were white settlers.
masters and slaves in the caribbean fearful of slave revolts whites in the caribbean monitored their labor forces closely and often harshly.
planters paid little attention to the welfare of their workers.
many concluded that it was cheaper to buy new slaves periodically than to protect the well being of those 44 chapter 30 in the summer of 1969 more than 400 000 people gathered for a music festival on a farm near woodstock new york.
the gathering became a symbol of the youth movement of the sixties.
shelly rustin black star woodstock to themes of anger frustration and rebellion.
many popular musicians used their music to express explicit political radicalism as well especially some of the leading folk singers of the era such as bob dylan and joan baez.
rocks driving rhythms its undisguised sensuality its often harsh and angry tone all made it an appropriate vehicle for expressing the themes of the social and political unrest of the late 1960s.
a powerful symbol of the fusion of rock music and the counterculture was the massive woodstock music festival at woodstock new york in the summer of 1969 where 400 000 people gathered on a farm for nearly a week.
despite heavy rain mud inadequate facilities and impossible crowding the attendees remained peaceful and harmonious.
champions of the counterculture spoke rhapsodically at the time of how woodstock represented the birth of a new youth culture the woodstock nation four months later however another large rock concert at the altamont racetrack near san francisco featuring the rolling stones and attended by 300 000 people exposed a darker side of the youth culture.
altamont became a brutal and violent event at which four people died several accidentally or from drug overdoses but one because of injuries inflicted by members of a hells angels motorcycle gang who were serving as security guards at the concert and who brutally beat and stabbed a number of people.
the mobilization of minorities the growth of african american protest encouraged other minorities to assert themselves and demand redress of their grievances.
for indians hispanic americans gay men and lesbians and others the late 1960s and 1970s were a time of growing self expression and political activism.
the crisis of authority 741 seeds of indian militancy few minorities had deeper or more justifiable grievances against the prevailing culture than did american indians or native americans as they began defiantly to call themselves in the 1960s.
indians were the least prosperous least healthy and least stable ethnic group in the nation.
and while african americans attracted the attention for good or for ill of many whites indians for years had remained largely ignored.
for much of the postwar era federal tribal policies tried to incorporate indians into mainstream american society whether indians wanted to assimilate or not.
two laws passed in 1953 established the basis of this policy which became known termination policy as termination through termination the federal government withdrew all official recognition of the tribes as legal entities they were no longer administratively separate from state governments and were subject to the same local jurisdictions as non native american residents.
at the same time the government encouraged indians to assimilate into the white world and worked to funnel native americans into cities where presumably they would adapt themselves to the larger society and lose their cultural distinctiveness.
despite some individual successes the new policies were a disastrous failure on the whole.
indians themselves fought so bitterly against these policies that in 1958 the eisenhower administration barred further terminations.
in the meantime the struggle against termination mobilized a new generation of indian militants and breathed life into the principal native american organization the national congress of american indians which had been created in 1944 the democratic administrations of the 1960s made no effort to revive termination.
instead they made modest efforts to restore at least some degree of tribal autonomy such as funneling office of economic opportunity money to tribal organizations through the community action programs.
in the meantime the tribes themselves began to fight for greater self determination.
the new militancy benefited from the rapid increase in the indian population which was growing much faster than that of the rest of the nation nearly doubling between 1950 and 1970 to a total of about 800 000.
the indian civil rights movement in 1961 more than 400 members from 67 tribes gathered in chicago and issued the declaration of indian purpose which stressed the right to choose our own way of life and the responsibility of preserving our precious heritage another example of a growing indian self consciousness the national indian youth council created in the aftermath of the 1961 chicago meeting promoted the idea of indian nationalism and intertribal unity.
in 1968 a group of young militant indians established the american indian movement aim which drew support from urban areas american indian movement and reservations alike.
the new activism produced results.
in 1968 congress passed the indian civil rights act.
it guaranteed reservation indians protections by the bill of rights indian civil rights act but also recognized the legitimacy of tribal laws within the reservations.
in 1968 indian fishermen citing old treaty rights clashed with washington state officials on the columbia river and in puget sound.
the following year members of several tribes occupied the abandoned federal prison on alcatraz island in san francisco bay claiming the site by right of discovery in response the nixon administration appointed louis bruce a mohawk sioux as commissioner of indian affairs in 1969 and in 1970 the president promised both 742 chapter 16 become landowners and farmers to abandon their collective society and culture and become part of white civilization.
some supporters of the new policy believed they were acting for the good of the indians whom they considered a vanishing race in need of rescue by and assimilation into white society.
the dawes severalty act of 1887 provided for the gradual elimination of most tribal ownership of land and the allotment of tracts to individual owners 160 acres to the head of a family 80 acres to a single adult or orphan 40 acres to each dependent child.
adult owners were given united states citizenship but unlike other citizens they could not gain full title to their property for twenty five years supposedly to prevent them from selling the land to speculators.
in applying the dawes act the bureau of indian affairs relentlessly promoted the idea of assimilation that lay behind it.
not only did agents of the bureau try to move indian families onto their own plots of land they also took many indian children away from their families and sent them to boarding schools run by whites.
they moved as well to stop indian religious rituals and encouraged the spread of christianity and the creation of christian churches on the reservations.
few indians were prepared for this wrenching change.
in any case white administration of the dawes act was so corrupt and inept that ultimately the government simply abandoned most efforts to enforce it.
much of the reservation land therefore was never distributed to individual owners.
the rise and decline of the western farmer the arrival of the miners the empire building of the cattle ranchers the dispersal of the indian tribes all served as a prelude to the decisive phase of white settlement of the far west.
even before the civil war farmers had begun moving into the plains region challenging the dominance of the ranchers and the indians.
by the 1870s what was once a trickle had become a deluge.
western journalists and visitors alike told tall tales of money to be had for the taking the regions healthy climate pure water fertile soil and nutrientrich grasses they crowed made industries like cattle ranching into cant miss investment opportunities.
see consider the source walter baron von richthofen cattle raising on the plains in north america and they came.
farmers poured into the plains and beyond enclosed land that had once been hunting territory for indians and open range for cattle and established a new agricultural region.
for a time in the late 1870s and early 1880s the new western farmers flourished enjoying the fruits of an agricultural economic boom.
beginning in the mid 1880s however the boom turned to bust and the western agricultural economy began a long steady decline.
farming on the plains many factors combined to produce the surge of post civil war western agricultural settlement but the most important was the railroads.
before the war the great plains had been accessible only through a difficult journey by wagon.
but beginning in the 1860s a great new network of railroad lines made huge areas of settlement accessible for the first time.
the conquest of the far west 399 the building of the transcontinental train line completed in 1869 when the two lines met at promontory point utah was a dramatic and monumental achievement.
but the construction of subsidiary lines in the following years proved of greater importance to the west.
state governments imitating washington subsidized railroad development by offering direct financial aid favorable loans and more than 50 million acres of land on top of the 130 million acres the federal government had already provided.
although built and operated by private corporations the railroads were in many respects public projects.
the railroad companies also actively promoted settlement.
the companies set rates so low for settlers that almost anyone could afford the trip west.
and they cheap rail rates sold much of their land at very low prices and with liberal credit to prospective settlers.
contributing further to the great surge of white agricultural expansion was a pronounced but temporary change in the climate of the great plains.
for several years in succession beginning in the 1870s rainfall in the plains states was well above average.
white americans now rejected the old idea that the region was the great american desert but even under the most favorable conditions farming on the plains presented special problems.
first was the problem of fencing.
farmers had to enclose their land but materials for traditional wood or stone fences were unavailable.
in the mid 1870s however two illinois farmers joseph h glidden and i l ellwood solved this problem by developing and marketing barbed wire which became standard equipment on the plains and revolutionized fencing practices all over the world.
the second problem was water.
water was scarce even when rainfall was above average.
after 1887 a series of dry seasons began and lands that had been fertile scarce water now returned to semidesert.
some farmers dealt with the problem by using deep wells pumped by steel windmills by turning to dryland farming a system of tillage designed to conserve moisture in the soil by covering it with a dust blanket or by planting droughtresistant crops.
in many areas of the plains however only large scale irrigation could save the endangered farms.
but irrigation projects of the necessary magnitude required government assistance and neither the federal nor the state governments were prepared to fund the projects.
most of the people who moved into the region had previously been farmers in the midwest the east or europe.
in the booming years of the early 1880s with land values rising the new farmers had no problem obtaining extensive and easy credit.
but the arid years of the late 1880s during which crop prices fell while production became more expensive changed the farmers prospects.
tens of thousands of farmers could not pay their debts and were forced to abandon their farms.
there was in effect a reverse migration reverse migration white settlers moving back east sometimes turning once flourishing western communities into desolate ghost towns.
those who remained continued to suffer from falling prices for example wheat which had sold for 1 60 a bushel at the end of the civil war dropped to 49 cents in the 1890s and persistent indebtedness.
commercial agriculture by the late nineteenth century the sturdy independent farmer of popular myth was being replaced by the commercial farmer attempting to do in the agricultural economy what industrialists were doing in the manufacturing economy.
commercial farmers specialized in cash crops that were sold in national or world markets.
they did not often make their own household supplies or grow their own food but bought them from merchants.
this kind of farming when it was successful raised farmers living standards.
but it also made co ns ider t he s o urc e walter baron von richthofen cattle raising on the plains in north america 1885 boosters of the wests lucrative economy were plentiful.
walter baron von richthofen an immigrant and scion of an aristocratic german austrian family lauded cattle ranching as a western industry that begged for investors eager to make easy money.
the immense profits which have been universally realized in the western cattle business for the past and which will be increased in the future owing to the more economical methods pursued so long as ranges can be purchased at present prices may seem incredible to many of my readers who no doubt have considered the stories of the fortunes realized as myths.
yet it is true that many men who started only a few years ago with comparatively few cattle are now wealthy and in some cases millionaires.
they certainly did not find the gold upon the prairies nor did they have any source of revenue beyond the increase of their cattle.
the agencies producing this immense wealth are very natural and apparent.
the climate of the west is the healthiest on the earth the pure high mountain air and dry atmosphere are the natural remedies or rather preventives against sickness among cattle in general and against all epidemic diseases in particular for nowhere in the western states do we find any traces of pleuro pneumonia foot or mouth and such like contagious diseases the pure clear water of the mountain rivers affords to cattle another health preserver and the fine nutritious and bountiful grasses and in winter the naturally cured hay furnish to them the healthiest natural food.
formerly these pastures cost nothing and at present only a trifle.
so that the interest on the investment in purchasing land is of little importance in the estimate of the cost of keeping a herd.
in fact ownership 400 of land is now indispensable for a herdowner.
this land in less than ten years will be a considerable factor in the profits of the cattle business as the value of pastures will constantly increase.
the principal cost of raising cattle is only the herding and watching the cattle by herders without any cost for sheltering or feeding.
in time even these expenses will be reduced as now already herds are kept in large fenced ranges and many of the herders are dispensed with.
the losses of cattle as shown by statistics are larger among eastern and european herds which are sheltered in stables and fed the whole year round than among the shelterless herds of the west.
the losses in the west.
are practically reduced by long experience to a certain percentage which enables the stockmen to calculate infallibly the profits and losses of their business.
this annual loss is found to average 2 to 3 per cent.
we may safely put the loss in the extreme northern states at about 3 per cent and in the more southern and temperate districts at 2 or less per cent.
the annual cost of herding the cattle.
is about 70 per head adding the other expenses such as taxes loss of interest on the purchase money of land etc we find that the entire annual expense is less than 1 50 per head.
now let me illustrate the profits realized from one texas cow worth 30 00.
in ten years she will have eight calves which if they are all steers will have produced at the end of fourteen years 320 or a profit of 272 00.
the cow herself still remains and is worth about her original cost for the butcher.
these figures are made without reference to any increase in the value of cattle or beef and without reference to any improvement of the stock by crossing it with better blood.
ten years ago an irish servant girl wanted money due her amounting to 150 from a cattle raiser who lived in montana.
cattle had been dull and he could not dispose of any of his herd but agreed to her to brand fifteen cows in her name give her the increase and carry them with his herd free of cost until she was ready to sell he to have the first privilege of purchase.
she accepted held on to her purchase and last may sold out her master for 25 000.
understand analyze evaluate 1 how did von richthofen describe the land and natural resources for cattle ranching in the north american plains.
why did von richthofen stress the importance of landownership.
2 does von richthofen strike you as a cautious businessman.
what might explain the confidence he showed in his projections.
3 why do you think the author concluded with the example of the irish servant girl.
source walter baron von richthofen cattle raising on the plains of north america 1885 repr norman university of oklahoma press 1964 pp.
70 73 80 located in marilynn s johnson ed.
violence in the west the johnson county range war and the ludlow massacre a brief history with documents boston bedford st martins 2009 pp.
them dependent on bankers and interest rates railroads and freight rates national and european markets world supply and demand.
and unlike the capitalists of the industrial order they could not regulate their production or influence the prices of what they sold.
between 1865 and 1900 farm output increased dramatically not only in the united states but in brazil argentina canada australia new zealand russia and elsewhere.
beginning in the 1880s worldwide overproduction led to a drop in worldwide overproduction prices for most agricultural goods and hence to great economic distress for many of the more than 6 million american farm families.
by the 1890s 27 percent of the farms in the country were mortgaged by 1910 33 percent.
in 1880 25 percent of all farms had been operated by tenants by 1910 the proportion had grown to 37 percent.
commercial farming made some people fabulously wealthy.
but the farm economy as a whole was suffering a significant decline relative to the rest of the nation.
the farmers grievances american farmers were painfully aware that something was wrong.
but few people yet understood the implications of national and world overproduction.
instead they concentrated their attention and anger on more immediate more comprehensible and no less real problems inequitable freight rates high interest charges and an inadequate currency.
the farmers first and most burning grievance was against the railroads.
in many cases the railroads charged higher rates for farm goods than for other goods and higher rates in the south and west than in the northeast.
railroads also controlled elevator and warehouse facilities in buying centers and charged arbitrary storage rates.
farmers also resented the institutions controlling credit banks loan companies insurance corporations.
since sources of credit in the west and south were few farmers had to take loans on whatever terms they could get often at interest rates ranging from 10 to 25 percent.
many farmers had to pay these loans back in years when prices were dropping and currency was becoming scarce.
as a result expansion of the currency became an increasingly important issue to farmers.
401 402 chapter 17 also a great wave of immigration from abroad primarily from europe but also from asia canada mexico and other areas in the decades following the civil war an influx greater than that of any previous era.
the 25 million immigrants who arrived in the united states between 1865 and 1915 were more than four times the number who had arrived in the previous fifty years.
in the 1870s and 1880s most of the immigrants came from england ireland and northern europe.
by the end of the century however the major sources of immigrants had shifted with large numbers of southern and eastern europeans italians poles russians greeks slavs and others moving into the country and into the industrial workforce.
the new immigrants came to america in part to escape poverty and oppression in their homelands.
but they were also attracted by expectations of new opportunities.
railroads lured immigrants into their western landholdings by distributing misleading advertisements overseas.
industrial employers actively recruited immigrant workers under the labor contract law which until its repeal in 1885 permitted them to pay for the passage of workers in advance and deduct the amount later from their wages.
even after the repeal of the law employers continued to encourage the immigration of unskilled laborers often with the assistance of foreign born labor brokers such as the greek and italian padrones who recruited work gangs of their fellow nationals.
the arrival of these new groups heightened ethnic tensions within the working class.
job competition low paid poles greeks and french canadians began to displace higherpaid british and irish workers in the textile factories of new england.
italians slavs and poles emerged as a major source of labor for the mining industry.
chinese and mexicans competed with anglo americans and african americans in mining farmwork and factory labor in california colorado and texas.
wages and working conditions at the turn of the century the average income of the american worker was 400 to 500 a year below the 600 figure that many believed was required to maintain a reasonable level of comfort.
nor did workers have much job security.
all were vulnerable to the boom and bust cycle of the industrial economy and the instability caused by technological advances.
even those who kept their jobs could find their wages suddenly and substantially cut in hard times.
few workers in other words were ever very far from poverty.
many first generation workers accustomed to the patterns of agrarian life had trouble adjusting to the nature of modern industrial labor routine repetitive tasks on a strict and monotonous schedule.
skilled artisans whose once valued tasks were now performed by machines found the new system impersonal and demeaning.
most factory laborers worked ten hours a day six days a week in the steel industry they worked twelve hours a day.
industrial accidents were frequent.
the decreasing need for skilled work in factories induced many employers to increase the use of women and children whom they could hire for lower wages than adult males.
by 1900 20 percent of all manufacturing workers were women.
women labored in all areas of industry even in some of the most arduous jobs.
most women however worked in a few industries where unskilled and semiskilled machine labor as opposed to heavy manual labor prevailed.
the textile industry remained the largest single industrial employer of women.
domestic service though remained the most common female occupation overall.
women worked for wages well below the minimum necessary for survival and well below the wages paid to men working the same jobs.
industrial supremacy 421 young boys some of them barefoot clamber among the great textile machines in a georgia cotton mill mending broken threads and replacing empty bobbins.
many of them were the children or siblings of women who worked in the plant.
the photograph is by lewis hine who traveled around the country documenting abuses for the national child labor committee.
bettmann corbis spindle boys at least 1 7 million children under sixteen years of age were employed in factories and fields 10 percent of all girls aged ten to fifteen and 20 percent of all boys held jobs.
under public pressure thirty eight states passed child labor laws in the late child labor nineteenth century.
but 60 percent of child workers were employed in agriculture which was typically exempt from the laws.
for children employed in factories the laws merely set a minimum age of twelve years and a maximum workday of ten hours standards that employers often ignored in any case.
emerging unionization laborers attempted to fight back against such conditions by creating national unions.
by the end of the century however their efforts had met with little success.
there had been craft unions in america representing small groups of skilled workers since well before the civil war.
but most unions could not hope to exert significant power in the economy.
and during the turbulent recession years of the 1870s unions faced the additional problem of widespread public hostility.
when labor disputes with employers turned bitter and violent as they occasionally did much of the public instinctively blamed the workers for the trouble rarely the employers.
particularly alarming to middle class americans was the emergence of the molly maguires molly maguires 422 chapter 3 baruch spinoza of amsterdam and ren descartes of france.
later however such americans as benjamin franklin thomas paine thomas jefferson and james madison made their own important contributions to enlightenment thought.
literacy and technology white male americans achieved a high degree of literacy in the eighteenth century.
by the time of the revolution well over one half of all white men could read and write.
the literacy rate for women lagged behind the rate for men until the nineteenth century.
while opportunities for education beyond the primary level were scarce for men they were almost nonexistent for women.
the large number of colonists who could read created a market for the first widely circulated publications in america other than the bible almanacs.
by 1700 there were almanacs dozens perhaps hundreds of almanacs circulating throughout the colonies and even in the sparsely settled lands to the west.
most families had at least one.
almanacs provided medical advice navigational and agricultural information practical wisdom humor and predictions about the future most famously predictions about weather patterns for the coming year which many farmers used as the basis for decisions about crops even though the predictions were notoriously unreliable.
the most famous almanac in eighteenth century america was poor richards almanac published by benjamin franklin in philadelphia.
among their many purposes almanacs sought to help farmers predict weather and plan for the demands of changing seasons.
this illustration part of a calendar of farming images shows a man and a woman tending fields in july.
american antiquarian society guide to the seasons society and culture in provincial america 79 the wide availability of reading material in colonial america by the eighteenth century was a result of the spread of printing technology.
the first printing press began operating in the colonies in 1639 and by 1695 there were more towns in america with printers than there were in england.
at first many of these presses did not get very much use.
over time however the rising literacy of the society created a demand for books pamphlets and almanacs that the presses rushed to fill.
the first newspaper in the colonies publick occurrences was published first newspaper in boston in 1690 using a relatively advanced printing facility.
it was the first step toward what would eventually become a large newspaper industry.
one reason the stamp act of 1765 which imposed a tax on printed materials created such a furor was that printing technology had by then become central to colonial life.
education even before enlightenment ideas penetrated america colonists placed a high value on formal education.
some families tried to teach their children to read and write at home although the heavy burden of work in most agricultural households limited the time available for schooling.
in massachusetts a 1647 law required that every town support a school and a modest network of public schools emerged as a result.
the public schools quakers and other sects operated church schools and in some communities widows or unmarried women conducted dame schools in their homes.
in cities some master craftsmen set up evening schools for their apprentices.
african americans had virtually no access to education.
occasionally a master or mistress would teach slave children to read and write but as the slave system became more firmly entrenched strong social and ultimately legal sanctions developed to discourage such efforts.
indians too remained largely outside the white educational system to a large degree by choice.
some white missionaries and philanthropists established schools for native americans and helped create a small population of indians literate in spoken and written english.
harvard the first american college was established in 1636 by puritan theologians who wanted to create a training center for ministers.
the college was named for a charlestown massachusetts minister john harvard who had left it his library and onehalf of his estate.
in 1693 william and mary college named for the english king and queen was established in williamsburg virginia by anglicans.
and in 1701 first colleges conservative congregationalists dissatisfied with the growing religious liberalism of harvard founded yale named for one of its first benefactors elihu yale in new haven connecticut.
out of the great awakening emerged the college of new jersey founded in 1746 and known later as princeton after the town in which it was located one of its first presidents was jonathan edwards.
despite the religious basis of these colleges most of them offered curricula that included not only theology but also logic ethics physics geometry astronomy rhetoric latin hebrew and greek.
kings college founded in new york city in 1754 and later renamed columbia was specifically devoted to the spread of secular knowledge.
the academy and college of philadelphia founded in 1755 and later renamed the university of pennsylvania was also a secular institution established by a group of laymen under the inspiration of benjamin franklin.
after 1700 most colonial leaders received their entire education in america rather than attending university in england as had once been the case.
but higher education remained available only to a few relatively affluent white men.
80 chapter 31 central to the economic problems was the continuing energy crisis.
in the aftermath of the arab oil embargo of 1973 the opec cartel raised the price of oil by 400 percent in 1974 alone one of the principal reasons why inflation reached 11 percent in 1976 ford retained henry kissinger as secretary of state and generally continued the foreign policies of the nixon years.
late in 1974 ford met with leonid brezhnev at vladivostok in siberia and signed an arms control accord.
meanwhile in the middle east henry kissinger helped produce a new accord by which israel agreed to return large portions of the occupied sinai to egypt.
the two nations pledged not to resolve future differences by force.
as the 1976 presidential election approached fords policies were coming under increasing 1976 election attack from both the right and the left.
in the republican primary campaign ford faced a powerful challenge from former california governor ronald reagan leader of the partys conservative wing who spoke for many americans on the right who opposed any agreements with communists.
the president barely survived the assault to win his partys nomination.
the democrats in the meantime were gradually uniting behind a new and until recently almost entirely unknown candidate jimmy carter a former governor of georgia who appealed to the general unhappiness with washington by offering honesty piety and an outsiders skepticism of the federal government.
unhappiness with the economy and a general economic problems 26 13 25 6 12 candidate party jimmy carter democratic gerald r ford republican ronald reagan independent republican other candidates mccarthy ind.
libertarian electoral vote popular vote 40 828 587 50 0 39 147 613 47 9 1 575 459 2 1 53 5 of electorate voting the election of 1976 jimmy carter a former governor of georgia swept the south in the 1976 election and carried enough of the industrial states of the northeast and midwest to win a narrow victory over president gerald r ford.
his showing indicated the importance to the democratic party of having a candidate capable of attracting support in the south which was becoming increasingly republican by the 1970s.
what drove so many southerners into the republican party.
from the age of limits to the age of reagan 769 disenchantment with ford enabled the democrat to win a narrow victory.
carter received 50 percent of the popular vote to fords 47 9 percent and 297 electoral votes to fords 240 the trials of jimmy carter like ford jimmy carter assumed the presidency at a moment when the nation faced problems of staggering complexity and difficulty.
but carter seemed at times to make his predicament worse by a style of leadership that many americans considered self righteous and inflexible.
carter devoted much of his time to the problems of energy and the economy.
entering office in the midst of a recession he moved first to reduce unemployment by raising public spending and cutting federal taxes.
unemployment declined but inflation soared mostly because of the continuing sharp increases in energy prices by opec.
during carters last two years in office retail prices rose at over a 10 percent annual rate.
like nixon and ford before him carter responded with a combination of tight money and calls for voluntary restraint.
determined to stop inflation he appointed conservative economists to head the federal reserve board which helped push interest rates to the highest levels in american history at times they exceeded 20 percent.
in the summer of 1979 instability in the middle east produced a second major fuel shortage in the united states.
in the midst of the crisis opec announced another major price increase.
faced with increasing pressure to act carter went to camp david the presidential retreat in the maryland mountains.
ten days later he emerged to deliver a remarkable television address.
it included a series of proposals for resolving the energy crisis.
but it was most notable for carters bleak assessment of the national condition and his claim that there was a crisis of confidence that had struck at the very heart and soul of our national will the address became known as the malaise speech although carter himself had never used that word and it helped fuel charges that the president was trying to blame his own problems on the american people.
carters sudden firing of several members of his cabinet a few days later deepened his political dilemma.
human rights and national interests among jimmy carters most frequent campaign promises was a new american foreign policy based on the defense of human rights carter spoke out sharply about human rights violations in many countries including most prominently the soviet union.
but the administration also focused on more traditional concerns.
carter completed negotiations begun several years earlier on a pair of treaties to turn over control of the panama canal to the government of panama.
after an acrimonious debate the senate panama canal treaties ratified the treaties by 68 to 32 only one vote more than the necessary two thirds majority.
carters greatest success was in arranging a peace treaty between egypt and israel.
middle east negotiations had seemed hopelessly stalled until egyptian president anwar sadat accepted an invitation in november 1977 from prime minister menachem begin to visit israel.
in tel aviv he announced that egypt was now willing to accept the state of israel as a legitimate political entity.
when talks between israeli and egyptian negotiators stalled carter invited sadat and begin to a summit conference at camp david in september 1978 and persuaded them to remain there for two weeks.
on september 17 carter escorted the two leaders into the white house to announce an agreement on a framework for an egyptian israeli peace treaty known as the camp david accords.
on march 26 1979 begin and sadat camp david accords returned together to the white house to sign a formal peace treaty between their two nations.
770 chapter 17 homestead strike 423 horatio alger 413 horizontal integration 411 john d rockefeller 411 j p morgan 411 knights of labor 422 louisa may alcott 413 molly maguires 421 monopoly 419 pullman strike 424 samuel gompers 422 social darwinism 412 taylorism 409 vertical integration 411 wilbur and orville wright 408 recall and reflect 1 who were some of the business and industrial titans of the late nineteenth century and what did they contribute to americas industrial growth.
2 what changes took place in corporate organization in the late nineteenth century and how did these changes affect the nations economy.
3 what was the gospel of wealth.
4 how did social darwinism attempt to justify the social consequences of industrial capitalism.
5 how did workers respond to the expansion of industrialization and the new industrial economy.
the age of the city the new urban growth the urban landscape strains of urban life the rise of mass consumption leisure in the consumer society high culture in the urban age looking ahead 1 what were some of the problems that resulted from rapid urbanization and how did urban governments respond to these problems.
2 how did the sources of immigration to america shift in the late nineteenth century and what was the native response to the change.
3 how did the rise of mass consumption affect leisure and entertainment.
the face of american society was transformed in countless ways by the growth of industry and commerce.
but no change was more profound than the growing size and influence of cities.
having begun its life as a primarily agrarian republic the united states in the late nineteenth century was becoming an urban nation.
427 the new urban growth time line first intercollegiate football game boston and chicago fires nyc opens first elevated railroads boss tweed convicted baseballs national league founded congress restricts chinese immigration first skyscraper in chicago riiss how the other half lives basketball invented immigration restriction league formed boston opens first subway in america chopins the awakening baseballs american league founded first world series 428 although the great movement of people to the city was not unique to the united states americans found urbanization particularly jarring.
the urban population increased sevenfold in the half century after the civil war.
and in 1920 the census revealed that for the first time a majority of the american people lived in urban areas defined as communities of 2 500 people or more.
natural increase accounted for only a small part of the urban growth.
families in cities experienced a high rate of infant mortality a declining fertility rate and a high death rate from disease.
it was immigration rather that expanded the urban population so dramatically.
the migrations in the late nineteenth century americans left the declining agricultural regions of the east at a dramatic rate.
some moved to the newly developing farmlands of the west.
but almost as many moved to the growing cities of the east and the midwest.
among those leaving rural america for industrial cities in the 1880s were black men and women trying to escape the poverty debt violence and oppression they faced in the rural south.
they were also seeking new opportunities in cities.
factory jobs for african americans were rare and professional opportunities almost nonexistent.
urban blacks tended to work in service occupations as cooks janitors domestic servants and so on.
because many such jobs were considered womens work black women often outnumbered black men in the cities.
the most important source of urban population growth however was the great number of new immigrants from abroad part of a larger pattern of mobility around the age of the city 429 the world.
see america in the world global migrations some came from canada latin america and particularly on the west coast china and japan.
but the greatest number came from europe.
after 1880 the flow of new arrivals began to include large numbers of people from southern and eastern europe.
by the 1890s more than half of all immigrants came from these regions.
in earlier years most new immigrants from europe particularly germans and scandinavians had arrived with at least some money and education.
most of them arrived at one of the major port cities on the atlantic coast the greatest number landing at new yorks immigrant depot at castle garden and then headed west.
but the new immigrants of the late nineteenth century generally lacked the capital to buy farmland and lacked the education to establish themselves in professions.
so like similarly poor irish immigrants before the civil war they settled overwhelmingly in industrial cities where they worked largely in unskilled jobs.
the ethnic city by 1890 most of the population of the major cities consisted of immigrants 87 percent of the population in chicago 80 percent in new york 84 percent in milwaukee and 2 98 total immigration during five year periods in millions 2 27 2 12 1 73 1 56 1 51 1 09 80 1861 1866 1871 1876 1881 1886 1891 1896 1865 1870 1875 1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 year over 10 million immigrants from abroad entered the united states in the last forty years of the nineteenth century with particularly high numbers arriving in the 1880s and 1890s.
this chart shows the pattern of immigration in five year intervals.
what external events might help explain some of the rises and falls in the rates of immigration in these years.
total immigration 1861 1900 430 chapter 31 washington montana north dakota oregon wyoming utah san diego 6 colorado arizona phoenix 9 new mexico me.
vt n h boston 10 wisconsin michigan new york mass.
r i new cleveland pa ct york 7 philadelphia iowa n j 1 1 chicago nebraska 3 5 del.
2 3 a t l a n t ic ohio md.
baltimore ind.
ocea n 6 illinois w va washington d c st louis kansas virginia 9 8 kentucky missouri north carolina tennessee south oklahoma population change arkansas carolina 1970 1990 by state miss.
texas pa ci fic ocea n 1000 km detroit 5 7 nevada california minn south dakota idaho los angeles 4 2 500 mi san antonio 10 dallas 8 houston 4 alabama georgia gain of 50 or more 30 49 9 gain 15 29 9 gain louisiana florida 5 14 9 gain loss 4 9 gain ten most populous cities 1950 1990 alaska g ul f of m e x i c o hawaii 1 1950 rank 8 1990 rank growth of the sunbelt 1970 1990 one of the most important demographic changes of the last decades of the twentieth century was the shift of population out of traditional population centers in the northeast and midwest and toward the states of the so called sunbelt most notably the southwest and the pacific coast.
this map gives a dramatic illustration of the changing concentration of population between 1970 and 1990 the orange states are those that lost population while the purple and blue states are those that made significant gains 30 percent or more.
what was the impact of this population shift on the politics of the 1980s.
of scientology the unification church of the reverend sun myung moon even the tragic peoples temple whose members committed mass suicide in their jungle retreat in guyana in 1978 but the most important impulse of the religious revival was the growth of evangelical christianity.
evangelicals have in common a belief in personal conversion being born again surging evangelicalism through direct communication with jesus.
evangelical religion had been the dominant form of christianity in america through much of its history.
in its modern form it became increasingly visible during the early 1950s when evangelicals such as billy graham and pentecostals such as oral roberts began to attract huge national and international followings for their energetic revivalism.
by the late 1970s evangelical christians had become more visible and more politically assertive.
more than 70 million americans now described themselves as born again christians.
christian evangelicals owned newspapers magazines radio stations and television networks.
they operated their own schools and universities.
three modern presidents jimmy carter bill clinton and george w bush have identified themselves as evangelicals.
some evangelical christians supported racial and economic justice and world peace of the type espoused by civil rights leaders like rev.
martin luther king.
but many others had a different political focus.
alarmed by what they considered the spread of immorality and disorder in american life they were concerned about the way a secular culture was intruding into their communities schools and families.
many evangelical men and women for example feared that the growth of feminism posed a threat to the traditional family and from the age of limits to the age of reagan 773 they resented the way in which government policies advanced the goals of the womens movement.
particularly alarming to them were supreme court decisions eliminating all religious observance from schools and later the decision guaranteeing women the right to an abortion.
by the late 1970s the christian right had become a powerful political force.
jerry falwell a fundamentalist minister in virginia with a substantial television audience launched a highly visible movement he called the moral majority.
he founded liberty university in lynchburg virginia to train men and women according to conservative christian principles.
the pentecostal minister pat robertson began a political movement of his own and in the 1990s launched an organization known as the christian coalition christian coalition.
these and other organizations of the christian right opposed federal interference in local affairs denounced abortion divorce feminism and homosexuality defended unrestricted free enterprise and supported a strong american posture in the world.
some denied the scientific doctrine of evolution and instead urged the teaching in schools of the biblical story of the creation or beginning in the early twenty first century the idea of intelligent design their goal was a new era in which christian values once again dominated american life.
the role of religion in the growth of conservatism was not limited to evangelical christians.
in the 1970s the catholic church began to make a strong case for tradition as well.
the church fought most aggressively against abortion thus joining the evangelical right in one of the most controversial issues of the time.
not all catholics were or are conservatives many priests and parishioners took strong liberal positions.
but in the political world catholics became strong allies of the right joining evangelicals in fighting for many conservative issues.
mormons too began to emerge as an important element of the right.
for many years mormons did not publicize their conservatism.
but like catholics many mormons began to take openly conservative stances in the 1970s on some of the controversial battles of the time.
some of these mormons wealthy and successful businesspeople became conservative political politicians in various parts of the country.
in 2012 two wealthy mormons mitt romney and jon huntsman both former governors were candidates for the presidency.
the emergence of the new right religious issues were only a part although an important part of what became known as the new right a diverse but powerful movement that enjoyed rapid growth in the 1970s and early 1980s.
it had begun to take shape after the 1964 election in which barry goldwater had suffered his shattering defeat.
energetic organizers responded to that disaster by building a new and powerful set of right wing institutions to help conservatives campaign more effectively in the future.
beginning in the 1970s largely because of these organizational advances conservatives found themselves almost always better funded and organized than their opponents.
by the late 1970s there were right wing think tanks consulting firms lobbyists foundations and colleges and universities.
conservatives also succeeded in building mechanisms to raise money mobilize activists and project their ideas to a broad audience.
building from a list compiled by richard viguerie after the 1964 goldwater campaign the right built a direct mail operation that ultimately reached millions of conservative voters.
evangelicals such as pat robertson used cable television to reach the conservative faithful.
conservative radio hosts such as rush limbaugh created shows that attracted a vast national audience.
774 chapter 4 functions.
yet even when george iii was lucid which was most of the time in the 1760s and 1770s he was painfully immature and insecure.
the kings personality therefore contributed both to the instability and to the rigidity of the british government during these critical years.
more directly responsible for the problems that soon emerged with the colonies george grenville however was george grenville whom the king made prime minister in 1763 grenville shared the prevailing opinion within britain that the colonists should be compelled to pay a part of the cost of defending and administering the empire.
the british and the tribes with the defeat of the french frontiersmen from the english colonies began immediately to move over the mountains and into tribal lands in the upper ohio valley.
an alliance of indian tribes under the ottawa chieftain pontiac struck back.
fearing that an escalation of the fighting proclamation of 1763 might threaten western trade the british government in the proclamation of 1763 forbade settlers to advance beyond the appalachian mountains.
many indian groups supported the proclamation as the best bargain available to them.
the cherokee in particular worked actively to hasten the drawing of the boundary hoping finally to put an end to white movements into their lands.
relations between the western tribes and the british improved for a time partly as a result of the work of the sympathetic indian superintendents the british appointed.
in the end however the proclamation of 1763 was ineffective.
white settlers continued to swarm across the boundary and to claim lands farther and farther into the ohio valley.
the british authorities failed to enforce limits to the expansion.
in 1768 new agreements with the western tribes pushed the permanent boundary farther west.
but these treaties and subsequent ones also failed to stop the white advance.
battles over trade and taxes the grenville ministry tried to increase its authority in the colonies in other ways as well.
regular british troops were stationed permanently in america and under the mutiny act of 1765 the colonists were required to help provision and maintain the army.
ships of the british navy patrolled american waters to search for smugglers.
the customs service was reorganized and enlarged.
royal officials were required to take up their colonial posts in person instead of sending substitutes.
colonial manufacturing was restricted so that it would not compete with rapidly expanding industries in great britain.
the sugar act of 1764 raised the duty on sugar while lowering the duty on molasses.
sugar and currency acts it also established new vice admiralty courts in america to try accused smugglers thus cutting them off from sympathetic local juries.
the currency act of 1764 required that the colonial assemblies stop issuing paper money.
at first it was difficult for the colonists to resist these unpopular new laws.
that was partly because americans continued to harbor as many grievances against one another as they did against the authorities in london.
in 1763 for example a band of pennsylvania frontiersmen known as the paxton boys descended on philadelphia to demand tax relief and financial support for their defense against indians.
bloodshed was averted only by concessions from the colonial assembly.
in 1771 a small scale civil war broke out in north carolina when the paxton boys and regulators regulators farmers of the interior organized and armed themselves to resist high taxes.
the colonial governor appointed sheriffs to enforce the levies.
an army of militiamen most of them from the eastern counties crushed the regulator revolt.
mutiny act the empire in transition 93 the unpopularity of the grenville program helped the colonists overcome their internal conflicts and see that the policies from london were a threat to all americans.
northern merchants would suffer from restraints on their commerce.
the closing of the west to land speculation and fur trading enraged many colonists.
others were angered by the restriction of opportunities for manufacturing.
southern planters in debt to english merchants would be unable to ease their debts by speculating in western land.
small farmers would suffer from the abolition of paper money which had been the source of most of their loans.
workers in towns faced the prospect of narrowing opportunities particularly because of the restraints on manufacturing and currency.
everyone stood to suffer from increased taxes.
most americans soon found ways to live with the new british laws without terrible economic hardship.
but their political grievances remained.
americans were accustomed to wide latitude in self government.
they believed that colonial assemblies had the sole right to control appropriations for the costs of government within the colonies.
by attempting to raise extensive revenues directly from the public the british government was challenging the basis of colonial political power.
stirrings of revolt by the mid 1760s a hardening of positions had begun in both england and america.
the result was a progression of events that more rapidly than imagined destroyed the british empire in america.
the stamp act crisis grenville could not have devised a better method for antagonizing and unifying the colonies than the stamp act of 1765 unlike the sugar act of a year earlier the stamp act which affected only a few new england merchants the new tax fell on everyone.
it levied taxes on every printed document in the colonies newspapers almanacs pamphlets deeds wills licenses.
british officials were soon collecting more than ten times as much revenue in america as they had been before 1763 more alarming than these taxes however was the precedent they seemed to create.
in the past taxes and duties on colonial trade had always been designed to regulate commerce.
the stamp act however was clearly an attempt by england to raise revenue from the colonies without the consent of the colonial assemblies.
few colonists believed that they could do anything more than grumble until the virginia house of burgesses aroused americans to action.
patrick henry made a dramatic speech to the house in may 1765 concluding with a vague prediction that if present policies were not revised george iii like earlier tyrants might lose his head.
amid shocked cries of treason henry introduced a set of resolutions only some of which the assembly passed declaring that americans possessed the same rights as the english especially the right to be taxed only by their virginia resolves own representatives that virginians should pay no taxes except those voted by the virginia assembly and that anyone advocating the right of parliament to tax virginians should be deemed an enemy of the colony.
henrys resolutions were printed and circulated as the virginia resolves co ns ider t he s o urc e benjamin franklin testimony against the stamp act 1766 in 1765 parliament passed the first internal tax on the colonists known as the stamp act.
benjamin franklin was a colonial agent in london at the time and as colonial opposition to the act grew he found himself representing these views to the british government.
in his testimony from parliament he describes the role of taxes in pennsylvania and the economic r elationship between the colonies and the mother country.
q what is your name and place of abode.
a franklin of philadelphia.
q do the americans pay any considerable taxes among themselves.
a certainly many and very heavy taxes.
q what are the present taxes in pennsylvania laid by the laws of the colony.
a there are taxes on all estates real and personal a poll tax a tax on all offices professions trades and businesses according to their profits an excise on all wine rum and other spirit and a duty of ten pounds per head on all negroes imported with some other duties.
q for what purposes are those taxes laid.
a for the support of the civil and military establishments of the country and to discharge the heavy debt contracted in the last seven years war.
q are not all the people very able to pay those taxes.
the frontier counties all along the continent have been frequently ravaged by the enemy and greatly impoverished are able to pay very little tax.
q are not the colonies from their circumstances very able to pay the stamp duty.
a in my opinion there is not gold and silver enough in the colonies to pay the stamp duty for one year.
94 q dont you know that the money arising from the stamps was all to be laid out in america.
a i know it is appropriated by the act to the american service but it will be spent in the conquered colonies where the soldiers are not in the colonies that pay it.
q do you think it right that america should be protected by this country and pay no part of the expense.
a that is not the case.
the colonies raised clothed and paid during the last war near 25 000 men and spent many millions.
q were you not reimbursed by parliament.
a we were only reimbursed what in your opinion we had advanced beyond our proportion or beyond what might reasonably be expected from us and it was a very small part of what we spent.
pennsylvania in particular disbursed about 500 000 pounds and the reimbursements in the whole did not exceed 60 000 pounds.
q do you think the people of america would submit to pay the stamp duty if it was moderated.
a no never unless compelled by force of arms.
q what was the temper of america towards great britain before the year 1763.
a the best in the world.
they submitted willingly to the government of the crown and paid in all their courts obedience to acts of parliament.
q what is your opinion of a future tax imposed on the same principle with that of the stamp act.
how would the americans receive it.
a just as they do this.
they would not pay it.
q have not you heard of the resolutions of this house and of the house of lords asserting the right of parliament relating to america including a power to tax the people there.
a yes i have heard of such resolutions.
q what will be the opinion of the americans on those resolutions.
a they will think them unconstitutional and unjust.
q was it an opinion in america before 1763 that the parliament had no right to lay taxes and duties there.
a i never heard any objection to the right of laying duties to regulate commerce but a right to lay internal taxes was never supposed to be in parliament as we are not represented there.
q did the americans ever dispute the controlling power of parliament to regulate the commerce.
q can anything less than a military force carry the stamp act into execution.
a i do not see how a military force can be applied to that purpose.
q why may it not.
a suppose a military force sent into america they will find nobody in arms what are they then to do.
they cannot force a man to take stamps who chooses to do without them.
they will not find a rebellion they may indeed make one.
q if the act is not repealed what do you think will be the consequences.
a a total loss of the respect and affection the people of america bear to this country and of all the commerce that depends on that respect and affection.
q how can the commerce be affected.
a you will find that if the act is not repealed they will take very little of your manufactures in a short time.
q is it in their power to do without them.
a i think they may very well do without them.
q is it their interest not to take them.
a the goods they take from britain are either necessaries mere conveniences or superfluities.
the first as cloth etc with a little industry they can make at home the second they can do without till they are able to provide them among themselves and the last which are mere articles of fashion purchased and consumed because of the fashion in a respected country but will now be detested and rejected.
the people have already struck off by general agreement the use of all goods fashionable in mourning.
q if the stamp act should be repealed would it induce the assemblies of america to acknowledge the right of parliament to tax them and would they erase their resolutions against the stamp act.
a no never.
q is there no means of obliging them to erase those resolutions.
a none that i know of they will never do it unless compelled by force of arms.
q is there a power on earth that can force them to erase them.
a no power how great so ever can force men to change their opinions.
q what used to be the pride of the americans.
a to indulge in the fashions and manufactures of great britain.
q what is now their pride.
a to wear their old clothes over again till they can make new ones.
understand analyze evaluate 1 what kind of taxes did colonists pay a ccording to franklin.
what did the interviewer seem to think of the colonists tax burden.
what disagreements existed between franklin and his interviewer on the purpose legality and feasibility of the stamp tax.
2 how did franklin characterize the britishcolonial relationship prior to 1763.
3 what colonial response to the stamp act and other internal taxes did franklin predict.
what if anything could parliament do to enforce the colonists compliance.
source the parliamentary history of england london 1813 vol.
138 159 in charles morris the great republic by the master historians vol.
belcher co 1902.
95 96 chapter 18 corrupt city boss was william m tweed boss of new york citys tammany hall in the 1860s and 1870s whose extravagant use of public funds and kickbacks landed him in jail in 1872 the urban machine was not without competition.
reform groups frequently mobilized public outrage at the corruption of the bosses and often succeeded in driving machine politicians from office.
but the reform organizations typically lacked the permanence of the machine.
boss tweed and tammany hall the rise of mass consumption in the last decades of the nineteenth century a distinctive middle class culture began to exert influence over the whole of american life.
other groups in society advanced less rapidly or not at all but the rise of the new urban consumer culture began to shape a new image of the nation.
patterns of income and consumption incomes rose for almost everyone in the industrial era although highly unevenly.
one result of the new economy was the creation of vast fortunes but perhaps the most imporgrowth of middle class tant result for society as a whole was the growth and increasing prosperity of the middle class.
clerks accountants middle managers and other white collar workers saw their salaries rise by an average of a third between 1890 and 1910 doctors lawyers and other professionals experienced a particularly dramatic increase in both the prestige and the profitability of their professions.
working class incomes rose in those years as well although from a much lower base and more slowly.
the iron and steel industries saw workers hourly wages increase by a third between 1890 and 1910 but industries with large female workforces shoes textiles and paper saw more modest increases as did almost all industries in the south.
wages for african americans mexicans and asians also rose more slowly than those for white workers.
rising incomes created new markets for consumer goods which were now available new consumerism to a mass market for the first time as a result of technological innovations and new merchandising techniques.
an example of such changes was the emergence of ready made clothing.
in the early nineteenth century most americans had made their own clothing.
the invention of the sewing machine and the civil war demand for uniforms spurred the manufacture of clothing and helped create an enormous industry devoted to producing ready made garments.
by the end of the century almost all americans bought their clothing from stores.
partly as a result much larger numbers of people became concerned with personal style.
interest in womens fashion for example had once been a luxury reserved for the relatively affluent.
now middle class and even working class women could strive to develop a distinctive style of dress.
buying and preparing food also became a critical part of the new consumerism.
the development and mass production of tin cans in the 1880s created a large new industry devoted to packaging and selling canned food and condensed milk.
refrigerated railroad cars made it possible for perishable foods to be transported over long distances without spoiling.
artificially frozen ice enabled many households to afford iceboxes.
the changes brought improved diets and better health.
life expectancy rose six years in the first two decades of the twentieth century.
the age of the city 441 department stores often created events to help promote sales of their many wares.
here strawbridge and clothier department store creates a stir on market street in philadelphia in 1907.
corbis department stores chain stores mail order houses and department stores changes in marketing also altered the way americans bought goods.
new chain stores could usually offer a wider array of goods at lower prices than the small local stores with which they competed.
the atlantic and pacific tea company the a p began a national network of grocery stores in the 1870s.
f w woolworth built a chain of dry goods stores.
sears and roebuck established a large market for its mail order merchandise by distributing an enormous catalog each year.
in larger cities the emergence of great department stores helped make shopping more alluring and glamorous.
marshall field in chicago created one of the first american department stores a place deliberately designed to produce a sense of department stores wonder and excitement.
similar stores emerged in new york brooklyn boston philadelphia and other cities.
for the philosophy of one of the leading department store innovators see consider the source john wanamaker the four cardinal points of the department store women as consumers the rise of mass consumption had particularly dramatic effects on american women.
womens clothing styles changed much more rapidly than mens which encouraged more frequent purchases.
women generally bought and prepared food for their families so the availability of new food products changed not only how people ate but also how women shopped and cooked.
the consumer economy produced new employment opportunities for women as salesclerks and waitresses.
and it spawned the creation of a new movement in which women co ns ider t he s o urc e john wanamaker the four cardinal points of the department store 1874 the philadelphia merchant john wanamaker was one of the most successful and innovative businessmen of his day.
a pioneer of the department store wanamaker ran this advertisement explaining the policies and benefits for consumers of his new commercial venue.
four cardinal points by which we will hereafter steer our craft full guarantee cash payment one price cash returned explanation and elaboration of the new plan first point cash houses doing a credit business must provide for losses on bad debts interest on long standing accounts capital locked up etc.
to bear such losses themselves would drive them out of business.
therefore a per cent is added to the price of each article sold to cover this leakage and cash buyers whether they know it or not really pay the bad debts and the interest on the long credits of the other customers.
under the cash payment system one pays only for what he gets and contributes nothing to a sinking fund by this radical change we shall lose some of our customers no doubt but we will gain ten where we lose one the advantages being so great to all who can avail themselves of them.
so we say cash throughout.
bring money for clothing and we will supply it at prices possible under no other plan.
second point one price the fairness of this feature of our plan all will praise.
it is simply treating all alike exacting nothing from indisposition to bargain or ignorance and at the same time conceding all that shrewdness on the shrewdest customers part could possibly extort because the one price 442 which we mark on our goods shall invariably be not the first price but the last and lowest price.
not the top price but the very bottom price.
third point full guarantee a printed guarantee bearing the signature of our firm will accompany each garment as a warrantee.
this binds us in every sense and will be honored as quickly as a good draft of the government of the united states.
this is a sample of the full guarantee and tells its own story guarantee.
we hereby guarantee first that the prices of our goods shall be as low as the same quality of material and manufacture are sold anywhere in the united states.
second that prices are precisely the same to everybody for same quality on same day of purchase.
third that the quality of goods is as represented on printed labels.
fourth that the full amount of cash paid will be refunded if customers find the articles unsatisfactory and return them unworn and uninjured within ten days of date of purchase.
fourth point cash returned this is simply a concession on our part to our customers to secure them full confidence in dealing for goods they know very little about and we thus prevent any occasion for dissatisfaction from any and every cause whatsoever.
if the garment is not exactly what you thought if your taste changes if the home folks prefer another color or another shape if you find you can buy the same material and style elsewhere for less money if you conclude you dont need it after you get home if the season changes suddenly and you wish you had not bought it bring it back unworn and uninjured and the full amount of money you paid will be returned on the spot.
what more can we do for our customers than this when we make our clothing so that they can draw the money value with it equally as well as with a check on the banks.
the advantages incident to a system having for its cardinal points these which we have now explained are simply innumerable.
saving of time and temper perfect security absence of all huckstering etc etc.
but above all this.
all of these by ways lead direct to cheapness and this without lowering the quality or style of our celebrated make of mens and boys clothing.
understand analyze evaluate 1 what were the benefits of wanamakers four cardinal points for consumers.
what were the benefits for wanamaker.
judging by wanamakers new way of doing business what must business practices and customer service have looked like before.
2 why might these assurances have been particularly important for a large department store.
why might it have been essential for the urban consumer market.
source golden book of the wanamaker stores jubilee year 1861 1911 philadelphia john wanamaker 1911 pp.
this advertisement was originally published in 1874 located in regina lee blaszczyk and philip b scranton eds.
major problems in american business history boston houghton mifflin company 2006 pp.
played a vital role the consumer protection movement.
the national consumers league ncl formed in the 1890s under the leadership of florence national consumers league kelley attempted to mobilize the power of women as consumers to force retailers and manufacturers to improve wages and working conditions.
the ncl encouraged women to buy only products with the leagues white label which indicated that the product was made under fair working conditions.
leisure in the consumer society closely related to the rise of consumption was a growing interest in leisure time.
members of the urban middle and professional classes had large blocks of time during which they were not at work evenings weekends even paid vacations.
working hours in many factories declined from an average of nearly seventy hours a week in 1860 to under sixty in 1900 even farmers found that the mechanization of agriculture gave them more free time.
as many peoples lives became more compartmentalized with clear distinctions between work and leisure many americans began to search for new forms of recreation and entertainment.
redefining leisure in earlier eras relatively few americans had considered leisure a valuable thing.
many equated it with laziness.
in the late nineteenth century however the beginnings of a redefinition of leisure appeared.
the economist simon patten articulated this new view 443 444 chapter 32 president clinton responded to the 1994 election results by shifting his own activist agenda conspicuously to the center announcing his own plan to cut taxes and balance the budget.
but the presidential politics of 1996 made compromise between the president and congress very difficult.
in november 1995 and again in january 1996 the federal government literally shut down for several days because the president and congress could not agree on a budget.
republican leaders refused to pass a continuing resolution to allow government operations to continue during negotiations in hopes of pressuring the president to agree to their terms.
that proved to be an epic political blunder.
public opinion turned quickly and powerfully against the republican leadership and much of its agenda.
newt gingrich emerged as one of the most unpopular political leaders in the nation while president clinton slowly improved his standing in public opinion polls.
by the time the 1996 campaign began in earnest president clinton was in a commanding position to win reelection.
unopposed for the democratic nomination he faced a republican opponent senator robert dole of kansas who inspired little enthusiasm even within his own party.
clinton benefited from the disastrous errors by congressional republicans in 1995 and early 1996 but his greatest strength came from the remarkable success of the american economy and the marked reduction in the federal deficit.
like reagan in 1984 he could campaign as the champion of peace prosperity and national well being.
candidate party bill clinton democratic robert dole republican ross perot reform electoral vote popular vote 47 401 185 49 3 39 197 469 40 7 8 085 294 8 4 49 of electorate voting the election of 1996 ross perot received many fewer votes in 1996 than he had in 1992 and president clinton came much closer than he had four years earlier to winning a majority of the popular vote.
once again clinton defeated his republican opponent this time robert dole by a decisive margin in both the popular and electoral votes.
after the 1994 republican landslide in the congressional elections bill clinton had seemed permanently weakened.
what explains his political revival.
the age of globalization 793 in a flurry of activity in the spring and summer of 1996 congress passed several important bills.
the most dramatic was a welfare reform bill that ended the fifty year federal guarantee of assistance to families with dependent children and turned most of the responsibility for allocating federal welfare funds to the states.
most of all it shifted the bulk of welfare benefits away from those without jobs and toward low wage workers.
clintons buoyant campaign flagged slightly in the last weeks but the president nevertheless received just over 49 percent of the popular vote to doles 41 percent ross perot running now as the candidate of what he called the reform party received just over 8 percent of the vote.
clinton won 379 electoral votes to doles 159 perot won none as was clinton reelected the case in the 1992 election.
but the democrats failed to regain either house of congress.
clinton triumphant and embattled the first democratic president to win two terms as president since franklin roosevelt bill clinton began his second administration with serene confidence.
he proposed a relatively modest domestic agenda.
he negotiated effectively with the republican leadership on a plan for a balanced budget which passed with much fanfare late in 1997 by the end of 1998 the federal budget was generating its first surplus in thirty years.
clintons renewed popularity was critical to his political survival in the turbulent year that followed when the most serious crisis of his presidency suddenly erupted.
clinton had been the target of accusations of corruption and scandal since his first weeks in office the investigation into whitewater charges of corruption against members of his cabinet and staff accusations of illegalities in financing his 1996 campaign and a civil suit for sexual harassment filed early in his first term by a former arkansas state employee paula jones.
in early 1998 inquiries associated with the paula jones case led to charges that the president had had a sexual relationship with a twenty two year old white house intern monica lewinsky.
the most damaging charge was that he had lied about it in his deposition before joness attorneys.
those revelations produced a new investigation by the independent counsel in the whitewater case kenneth starr a former judge and official in the reagan justice department.
clinton forcefully denied the charges and a majority of the public strongly backed him.
his popularity soared to record levels and remained high throughout the year that followed.
in the meantime a federal judge dismissed the paula jones case which had launched the scandal.
but the scandal revived again with great force in august 1998 when lewinsky struck a deal with the independent counsel and testified about her relationship with clinton.
starr then subpoenaed clinton himself who faced with the prospect of speaking the starr report to a grand jury finally admitted that he and lewinsky had had what he called an improper relationship a few weeks later starr submitted a lengthy and salacious report to congress on the results of his investigation recommending that congress impeach the president.
impeachment acquittal and resurgence on december 19 1998 the house voting on strictly partisan lines narrowly approved two counts of impeachment lying to the grand jury and obstructing justice.
the matter then moved to the senate where a trial of the president the first since the trial of andrew johnson in 1868 began in early january.
it ended with a decisive acquittal of the president.
neither of the charges attracted even a majority of the votes let alone the two thirds necessary for conviction.
794 chapter 18 william james a harvard psychologist and brother of the novelist henry james was the most prominent publicist of the new theory although earlier intellectuals such as charles s peirce and later ones such as john dewey were also important to its develop pragmatism ment and dissemination.
according to the pragmatists modern society should rely for guidance not on inherited ideals and moral principles but on the test of scientific inquiry.
no idea or institution not even religious faith was valid they claimed unless it worked unless it stood the test of experience.
a similar concern for scientific inquiry was influencing the social sciences.
sociologists such as edward a ross and lester frank ward urged applying the scientific method to the solution of social and political problems.
historians such as frederick jackson turner and charles beard argued that economic factors more than spiritual ideals had been the governing force in historical development.
john dewey proposed a new approach to education that placed less emphasis on the rote learning of traditional knowledge and more on flexible democratic schooling.
the implications of darwinism also promoted the growth of anthropology and encouraged some scholars to begin examining other cultures in new ways.
some white americans began to look at indian society for example as a coherent culture with its own norms and values that were worthy of respect and preservation even though they were different from those of white society.
toward universal schooling the growing demand for specialized skills and scientific knowledge naturally created a growing and changing demand for education.
the late nineteenth century therefore was a time of rapid expansion and reform of american schools and universities.
free public primary and secondary education spread rapidly.
by 1900 compulsory school attendance laws existed in thirty one states and territories.
education was still far from universal.
rural areas lagged far behind urban industrial ones in funding public education.
in the south many african americans had no access to schools at all.
but for many white men and women educational opportunities were expanding rapidly.
educational reformers tried to extend educational opportunities to the indian tribes as well in an effort to civilize them and help them adapt to white society.
in the 1870s reformers recruited small groups of indians to attend hampton institute a primarily black college.
in 1879 they organized the carlisle indian industrial school in pennsylvania.
like many black colleges carlisle emphasized practical industrial education.
ultimately however these reform efforts failed in part because they were unpopular with their intended beneficiaries.
universities and the growth of science and technology colleges and universities also proliferated rapidly in the late nineteenth century.
the morrill land grant act of 1862 by which the federal government had donated public land to states for the establishment of colleges led to the creation of sixty nine landgrant institutions in the last decades of the century among them the state university systems of california illinois minnesota and wisconsin.
other universities including chicago columbia harvard northwestern princeton syracuse and yale benefited from millions of dollars contributed by business and financial titans such as rockefeller and carnegie.
other philanthropists founded new universities or reorganized older ones to the age of the city 451 perpetuate their family names for example vanderbilt johns hopkins cornell duke tulane and stanford.
these and other universities played a vital role in the economic development of the united states in the late nineteenth century and beyond.
the land grant institutions were specifically mandated to advance knowledge in agriculture higher education and the economy and mechanics from the beginning therefore they were committed not just to abstract knowledge but to making discoveries that would be of practical use to farmers and manufacturers.
as they evolved into great state universities they retained that tradition and became the source of many of the great discoveries that helped american industry and commerce advance.
private universities emerged that served many of the same purposes the massachusetts institute of technology founded in 1865 soon became the nations premier engineering school johns hopkins university in baltimore founded in 1876 did much to advance medical scholarship as did the rockefeller institute for medical research in new york later rockefeller university and the carnegie institution.
by the early twentieth century older and more traditional universities were beginning to form relationships with the private sector and the government doing research that did not just advance knowledge for its own sake but that was directly applicable to practical problems of the time.
medical science both the culture of and the scientific basis for medical care were changing rapidly in the early twentieth century.
most doctors were beginning to accept the new medical assumption that there were underlying causes to particular symptoms that a symptom was not itself a disease.
they were also beginning to make use of new or improved technologies the x ray improved microscopes and other diagnostic devices that made it possible to classify and distinguish among different diseases.
laboratory tests could now identify infections such as typhoid and dysentery.
these technologies were a critical first step toward the effective treatment of diseases.
at about the same time pharmaceutical research began to produce some important new medicines.
aspirin was first synthesized in 1899 other researchers experimented with chemicals that might destroy diseases in the blood an effort that eventually led to the various forms of chemotherapy that are still widely used in treating cancer.
in 1906 an american surgeon g w crile became the first physician to use blood transfusion in treatment which revolutionized surgery.
in the past patients often lost so much blood during operations that extensive surgery could be fatal for that reason alone.
with transfusions it became possible to conduct much longer and more elaborate operations.
the widespread acceptance by the end of the nineteenth century of the germ theory of disease had important implications.
physicians quickly discovered that germ theory accepted exposure to germs did not by itself necessarily cause disease and they began looking for the other factors that determined who got sick and who did not.
among the factors they eventually discovered were general health previous medical history diet and nutrition and eventually genetic predisposition.
the awareness of the importance of infection in spreading disease also encouraged doctors to sterilize their instruments use surgical gloves and otherwise purify the medical environment.
by the early twentieth century american physicians and surgeons were generally recognized as among the best in the world and american medical education declining mortality was beginning to attract students from many other countries.
these improvements in medical knowledge and training along with improvements in sanitation and public health did much to reduce infection and mortality in most american communities.
452 chapter of the revolution around the chesapeake bay and the james river.
what errors led the british to their surrender at yorktown.
america in the world the age of revolutions the american revolution was a result of tensions and conflicts between imperial britain and its north american colonies.
but it was also both a part and a cause of what historians have come to call an age of revolutions which spread through much of the western world in the last decades of the eighteenth century and the first decades of the nineteenth.
the modern idea of revolution the overturning of old systems and regimes and the creation of new ones was to a large degree a product of the ideas of the enlightenment.
among those ideas was the notion of popular sovereignty articulated by among others the english philosopher john locke.
locke argued that political authority did not derive from the divine right of kings or the inherited authority of aristocracies but from the consent of the governed.
a related enlightenment idea was the concept of individual freedom which challenged the traditional belief that governments had the right to prescribe the way people act speak and even think.
champions of individual freedom in the eighteenth century among them the french philosopher voltaire advocated religious toleration and freedom of thought and expression.
the enlightenment also helped spread the idea of political and legal equality for all people the end of special privileges for aristocrats and elites and the right of all citizens to participate in the formation of policies and laws.
jean jacques rousseau a swissfrench theorist helped define these new ideas of equality.
together enlightenment ideas formed the basis for challenges to existing social orders in many parts of the western world and eventually beyond it.
the american revolution was the first and in many ways most influential of the enlightenment derived uprisings against 116 e stablished orders.
it served as an inspiration to people in other lands who opposed unpopular regimes.
in 1789 a little over a decade after the beginning of the american revolution dissenters rebelled in france at first through a revolt by the national legislature against the king and then through a series of increasingly radical challenges to established authority.
the monarchy was abolished and the king and queen publicly executed in 1793 the authority of the catholic church was challenged and greatly weakened and at the peak of revolutionary chaos during the jacobin period 1793 1794 over 40 000 suspected enemies of the revolution were executed and hundreds of thousands of others imprisoned.
the radical phase of the revolution came to an end in 1799 when napoleon bonaparte a young general seized power and began to build a new french empire.
but frances ancien regime of king and aristocracy never wholly revived.
together the french and american revolutions helped inspire uprisings in many other parts of the atlantic world.
in 1791 a major slave revolt began in haiti and soon attracted over 100 000 rebels.
the army of enslaved people defeated both the white settlers of the island and the french colonial armies sent to quell their rebellion.
under the leadership of toussaint louverture they began to agitate for independence which they obtained on january 1 1804 a few months after toussaints death.
the ideas of these revolutions spread next into spanish and portuguese colonies in the americas particularly among the so called creoles people of european ancestry born in the americas.
in the late eighteenth century they began to resist the continuing authority of colonial officials from spain and portugal and to demand a greater say in governing their own lands.
when napoleons french armies this painting portrays the storming of the great parisian fortress and prison the bastille on july 14 1789 the bastille was a despised symbol of royal tyranny to many of the french because of the arbitrarily arrested and imprisoned people who were sent there.
the july assault was designed to release the prisoners but in fact the revolutionaries found only seven people in the vast fortress.
even so the capture of the bastille which marked one of the first moments in which ordinary frenchmen joined the revolution became one of the great moments in modern french history.
the anniversary of the event bastille day remains the french national holiday.
musee de la ville de paris musee carnavalet paris france bridgeman images storming the bastille invaded spain and portugal in 1807 they weakened the ability of the european regimes to sustain authority over their american colonies.
in the years that followed revolutions swept through much of latin america.
mexico became an independent nation in 1821 and provinces of central america that had once been part of mexico guatemala el salvador honduras nicaragua and costa rica established their independence three years later.
simn bolvar modeling his efforts on those of george washington movement that helped inspire revolutionary campaigns in venezuela ecuador and peru all of which won their independence in the 1820s.
at about the same time greek patriots drawing from the examples of other revolutionary nations launched a movement to win their independence from the ottoman empire which finally succeeded in 1830 the age of revolutions left many new independent nations in its wake.
it did not however succeed in establishing the ideals of popular sovereignty individual freedom and political equality in all the nations it affected.
slavery survived in the united states and in many areas of latin america.
new forms of aristocracy and even monarchy emerged in france mexico brazil and elsewhere.
women many of whom had hoped the revolutionary age would win them new rights made few legal or political gains in this era.
but the ideals that the revolutionary era introduced to the western world continued to shape the histories of nations throughout the nineteenth century and beyond.
understand analyze evaluate 1 how did the american revolution influ ence the french revolution and how were other nations affected by it.
2 what was the significance of the revolution in haiti and how much attention did it get in other nations.
117 118 chapter 19 balance was similarly stable with the republicans generally controlling the senate and the democrats generally controlling the house.
despite the relatively modest differences most eligible americans had strong loyalties high voter turnout to their chosen party.
voter turnout in presidential elections between 1860 and 1900 averaged over 78 percent of all eligible voters.
large groups of potential voters were disenfranchised in these years women in most states and almost all blacks and many poor whites in the south.
but for adult white males there were few restrictions on voting.
what explains this extraordinary loyalty to the two political parties.
it was not that the parties took distinct positions on important public issues.
they did so rarely.
reasons for party loyalties party loyalties reflected other factors.
region was perhaps the most important.
to white southerners loyalty to the democratic party the vehicle by which they had triumphed over reconstruction and preserved white supremacy was a matter of unquestioned faith.
republican loyalties were equally intense in the north.
to many the party of lincoln remained a bulwark against slavery and treason.
religious and ethnic differences also shaped party loyalties.
the democratic party attracted most of the catholic voters recent immigrants and poorer workers.
the republican party appealed to northern protestants citizens of old stock and much of the middle class.
among the few substantive issues on which the parties took clearly different stands were immigration matters.
republicans tended to support immigration restriction and to favor temperance legislation which many believed would help discipline immigrant communities.
catholics and immigrants viewed such proposals as assaults on them and their cultures and the democratic party followed their lead.
party identification then was usually more a reflection of cultural inclinations than a calculation of economic interest.
individuals might affiliate with a party because their parents had done so or because it was the party of their region their church or their ethnic group.
the national government one reason the parties avoided most substantive issues was that the federal government did relatively little.
the government in washington was responsible for delivering the mail maintaining a military conducting foreign policy and collecting tariffs and taxes.
it had few other responsibilities and few institutions capable of undertaking additional responsibilities even if it had chosen to do so.
there was one significant exception.
from the end of the civil war to the early twentieth century the federal government administered a system of annual pensions for retired union civil war veterans and their widows.
at its peak this pension system was making payments first pension system to a majority of the male citizens black and white of the north and to many women as well.
some reformers hoped to make the system permanent and universal others found it corrupt and expensive.
when the civil war generation died out the pension system died with it.
in most other respects the united states in the late nineteenth century was a society without a modern national government.
the most powerful institutions were the two political parties and the bosses and machines that dominated them and the federal courts.
from crisis to empire 457 presidents and patronage presidents in the late nineteenth century had great symbolic importance but they were unable to do very much except distribute government appointments.
a new president and his tiny staff had to make almost 100 000 appointments.
it sometimes proved impossible for a president to avoid factional conflict as the presidency of rutherford b hayes demonstrated.
by the end of his term two groups the stalwarts led by roscoe conkling of new york and the half breeds stalwarts and half breeds captained by james g blaine of maine were competing for control of the republican party.
rhetorically the stalwarts favored traditional professional machine politics while the halfbreeds favored reform.
in fact both groups were mainly interested in a larger share of patronage.
hayes tried to satisfy both and ended up satisfying neither.
the battle over patronage overshadowed all else during hayess unhappy presidency.
his one important substantive initiative an effort to create a civil service system attracted no support from either party.
and his early announcement that he would not seek reelection only weakened him further.
the republicans managed to retain the presidency in 1880 in part because they agreed on a ticket that included a stalwart and a half breed.
they nominated james a garfield a veteran congressman from ohio and a half breed for president and chester a arthur of new york a stalwart for vice president.
the democrats nominated general winfield scott hancock a minor civil war commander with no national following.
benefiting from the end of the recession of 1879 garfield won a decisive electoral victory although his popular vote margin was thin.
president chester a arthur although originally a stalwart arthur attempted to reform the spoils system.
in this puck cartoon he is catching heat from a variety of republican factions including the stalwarts and half breeds.
the library of congress 458 chapter 5 the seven ranges first area surveyed rie ee 1st range lak pa ng um r ki us em l t t li o o hi ohio 1803 indiana cincinnati c d e virginia kentucky 1792 four sections reserved for subsequent sales r ve ri a b pennsylvania virginia northwest territory section 16 reserved for school funds 29 23 11 one section 640 acres 1 mile square a half section 320 acres b quarter section 160 acres c half quarter section 80 acres d e quarter quarter section 40 acres 26 20 8 one township 6 miles square 6 miles 2nd range 3rd range 4th range 5th range 6th range 7th range geographers line base line 1 mile land survey ordinance of 1785 in the ordinance of 1785 the congress established a new system for surveying and selling western lands.
these maps illustrate the way in which the lands were divided in an area of ohio.
note the highly geometrical grid pattern that the ordinance imposed on these lands.
each of the squares in the map on the left was subdivided into 36 sections as illustrated in the map at the lower right.
why was this grid pattern so appealing to the planners of the western lands.
be surveyed and marked off into neat rectangular townships each divided into thirty six identical sections.
in every township four sections were to be reserved by the federal government for future use or sale a policy that helped establish the idea of public land.
the revenue from the sale of one of these federally reserved sections was to support creation of a public school.
the precise rectangular pattern imposed on the northwest territory the grid became a model for all subsequent land policies of the federal government and for many other planning decisions in states and localities.
the grid also became characteristic of the layout of many american cities.
it had many advantages.
it eliminated the uncertainty about property borders that earlier more informal land systems had produced.
it sped the development of western lands by making land ownership simple and understandable.
but it also encouraged a dispersed form of settlement with each farm family separated from its neighbors that made the formation of community more difficult.
whatever its consequences however the 1785 ordinance made a dramatic and indelible mark on the american landscape.
the american revolution 129 the original ordinances proved highly favorable to land speculators and less so to ordinary settlers many of whom could not afford the price of the land.
congress compounded the problem by selling much of the best land to the ohio and scioto companies before making it available to anyone else.
criticism of these policies led to the passage in 1787 of another law governing western settlement legislation that became known as the northwest ordinance the 1787 ordinance abandoned the ten the northwest ordinance districts established in 1784 and created a single northwest territory out of the lands north of the ohio the territory could be divided subsequently into three to five territories.
it also specified a population of 60 000 as a minimum for statehood guaranteed freedom of religion and the right to trial by jury to residents of the region and prohibited slavery throughout the territory.
the western lands south of the ohio river received less attention from congress.
the region that became kentucky and tennessee developed rapidly in the late 1770s as slave owning territories and in the 1780s began setting up governments and asking for statehood.
the confederation congress was never able to resolve the conflicting claims in that region successfully.
indians and the western lands on paper the western land policies of the confederation brought order and stability to the process of white settlement in the northwest.
but in reality order and stability came slowly and at great cost because much of the land was claimed by the indians.
congress tried to resolve that problem in 1784 1785 and 1786 by persuading iroquois choctaw chickasaw and cherokee leaders to sign treaties ceding lands to the united states.
but those agreements proved ineffective.
in 1786 the leadership of the iroquois confederacy repudiated the treaty it had signed two years earlier.
other tribes had never really accepted the treaties affecting them and continued to resist white movement into their lands.
violence between whites and indians on the northwest frontier reached a crescendo in the early 1790s.
in 1790 and again in 1791 the miami led by the famed warrior little turtle defeated united states forces in two major battles.
efforts to negotiate a settlement failed because of the miamis insistence that no treaty was possible unless it forbade white settlement west of the ohio river.
negotiations did not resume until after general anthony wayne led 4 000 soldiers into the ohio valley in 1794 and defeated battle of fallen timbers the indians in the battle of fallen timbers.
a year later the miami signed the treaty of greenville ceding substantial new lands to the united states in exchange for a formal acknowledgment of their claim to the territory they had managed to retain.
this was the first time the new federal government recognized the sovereignty of indian nations in doing so it affirmed that indian lands could be ceded only by the tribes themselves.
that hard won assurance however proved a frail protection against the pressure of white expansion.
debts taxes and daniel shays the postwar depression which lasted from 1784 to 1787 increased the perennial american problem of an inadequate money supply a burden that weighed particularly heavily on debtors.
the confederation itself had an enormous outstanding debt accumulated during the revolutionary war and few means with which to pay it down.
it had sold war bonds that were now due to be repaid it owed money to its soldiers it had substantial debts 130 chapter 32 thousands of demonstrators rallied at the site of the 1999 world trade organization meeting to protest the wtos role in the globalization of the economy and they believed the exploitation of working people.
they succeeded in postponing the opening of the conference.
in this photograph a protester faces seattle police in a cloud of tear gas waiting to be arrested.
andy clark reuters corbis protesting the wto in seattle 1999 defending orthodoxy outside the industrialized west the impact of globalization sparked other controversies.
many citizens of nonindustrialized nations resented the way the world economy had left them in poverty.
in their view the developed world exploited and oppressed them.
in some parts of the nonindustrialized world particularly in some of the islamic nations of the middle east the increasing reach of globalization created additional grievances rooted not just in economics but also in religion and culture.
the iranian revolution of 1979 in which orthodox muslims ousted a despotic government was one of the first large and visible manifestations of a phenomenon that eventually reached across much of the islamic world.
it threatened the stability of the globe.
militants used isolated incidents of violence and mayhem designed to disrupt societies and governments and to create fear among their peoples.
such tactics are known to the world as terrorism.
the rise of terrorism the term terrorism was used first during the french revolution in the 1790s to describe the actions of radical jacobins against the french government.
it continued to be used intermittently throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries to describe the use of violence as a form of intimidation against peoples and governments.
but the widespread understanding of terrorism as an important fact of modern life is largely a product of the end of the twentieth century and the beginning of the twenty first.
the age of globalization 817 acts of what came to be called terrorism have occurred in many parts of the world.
irish revolutionaries engaged in terrorism regularly against the english through much of the twentieth century.
jews used it in palestine against the british before the creation of israel and palestinians have used it frequently against jews in israel particularly in the past several decades.
revolutionary groups in italy germany japan and france have engaged in terrorist acts intermittently over the past several decades.
the united states too has experienced terrorism for many years much of it against american targets abroad including the bombing of the marine barracks in beirut in 1983 the explosion that brought down an american airliner over lockerbie scotland in 1988 the bombing of american embassies in 1998 and the assault on the u s naval vessel cole in 2000 terrorist incidents were relatively rare terrorist incidents before 9 11 but not unknown within the united states itself prior to september 11 2001 militants on the american left performed various acts of terror in the 1960s and early 1970s.
in february 1993 a bomb exploded in the parking garage of the world trade center in new york killing six people and causing serious but not irreparable structural damage to the towers.
several men connected with militant islamic organizations were convicted of the crime.
in april 1995 a van containing explosives blew up in front of a federal building in oklahoma city killing 168 people.
timothy mcveigh a former army soldier who had become part of a militant a ntigovernment movement of the american right was convicted of the crime and eventually executed in 2001 september 11 2001 a new york city symbol stands against a sky filled with the thick smoke from the destruction of another american symbol new york citys world trade center towers a few hours after terrorists crashed two planes into them.
daniel hulshizer ap images 818 chapter 19 great britain and germany were also interested in the islands and they too secured treaty rights from the native princes.
for the next ten years the three powers jockeyed for samoa divided dominance in samoa finally agreeing to create a tripartite protectorate over samoa with the native chiefs exercising only nominal authority.
the three way arrangement failed to halt the rivalries of its members and in 1899 the united states and germany divided the islands between them compensating britain with territories elsewhere in the pacific.
the united states retained the harbor at pago pago.
war with spain imperial ambitions had thus begun to stir within the united states well before the late 1890s.
but a war with spain in 1898 turned those stirrings into overt expansionism.
controversy over cuba spains once formidable empire had grown rickety but still included two prized island possessions cuba ninety miles off the shores of florida and the philippines in asia.
as in many imperial holdings the native peoples in these regions objected to the presence of european colonizers and occasionally waged insurrections.
one rebellion in cuba had ended in 1878 with spanish rule intact.
nominal cuban control over the economy followed but the depression of the 1890s led spain to withdraw even that privilege.
in 1895 cuban revolt cuban revolutionaries mounted a new insurrection led by the revolutionary poet jos mart and military heroes of the earlier wars of liberation.
the rebellion soon attracted the sympathies of people in the united states.
popular newspapers reported horrific atrocities committed by the spanish against cuban rebels and civilians.
the spanish governor since 1896 general valeriano weyler was rounding up cubans in detention camps to isolate rebels in the countryside and then destroying agriculture to starve them out.
these policies of the butcher led to the deaths of tens of thousands of cuban civilians.
the conflict also imperiled the american owned sugar plantations in cuba and regional commerce more broadly.
and ever since the articulation of the monroe doctrine in 1823 americans had dreamed of ridding north and south america of european colonizers.
some hoped to replace the spanish with a heavy american presence in the region while others including william jennings bryan and other prominent democrats and members of congress wished only to liberate cuba and leave it to the cubans.
the conflict in cuba came at a particularly opportune moment for the publishers of some american newspapers joseph pulitzer with his new york world and william randolph hearst with his new york journal.
in the 1890s hearst and pulitzer were engaged in a ruthless circulation war and they both sent batteries of reporters and illustrators to cuba with orders to provide accounts of spanish atrocities.
this sort of sensationalist reporting was known as yellow journalism.
see patterns of popular culture yellow journalism although president cleveland worried about the potential disruptions of american trade he did not intervene.
nor at first did his successor william mckinley.
both men shared the commercial and humanitarian concerns but sought to avoid war with a european power.
an irritated theodore roosevelt the assistant secretary of the navy excoriated president mckinley for his un masculine weakness charging that he had no more backbone than a chocolate clair from crisis to empire 473 the situation changed in early 1898 in january pro spanish cubans rioted in havana against the idea of a free cuba or cuba libre which the two american political parties had at least rhetorically supported even as successive u s administrations remained neutral.
thus the riots carried anti american undertones and president mckinley under pressure from the popular media after unfulfilled promises from spain sent the u s s.
maine to havana harbor to protect american citizens.
on february 15 1898 the maine the ship exploded killing 266 americans.
although later investigations revealed it likely an accident most americans egged on by the jingoistic press blamed the spanish.
for all the earlier arguments about humanity commerce and geopolitical strategy the destruction of the maine challenged american honor.
a democrat in the house voted for war to defend the honor and maintain the dignity of this republic a republican sought peace with honor on april 25 congress passed a resolution calling for war against the spanish.
it included the teller amendment named for democratic senator teller amendment henry t teller from colorado which swore off any intentions to occupy possess or control cuba after a future victory against the spanish.
a splendid little war the american ambassador to england john hay called the ensuing spanish american conflict a splendid little war an opinion that most americans with the exception of many of the enlisted men who fought in it seemed to share.
declared in april it was over in august in part because cuban rebels had already greatly weakened the spanish resistance making the american intervention in many respects little more than a mopping up exercise.
only 460 americans were killed in battle or died of wounds although some 5 200 others perished of disease malaria dysentery and typhoid among others.
casualties among cuban insurgents who continued to bear the brunt of the fighting were much higher.
the american war effort was not without difficulties.
united states soldiers faced serious supply problems a shortage of modern rifles and ammunition uniforms too heavy for the warm caribbean weather inadequate medical services and skimpy almost indigestible food.
the regular army numbered only 28 000 troops and officers most of whom had experience in quelling indian outbreaks but none in larger scale warfare.
that meant that as in the civil war the united states had to rely heavily on national guard units organized by local communities and commanded for the most part by local leaders without military experience.
a significant proportion of the american invasion force consisted of black soldiers.
some were volunteer troops put together by african american communities.
others were members of the four black regiments in the regular army who had been stationed on the frontier to defend white settlements against indians and were now transferred east to fight in cuba.
as the black soldiers traveled through the south toward the training camps some resisted the rigid segregation to which they were subjected.
african american soldiers in georgia deliberately made use of a whites only park in florida they beat a soda fountain operator for refusing to racial tensions in the military serve them in tampa white provocations and black retaliation led to a nightlong riot that left thirty wounded.
racial tensions continued in cuba.
african americans played crucial roles in some of the important battles of the war including the famous charge at san juan hill and won many medals.
nearly half the cuban insurgents fighting with the americans were themselves black patterns of popular culture yellow journalism joseph pulitzer was a successful newspaper publisher in st louis missouri when he traveled to new york city in 1883 to buy a struggling paper the new york world.
there is room in this great and growing city he wrote in one of his first editorials for a journal that is not only cheap but bright not only bright but large not only large but truly democratic.
that will serve and battle for the people with earnest sincerity within a year the worlds daily circulation had soared from 10 000 to over 60 000 by 1886 it had reached 250 000 and was making enormous profits.
the success of pulitzers world marked the birth of what came to be known as yellow journalism a phrase that reportedly derived from a character in one of the world s comic strips the yellow kid color printing in newspapers was relatively new and yellow was the most difficult color to print so in the beginning the term yellow journalism was a comment on the new technological possibilities that pulitzer was so eagerly embracing.
eventually however it came to refer to a sensationalist style of reporting and writing that spread quickly through urban america and changed the character of newspapers forever.
sensationalism was not new to journalism in the late nineteenth century of course.
political scandal sheets had been publishing lurid stories since before the american revolution.
but the yellow journalism of the 1880s and 1890s took the search for a mass audience to new levels.
the world created one of the first sunday editions with lavishly colored special sections comics and illustrated features.
it expanded coverage of sports fashion 474 l iterature and theater.
it pioneered large glaring overheated headlines that captured the eyes of people who were passing newsstands.
it published exposs of political corruption.
it made considerable efforts to bring drama and energy to its coverage of crime.
it tried to involve readers directly in its stories as when a world campaign helped raise 300 000 to build a base for the statue of liberty with much of the money coming in donations of five or ten cents from working class readers.
and it introduced a self consciously populist style of writing that appealed to working class readers.
the american people want something terse forcible picturesque striking pulitzer said.
his reporters wrote short forceful sentences.
they did not shy away from expressing sympathy or outrage.
and they were not always constrained by the truth.
pulitzer very quickly produced imitators the most important of them the california publisher william randolph hearst who in 1895 bought the new york journal cut its price to one cent pulitzer quickly followed suit copied many of the worlds techniques and within a year raised its circulation to 400 000 hearst soon made the journal the largest circulation paper in the country selling more than a million copies a day.
pulitzer whose own circulation was not far behind accused him of pandering to the worst tastes of the prurient and the horrorloving and dealing in bogus news but the world wasted no time before imitating the journal.
the competition between these two great yellow journals soon drove both to new levels of sensationalism.
their success drove newspapers in other cities around the nation to copy their techniques.
the civil war in cuba in the 1890s gave both papers their best opportunities yet for combining sensational reporting with shameless appeals to patriotism and moral outrage.
they avidly published exaggerated reports of spanish atrocities toward the cuban rebels fanning popular anger toward spain.
when the american battleship maine mysteriously exploded in havana harbor in 1898 both papers without any evidence immediately blamed spanish authorities.
the journal offered a 50 000 reward for information leading to the conviction of those responsible for the explosion and it crowded all other stories off its front page there is no other news hearst told his editors to make room for such screaming headlines as the whole country thrills with war fever and havana populace insults the memory of the maine victims.
in the three days following the maine explosion the journal sold more than 3 million copies a new worlds record for newspaper circulation.
in the aftermath of the maine episode the more conservative press launched a spirited attack on yellow journalism.
that was partly in response to hearsts boast that the conflict in cuba was the journals war he sent a cable to one of his reporters in cuba saying you furnish the pictures and ill furnish the war growing numbers of critics tried to discourage yellow journalism which respectable editors both deplored and feared.
some schools libraries and clubs began to banish the papers from their premises.
but the techniques the yellow press pioneered in the 1890s helped map the way for a tradition of colorful popular journalism later embodied in tabloids some elements of which eventually found their way into television news that has endured into the present day.
understand analyze evaluate 1 did pulitzers world hearsts journal and their imitators report the news or manufacture it.
2 how did the yellow press influence the publics perception of the spanishamerican war.
3 how does television news continue the tradition of yellow journalism.
in what other mass media do you see the style and techniques pioneered by the yellow press.
african american cavalry substantial numbers of african americans fought in the united states army during the spanish american war.
although confined to all black units they engaged in combat alongside white units and fought bravely and effectively.
this photograph shows a troop of african american cavalry in formation in cuba.
it is meant to be viewed through a stereoscope which would create a single three dimensional image.
corbis 475 476 chapter 7 by now the federalists were in the minority in the country but they were still the majority party in new england.
some of them began to dream once again of creating a separate nation.
talk of secession reached a climax in the winter of 1814 1815.
on december 15 1814 delegates from the new england states met in hartford connecticut to discuss their grievances against the madison administration.
the would be the hartford convention seceders at the hartford convention were outnumbered by a comparatively moderate majority.
but while the conventions report only hinted at secession it reasserted the right of nullification and proposed seven amendments to the constitution amendments designed to protect new england from the growing influence of the south and the west.
because the war was going so badly the new englanders assumed that the republicans would have to agree to their demands.
soon after the convention adjourned however the news of jacksons victory at new orleans reached the cities of the northeast.
a day or two later reports of a peace treaty arrived from abroad.
in the changed atmosphere the aims of the hartford convention and the federalist party came to seem futile irrelevant even treasonable.
the peace settlement negotiations between the united states and britain began in august 1814 when american and british diplomats met in ghent belgium.
john quincy adams henry clay and albert gallatin led the american delegation.
although both sides began with extravagant demands the final treaty did little except end the fighting itself.
the americans gave up their demand for a british renunciation of impressment and for the cession of canada to the united states.
the british abandoned their call for the creation of an indian buffer treaty of ghent state in the northwest and made other minor territorial concessions.
the treaty was signed on christmas eve 1814 both sides had reason to accept this skimpy agreement.
the british exhausted and in debt from their prolonged conflict with napoleon were eager to settle the lesser dispute in north america.
the americans realized that with the defeat of napoleon in europe the british would no longer have much incentive to interfere with american commerce.
other settlements followed the treaty of ghent.
a commercial treaty in 1815 gave americans the right to trade freely with england and much of the british empire.
the rush bagot agreement of 1817 provided for mutual disarmament on the great lakes eventually although not until 1872 the canadian american boundary became the longest unguarded frontier in the world.
for the indian tribes east of the mississippi the conflict dealt another disastrous blow to their ability to resist white expansion.
tecumseh was dead.
the british were gone from the northwest.
and the intertribal alliance of disastrous consequences for native americans tecumseh and the prophet had collapsed.
as the end of the war spurred a new white movement westward the native americans were less able than ever to defend their land.
conclusion thomas jefferson called his election to the presidency the revolution of 1800 and his supporters believed that his victory would bring a dramatic change in the character of the nation a retreat from hamiltons dreams of a powerful developing nation and a return to an ideal of a simple agrarian republic.
the jeffersonian era 183 but american society was changing rapidly making it virtually impossible for the jeffersonian dream to prevail.
the nations population was expanding and diversifying.
its cities were growing and its commercial life was becoming ever more important.
in 1803 jefferson himself made one of the most important contributions to the growth of the united states the louisiana purchase which dramatically expanded the physical boundaries of the nation and which began extending white settlement deeper into the continent.
in the process it greatly widened the battles between europeans and native americans.
the growing national pride and commercial ambitions of the united states gradually created another serious conflict with great britain the war of 1812 a war that was settled finally in 1814 on terms at least mildly favorable to the united states.
by then the bitter party rivalries that had characterized the first years of the republic had to some degree subsided and the nation was poised to enter what became known quite inaccurately as the era of good feelings key terms people places events aaron burr 174 cane ridge 158 capitalists 161 deism 158 eli whitney 162 embargo 176 handsome lake 159 hartford convention 182 impressment 175 industrial revolution 160 john marshall 168 judith sargent murray 156 lewis and clark 170 marbury v madison 168 noah webster 157 robert fulton 163 secession 174 second great awakening 158 tecumseh 178 the prophet tenskwatawa war hawks 179 war of 1812 179 washington irving 157 washington d c 165 william henry harrison 177 recall and reflect 1 what was the impact of the second great awakening on women african americans and native americans.
2 what was the long term significance of the marbury v madison ruling.
3 how did americans respond to the louisiana purchase.
4 what foreign entanglements and questions of foreign policy did jefferson have to deal with during his presidency.
how did these affect his political philosophy.
5 what were the consequences of the war of 1812.
varieties of american nationalism stabilizing economic growth expanding westward the era of good feelings sectionalism and nationalism the revival of opposition looking ahead 1 how did the economic developments and territorial expansion of this era affect american nationalism.
2 what was the era of good feelings and why was it given that name.
3 how did the marshall court seek to establish a strong national government.
like a fire bell in the night as thomas jefferson said the issue of slavery arose after the war of 1812 to threaten the unity of the nation.
the debate began when the territory of missouri applied for admission to the union raising the question of whether it would be a free or a slaveholding state.
but the larger issue was whether the vast new western regions of the united states would ultimately align politically with the north or the south.
the missouri crisis was significant because it was a sign of sectional crises to come.
but at the time it was also significant because it stood in such sharp contrast to the rising american nationalism of the years following the war.
whatever forces might have been working to pull the nation apart stronger ones were acting at least for a time to draw it together.
184 stabilizing economic growth time line the end of the war of 1812 allowed the united states to resume its economic growth and territorial expansion.
yet a vigorous postwar boom led to a disastrous bust in 1819 this collapse was evidence that the united states continued to lack some of the basic institutions necessary to sustain longterm growth.
u s treaties take western lands from indians the government and economic growth the war of 1812 produced chaos in shipping and banking and it exposed dramatically the inadequacy of the nations existing transportation and financial systems.
the aftermath of the war therefore led to new efforts to strengthen national economic development.
the wartime experience underlined the need for another national bank.
after the expiration of the first banks charter a large number of state banks had issued vast quantities of banknotes creating a confusing variety of currency of widely differing value.
it was difficult to tell what any banknote was really worth and counterfeiting was easy.
in response to these problems congress chartered a second bank of the united states in 1816 much like its predecessor of 1791 but with more capital.
the national bank could not forbid state banks from issuing notes but its size and power enabled it to compel the state banks to issue only sound notes or risk being forced out of business.
congress also acted to promote manufacturing which the war by cutting off imports had already greatly stimulated.
the american textile industry in particular had grown dramatically.
between 1807 and 1815 the total number of cotton spindles in the country increased more than fifteenfold from 8 000 to 130 000 before the war the textile factories most of them in new england produced only yarn and thread families second bank of u s monroe elected president seminole war ends panic and depression dartmouth college v woodward mcculloch v maryland missouri compromise monroe reelected monroe doctrine john quincy adams elected president tariff of abominations jackson elected president 185 186 chapter 21 this 1904 drawing by the famous puck cartoonist louis dalrymple conveys the new image of america as a great power that theodore roosevelt hoped to convey.
roosevelt polices the world by dealing with less civilized people on the left using the big stick and with civilized nations on the right by using diplomacy.
granger nyc all rights reserved.
the new diplomacy protecting the open door in asia in 1904 the japanese staged a surprise attack on the russian fleet at port arthur in southern manchuria a province of china that both russia and japan hoped to control.
roosevelt hoping to prevent either nation from becoming dominant there agreed to mediate an end to the conflict.
russia faring badly in the war had no choice but to agree.
at a peace conference in portsmouth new hampshire in 1905 roosevelt pressured the embattled russians to accept japans territorial gains.
the japanese agreed to cease the fighting and expand no farther.
at the same time roosevelt negotiated a secret agreement with the japanese to ensure that the united states could continue to trade freely in the region.
roosevelt received the nobel peace prize in 1906 for his mediation of what became the treaty of portsmouth.
in the years that followed relations between the united states and japan steadily deteriorated.
japan by then the preeminent naval power in the pacific began to exclude american trade from many of the territories it controlled.
roosevelt took no direct action against japan but to be sure the japanese government recognized the power of the united states he sent sixteen battleships of the new american navy known as the great white great white fleet fleet because the ships were temporarily painted white for the voyage on an unprecedented journey around the world that included a call on japan.
the iron fisted neighbor roosevelt took a particular interest in latin america.
embarking on a series of ventures in the caribbean and south america he established a pattern of american intervention in the region that would outlive his presidency.
america and the great war 521 in 1902 the government of venezuela began to renege on debts to european bankers.
naval forces of britain italy and germany blockaded the venezuelan coast in response.
then german ships began to bombard a venezuelan port.
amid rumors that germany planned to establish a permanent base in the region roosevelt used the threat of american naval power to pressure the german navy to withdraw.
the incident helped persuade roosevelt that european intrusions into latin america could result not only from aggression but also from instability or irresponsibility such as defaulting on debts within the latin american nations themselves.
as a result in 1904 he announced what came to be known as the roosevelt corollary to the monroe roosevelt corollary doctrine.
the united states he claimed had the right not only to oppose european intervention in the western hemisphere but also to intervene in the domestic affairs of its neighbors if those neighbors proved unable to maintain order and national sovereignty on their own.
the immediate motivation for the roosevelt corollary and the first opportunity for using it was a crisis in the dominican republic.
a revolution had toppled its corrupt and bankrupt government in 1903 but the new regime proved no better able than the old to make good on the countrys 22 million in debts to european nations.
using the rationale provided by the roosevelt corollary roosevelt established in effect an american receivership assuming control of dominican customs and distributing 45 percent of the revenues to the dominicans and the rest to foreign creditors.
this arrangement lasted in one form or another for more than three decades.
the panama canal the most celebrated foreign policy accomplishment of roosevelts presidency was the construction of the panama canal which linked the atlantic and the pacific by creating a channel through central america.
at first roosevelt and many others favored a route across nicaragua which would permit a sea level canal requiring no locks.
but they soon turned instead to the narrow isthmus of panama then part of colombia the site of an earlier failed effort by a french company to construct a channel.
although the panama route was not at sea level it was shorter than the one in nicaragua and construction was already about 40 percent complete.
the french then lowered the price for its holdings and the united states opted for panama.
roosevelt dispatched john hay his secretary of state to negotiate an agreement with colombian diplomats that would allow construction to begin without delay.
under heavy american pressure the colombian charg daffaires toms herrn unwisely signed an agreement giving the united states perpetual rights to a six mile wide canal zone across colombia in return the united states would pay colombia 10 million and an annual rental of 250 000.
the outraged colombian senate refused to ratify the treaty.
colombia then sent a new representative to washington with instructions to demand at least 20 million from the americans plus a share of the payment to the french.
roosevelt was furious and began to look for ways to circumvent the colombian government.
philippe bunau varilla chief engineer of the french canal project was a ready ally.
in 1903 with the support of the united states he helped organize and finance a revolution in panama.
roosevelt landed troops from the u s s.
nashville there to maintain order their presence prevented colombian forces from suppressing the rebellion and three days later roosevelt recognized panama as an independent nation.
the new panamanian government quickly agreed to the terms the colombian senate had rejected.
work on the canal proceeded rapidly and it opened in 1914.
522 chapter 9 harrison and reform this hand colored engraving was made for a brass brooch during the 1840 presidential campaign and served the same purposes that modern campaign buttons do.
it conveys harrisons presumably humble beginnings in a log cabin.
in reality harrison was a wealthy aristocratic man but the unpopularity of the aristocratic airs of his opponent president martin van buren persuaded the whig party that it would be good political strategy to portray harrison as a humble man of the people david j.
janice l frent collection corbis of their opposition to andrew jacksons common people democracy presented themselves in 1840 as the party of the common people.
so of course did the democrats.
with both parties using the same techniques of mass voter appeal what mattered was not the philosophical purity of the party but its ability to win votes.
the whig campaign was particularly effective in portraying william henry harrison a wealthy member of the frontier elite with a considerable estate as a simple man of the people who loved log cabins and hard cider.
the democrats already weakened by the depression had no effective defense against such tactics.
harrison won the election with 234 electoral votes to 60 for van buren and with a popular majority of 53 percent.
the frustration of the whigs despite their decisive victory the whigs found the four years after their resounding victory frustrating and divisive.
the trouble began when their appealing new president died of pneumonia just one month after taking office.
vice president john tyler of virginia succeeded him.
jacksonian america 223 tyler was a former democrat who had left the party in reaction to what he considered jacksons excessively egalitarian program tylers approach to public policy still showed signs of his democratic past.
the president did agree to bills abolishing van burens independenttreasury system and raising tariff rates.
but he refused to support clays attempt to recharter the bank of the united states and he vetoed several internal improvement bills sponsored by clay and other congressional whigs.
finally a conference of congressional whigs voted tyler out of the party.
every cabinet member but webster who was serving as secretary of state resigned five former democrats took their places.
when webster too left the cabinet tyler appointed calhoun who had rejoined the democratic party to replace him.
a new political alignment was taking shape.
tyler and a small band of conservative southern whigs were preparing to rejoin the democrats.
into the common changes to democratic party peoples party of jackson and van buren was arriving a faction with decidedly aristocratic political ideas men who thought that government had an obligation to protect and even expand the institution of slavery and who believed in states rights with almost fanatical devotion.
whig diplomacy in the midst of these domestic controversies anti british factions in canada launched an unsuccessful rebellion against the colonial government there in 1837 when the insurrection failed some of the rebels took refuge near the united states border and chartered an american steamship the caroline to ship them supplies across the caroline affair and aroostook war niagara river from new york.
british authorities in canada seized the caroline and burned it killing one american in the process.
resentment in the united states grew rapidly.
at the same time tensions flared over the boundary between canada and maine which had been in dispute since the treaty of 1783 in 1838 rival groups of americans and canadians mostly lumberjacks began moving into the aroostook river region in the disputed area precipitating a violent brawl that became known as the aroostook war several years later in 1841 an american ship the creole sailed from virginia for new orleans with more than 100 slaves aboard.
en route the slaves mutinied seized possession of the ship and took it to the bahamas.
british officials there declared the slaves free and the english government refused to overrule them.
many americans especially southerners were furious.
at this critical juncture a new government eager to reduce tensions with the united states came to power in great britain.
it sent lord ashburton an admirer of america to negotiate an agreement on the maine boundary and other matters.
the result was the webster ashburton treaty of 1842 under which the united states webster ashburton treaty received slightly more than half the disputed area and agreed to a northern boundary as far west as the rocky mountains.
ashburton also eased the memory of the caroline and creole affairs by expressing regret and promising no future officious interference with american ships.
anglo american relations improved significantly.
during the tyler administration the united states established its first diplomatic relations with china.
in the 1844 treaty of wang hya american diplomats trade with china secured the same trading privileges as the english.
in the next ten years american trade with china steadily increased.
in their diplomatic efforts at least the whigs were able to secure some important successes.
but by the end of the tyler administration the party could look back on few other victories.
and in the election of 1844 the whigs lost the white house to james k polk a democrat with an explicit agenda of westward expansion.
224 chapter 10 lak e superi brit ish c a na da or minnesota maine l riv er gan lake mich i pi ip iowa u ro n s eh wisconsin ak m iss is michigan new york vt n h boston albany buffalo detroit chicago davenport e lak rio onta illinois indianapolis e lak er mass.
ie pennsylvania cleveland wheeling ohio cincinnati ohio r ri ve r u misso ri st louis missouri new york n j philadelphia pittsburgh ind.
r i conn md.
baltimore del.
washington d c atlantic ocean virginia richmond kentucky tennessee n c memphis arkansas atlanta alabama s c charleston mississippi montgomery georgia jackson texas louisiana mobile new orleans florida gulf of mexico railroad gauges 4 8 5 standard atlantic ocean 4 10 5 5 6 6 bridge 200 mi gulf of mexico 400 km these two maps illustrate the dramatic growth of american railroads in the 1850s.
note the particularly extensive increase in mileage in the upper midwest known at the time as the old northwest.
note too the relatively smaller increase in railroad mileage in the south.
railroads forged a close economic relationship between the upper midwest and the northeast and weakened the midwests relationship with the south.
how did this contribute to the souths growing sense of insecurity within the union.
railroad growth 1850 1860 the telegraph what the railroad was to transportation the telegraph was to communication a dramatic advance over traditional methods and a symbol of national progress and technological expertise.
before the telegraph communication over great distances could be achieved only by direct physical contact.
that meant that virtually all long distance communication relied americas economic revolution 233 on the mail which traveled first on horseback and coach and later by railroad.
there were obvious disadvantages to this system not the least of which was the difficulty in coordinating the railroad schedules.
by the 1830s experiments with many methods of improving long distance communication had been conducted among them a procedure for using the sun and reflective devices to send light signals as far as 187 miles.
in 1832 samuel f b morse a professor of art with an interest in science began experimenting with a different system.
fascinated with the possibilities of electricity morse code morse set out to find a way to send signals along an electric cable.
technology did not yet permit the use of electric wiring to send reproductions of the human voice or any complex information.
but morse realized that electricity itself could serve as a communication device that pulses of electricity could themselves become a kind of language.
he experimented at first with a numerical code in which each number would represent a word on a list available to recipients.
gradually however he became convinced of the need to find a more universal telegraphic language and he developed what became the morse code in which alternating long and short bursts of electric current would represent individual letters.
the telegraph the telegraph provided rapid communication across the country and eventually across oceans for the first time.
samuel f b morse was one of a number of inventors who helped create the telegraph but he was the most commercially successful of the rivals.
the library of congress 234 chapter 23 black women suffered massive unemployment particularly in the south because of a great reduction of domestic service jobs.
as many as half of all black working women lost their jobs in the 1930s.
even so at the end of the 1930s 38 percent of black women were employed as compared with 24 percent of white women.
that was so because black women both married and unmarried had always been more likely to work than white women less out of preference than out of economic necessity.
the depression also worked to erode the strength of many family units.
there was a declining marriage rate and birthrate decline in the divorce rate but largely because divorce was now too expensive for some.
more common was the informal breakup of families particularly the desertion of families by unemployed men trying to escape the humiliation of being unable to earn a living.
the marriage rate and the birthrate both declined for the first time since the early nineteenth century.
the depression and american culture the great depression was a traumatic experience for millions of americans.
out of the crisis emerged probing criticisms of american life.
but the depression also produced powerful confirmations of more traditional values and reinforced many traditional goals.
there was not one depression culture but many.
depression values prosperity and industrial growth had done much to shape american values in the 1920s.
yet even when hard times came american social values seemed to change relatively little in response to the depression.
instead many people responded to hard times by redoubling their commitment to familiar ideas and goals.
the depression did not destroy the success ethic.
the survival of the ideals of work and individual responsibility was evident in many ways not least in the reactions of those most traumatized by the depression people who suddenly found themselves without employment.
some expressed anger and struck out at the economic system.
many however seemed to blame themselves.
at the same time millions responded eagerly to reassurances that they could through their own efforts dale carnegie restore themselves to prosperity and success.
dale carnegies how to win friends and influence people 1936 a self help manual preaching individual initiative was one of the best selling books of the decade.
yet the most popular cultural products of the 1930s diverted attention away from the depression.
and they came to americans primarily through the two most powerful instruments of popular culture in the 1930s radio and the movies.
for another powerful vehicle of escapist culture see patterns of popular culture the golden age of comic books radio almost every american family had a radio in the 1930s.
in cities and towns radio consoles were as familiar a part of the furnishing of homes as tables and chairs.
even in remote rural areas without access to electricity many families purchased radios and hooked them up to car batteries when they wished to listen.
radio was often a community experience.
young people would place radios on their front porches and invite friends by to sit talk or dance.
in poor urban neighborhoods the great depression 575 people would gather on a street or in a backyard to listen to sporting events or concerts.
within families the radio often drew parents and children together to listen to favorite programs.
although radio stations occasionally carried provocative programs the staple of broadcasting was escapism including comedies such as amos n escapist programming andy with its demeaning picture of urban blacks and adventures such as superman dick tracy and the lone ranger.
radio brought a new kind of comedy to a wide audience.
jack benny george burns and gracie allen and other masters of elaborately timed repartee began to develop broad followings.
enormously popular especially among women who were alone in the house during the day were soap operas so named because they were generally sponsored by soap companies whose advertising was targeted at women.
radio provided americans with their first direct access to important public events.
on air coverage of news and sports expanded rapidly to meet the demand.
some of the most dramatic moments of the 1930s were a result of radio coverage of celebrated events the world series the academy awards political conventions.
when the german dirigible hindenburg crashed in flames in lakehurst new jersey in 1937 it the hindenburg crash produced an enormous national reaction largely because of the live radio account by a broadcaster overcome with emotion who cried out as he watched the terrible crash oh the humanity.
oh the humanity the actor director orson welles created another memorable event on halloween night 1938 when he broadcast a radio play about aliens landing in central new jersey who had set off toward new york armed with terrible weapons.
the play took the form of a news broadcast and it created panic among some people who believed for a while that the events it described were real.
the movies in the first years of the depression movie attendance dropped significantly.
by the mid 1930s however most americans had resumed their moviegoing habits in part because the movies now with sound and by the end of the decade color were becoming more appealing.
hollywood continued to exercise tight control over its products in the 1930s through its resilient censor will hays who ensured that most movies carried no sensational or controversial messages.
the studio system through which a few large movie companies exercised iron control over actors writers and directors also worked to ensure that hollywood films avoided controversy.
neither the censor nor the studio system however could or wished to completely prevent films from exploring social questions.
there were many serious films that portrayed the problems of the depression for example king vidors our daily bread 1932 and john fords adaptation of the grapes of wrath 1940.
gangster movies such as little caesar 1930 and the public enemy 1931 portrayed a dark gritty violent world with which few americans were familiar but their desperate stories were popular nevertheless with those engaged in their own difficult struggles.
but the most effective presentation of a social message came from the brilliant italian born director frank capra.
capra had a deep and somewhat romanticized love for his adopted country and he translated that love into a vaguely populistic admiration for ordinary people.
he contrasted the decency of small town america films of frank capra and the common man with what he considered the grasping opportunism of the patterns of popular culture the golden age of comic books in the troubled years of the great depression and later world war ii many americans sought release from their anxieties in fantasy.
movies plays books radio shows and other diversions drew people out of their own lives and into a safer or more glamorous or more exciting world.
beginning in 1938 one of the most popular forms of escape for many young americans was the comic book.
in february 1935 malcolm wheelernicholson founded the first comics magazine what we now know as the comic book titled new fun.
it was not successful but wheeler founded a new company detective comics.
he began in 1937 to design a new magazine called action comics.
wheeler ran out of money before he could publish anything but the company continued without him.
in 1938 the first issue of action comics appeared with a startling and controversial cover a powerful man in a skintight suit lifting a car over his head.
his name was superman and he became the most popular cartoon character of all time.
within a year superman had a comic book named after him which was selling over 1 2 million copies each issue.
by 1940 there was a popular superman radio show introduced by a breathless announcer crying its a bird.
its a plane.
superman soon other publishers began developing new superheroes a term invented by the creators of superman to capitalize on this growing popular appetite.
in 1939 a s econd great comic book publisher appeared marvel comics.
by the early 1940s superman had been joined by other superheroes the human torch the sub mariner batman the flash 576 and wonder woman a character created in part to signal the importance of women to the war effort.
it is not hard to imagine why super heroes would be so appealing to americans in the 1930s and 1940s particularly to the teenage boys who were the largest single purchasers of comic books.
superman and other superheroes were idealized versions of the ideal boy smart good the perfect boy scout as one fan put it.
but they were also all powerful capable of righting wrong and preventing catastrophe.
even as the national economy faltered comic book heroes modeled patriotic pride resilience and optimism.
they operated with moral certainty when so much was uncertain.
at a time when suffering was an ever present reality in the world superheroes offered a comforting escape from anxiety.
many of the early comic book writers were young jewish men conscious of their outsider status in an american culture not yet wholly open to them.
almost all the characters they created had alter egos identities they used while living within the normal world.
superman was clark kent a mild mannered reporter batman was bruce wayne a wealthy heir.
all were part of mainstream american society and they expressed in part the outsiders dream of assimilation.
the superheroes themselves were outsiders too but outsiders endowed with special powers and abilities unavailable to ordinary people.
in the last years of the depression the comic superheroes began battling the axis powers.
marvels human torch and submariner joined forces against the german navy.
superman fought spies and saboteurs at home.
captain america a new character created in march 1941 was a frail young man rejected by the army who after being given a secret serum by a military doctor became extraordinarily powerful.
the cover of the first issue of captain america showed the title character punching adolf hitler in his headquarters in germany.
the end of the war was also the end of this first golden age of american comic books.
new comic books emphasized romance mild sexuality and over time violence and cruelty.
but comic books never surpassed the heights of popularity that the superhero comics attained during the depression and world war ii.
understand analyze evaluate superman the most popular action figure in the history of comic books was superman whose superhuman powers were particularly appealing fantasies to americans suffering through the depression and later world war ii.
hulton archive getty images 1 what could comic books offer readers suffering through the crisis of the great depression.
2 how and why have comic book super heroes changed over time.
city and the greedy capitalist marketplace.
in mr deeds goes to town 1936 a simple man from a small town inherits a large fortune moves to the city and not liking the greed and dishonesty he finds there gives the money away and moves back home.
in mr smith goes to washington 1939 a decent man from a western state is elected to the united states senate refuses to join in the self interested politics of washington and dramatically exposes the corruption and selfishness of his colleagues.
capras films incredibly popular in the 1930s helped audiences find solace in a vision of an imagined american past in the warmth and goodness of idealized small towns and the decency of ordinary people.
more often however the commercial films of the 1930s like most radio programs were deliberately and explicitly escapist lavish musicals such as gold diggers of 1933 screwball comedies such as capras it happened one night or the many films of the marx brothers films designed to divert audiences from their troubles and often indulge their fantasies about quick and easy wealth.
the 1930s were the first years of walt disneys long reign as the champion of animation and childrens entertainment.
after producing cartoon shorts for theaters in the late 1920s many of them starring the newly created character mickey mouse disney began to produce feature length animated films starting in 1937 with snow white.
other enormously popular films of the 1930s were adaptations of popular novels such as the wizard of oz and gone with the wind both released in 1939.
577 578 chapter 11 cotton economies might have forced the region to shift its attention to other nonagricultural pursuits had it not been for the growing importance of a new product that soon short staple cotton overshadowed all else short staple cotton.
it was a hardier and coarser strain of cotton that could grow successfully in a variety of climates and soils.
it was harder to process than the long staple cotton because its seeds were difficult to remove from the fiber.
but the invention of the cotton gin in 1793 had largely solved that problem.
demand for cotton increased rapidly in britain in the 1820s and 1830s and in new england in the 1840s and 1850s.
from the western areas of south carolina and georgia production moved into alabama and mississippi and then into northern louisiana texas and arkansas.
by the 1850s cotton had become the linchpin of the southern economy.
by the time of the civil war cotton constituted nearly two thirds of the total export trade of the united states.
it was little wonder that southern politicians now proclaimed cotton is king cotton production boomed in the lower south later known as the deep south.
some began to call it the cotton kingdom the prospect of tremendous profits drew settlers to the lower south by the thousands.
some were wealthy planters from the older states but most were small slaveholders or slaveless farmers who hoped to move into the planter class.
a similar shift if an involuntary one occurred in the slave population.
between 1840 and 1860 hundreds of thousands of slaves moved from the upper south to the cotton states either accompanying masters who were themselves migrating to the lower south or more often sold to planters already there.
this second middle passage as the historian ira berlin has called it using a term usually associated with the transatlantic slave trade was a traumatic experience for perhaps a million dislocated african americans.
slave families were b roken up and scattered across the expand second middle passage ing cotton kingdom.
marched over hundreds of rugged miles tied together in coffles as on the earlier slave ships coming from africa they arrived in unfamiliar and usually forbidding territory where they were made to construct new plantations and work in cotton fields.
the sale of slaves to the lower south became an important economic activity for whites in the upper south where agricultural production was declining.
southern trade and industry in the face of this booming agricultural expansion other forms of economic activity were slow to develop in the south.
flour milling and textile and iron manufacturing grew particularly in the upper south but industry remained a relatively insignificant force in comparison with the agricultural economy.
the total value of southern textile manufactures in 1860 was 4 5 million a threefold increase over the value of those goods twenty years before.
but the value of the exports was approximately 200 million.
the limited nonfarm commercial sector that did develop in the south was largely intended to serve the needs of the plantation economy.
particularly important were the brokers or factors who in the absence of banks marketed the planters crops and provided them with credit.
other obstacles to economic development included the souths inadequate transportation system.
canals were almost nonexistent most roads were crude and unsuitable for heavy transport and railroads although they expanded substantially in the 1840s and 1850s failed to tie the region together effectively.
despite the lack of canals the principal means of transportation was still water.
planters generally shipped their crops to market along rivers or by sea most manufacturing was in or near port towns.
the south therefore was becoming more and more dependent on the industrial manufacturers merchants and professionals of the north.
concerned by this trend some cotton slavery and the old south 255 southerners began to advocate economic independence for the region among them james d b de bow of new orleans whose magazine de bows de bows commercial review commercial review called for southern commercial expansion and economic independence from the north.
yet even de bows commercial review was filled with advertisements from northern manufacturing firms and its circulation was far smaller in the south than such northern magazines as harpers weekly.
sources of southern difference an important question about antebellum southern history concerns why the region did so little to develop a larger industrial and commercial economy of its own.
why did it remain so different from the north.
part of the reason was the great profitability of the regions agricultural system.
in the northeast many people had turned to manufacturing as the agricultural economy of the region declined.
in the south the agricultural economy was booming and ambitious capitalists had little incentive to look elsewhere.
another reason was that wealthy southerners had so much capital invested in land and slaves that they had little left for other investments.
some historians have also suggested that the southern climate with its long hot steamy summers was less suitable for industrial development than the climate of the north.
edgar degas the renowned french painter painted this scene of cotton traders examining samples in the new orleans cotton exchange in 1873 by this time the cotton trade was producing less impressive profits than those that had made it the driving force of the booming southern economy of the 1850s.
degass mother came from a creole family of cotton brokers in new orleans and two of the artists brothers depicted here reading a newspaper and leaning against a window joined the business in america.
musee des beaux arts pau france bridgeman images the new orleans cotton exchange 256 chapter 12 antislavery sentiment underlay the formation in 1840 of the liberty party which ran kentucky antislavery leader james g birney for president.
but this party and its successors never campaigned for outright abolition.
they stood instead for free soil for keeping slavery out of the territories.
some free soilers were concerned about the welfare of blacks others were people who cared nothing about slavery but simply wanted to keep the west a country for whites.
but the free soil position would ultimately do what abolitionism never could attract the support of large numbers of the white population of the north.
the slow progress of abolitionism drove some critics of slavery to embrace more drastic measures.
a few began to advocate violence.
a group of prominent abolitionists in new england for example funneled money and arms to john brown for his bloody uprisings in kansas and virginia.
others attempted to arouse public anger through propaganda.
the most powerful of all abolitionist propaganda was harriet beecher stowes novel uncle toms cabin published as a book in 1852 it sold more than 300 000 copies within a year of publication and was reissued again and again.
it succeeded in bringing the mesuncle toms cabin sage of abolitionism to an enormous new audience not only those who read the book but also those who watched countless theater companies reenact it across the nation.
an unconfirmed statement by lincoln to stowe has been widely publicized is this the little woman who made the great war reviled throughout the south stowe became a hero to many in the north.
and in both regions her novel helped inflame sectional tensions to a new level of passion.
stowes novel emerged not just out of abolitionist politics but also a popular tradition of sentimental novels written by and largely for women.
see patterns of popular culture sentimental novels stowe artfully integrated the emotional conventions of the sentimental novel with the political ideas of the abolitionist movement and to sensational effect.
her novel by embedding the antislavery message within a familiar literary form in which women were the key protagonists serving to improve society brought that message to an enormous new audience.
even divided abolitionism remained a powerful influence on the life of the nation.
only a relatively small number of people before the civil war ever accepted the abolitionist position that slavery must be entirely eliminated in a single stroke.
but the crusade that garrison had launched and that thousands of committed men and women kept alive for three decades was a constant visible reminder of how deeply the institution of slavery was dividing america.
conclusion the rapidly changing society of antebellum america encouraged interest in a wide range of reforms.
writers artists intellectuals and others drew heavily from new european notions of personal liberation and fulfillment a set of ideas often known as romanticism.
but they also strove to create a truly american culture.
the literary and artistic life of the nation expressed the rising interest in personal liberation in giving individuals the freedom to explore their own souls and to find in nature a full expression of their divinity.
it also called attention to some of the nations glaring social problems.
reformers too made use of the romantic belief in the divinity of the individual.
they flocked to religious revivals worked on behalf of such moral reforms as temperance antebellum culture and reform 295 supported education and articulated some of the first statements of modern feminism.
and in the north they rallied against slavery.
out of this growing antislavery movement emerged a new and powerful phenomenon abolitionism which insisted on immediate emancipation of slaves.
the abolitionist movement galvanized much of the north and contributed greatly to the growing schism between north and south.
key terms people places events dorothea dix 283 elizabeth cady stanton 283 frederick douglass 290 harriet beecher stowe 283 henry david thoreau 276 herman melville 274 horace mann 282 hudson river school 273 jarena lee 286 joseph smith 278 liberia 287 lucretia mott 283 nathaniel hawthorne 277 oneida perfectionists 277 ralph waldo emerson 276 rebecca cox jackson 286 seneca falls convention 283 shakers 277 sojourner truth 290 susan b anthony 283 temperance 280 transcendentalism 275 walt whitman 274 william lloyd garrison 287 recall and reflect 1 what is romanticism and how was it expressed in american literature and art.
2 how did religion affect reform movements and what was the effect of these move ments on religion.
3 what were the aims of the womens movement of the nineteenth century.
how successful were women in achieving these goals.
4 what arguments and strategies did the abolitionists use in their struggle to end slavery.
who opposed them and why.
the impending crisis looking westward expansion and war the sectional debate the crises of the 1850s looking ahead 1 how did the annexation of western territories intensify the conflict over slavery and lead to deeper divisions between the north and the south.
2 what compromises attempted to resolve the conflicts over the expansion of slavery into new territories.
to what degree were these compromises successful.
why did they eventually fail to resolve the differences between the north and the south.
3 what were the major arguments for and against slavery and its expansion into new territories.
until the 1840s the tensions between the north and the south remained relatively contained.
had no new sectional issues arisen it is possible that the two sections might have resolved their differences peaceably over time.
but new issues did arise.
from the north came the strident and increasingly powerful abolitionist movement.
from the south came a newly militant defense of slavery and the way of life it supported.
and from the west most significantly emerged a series of controversies that would ultimately tear the fragile union apart.
296 looking westward more than a million square miles of new territory came under the control of the united states during the 1840s.
by the end of the decade the nation possessed all the territory of the present day united states except alaska hawaii and a few relatively small areas acquired later through border adjustments.
many factors accounted for this great new wave of expansion but one of the most important was an ideology known as manifest destiny manifest destiny manifest destiny reflected both the growing pride that characterized american nationalism in the mid nineteenth century and the idealistic vision of social perfection that fueled so much of the reform energy of the time.
it rested on the idea that america was destined by god and by history to expand its boundaries over a vast area.
by the 1840s publicized by the rise of inexpensive newspapers dubbed penny press the idea of manifest destiny had spread throughout the nation.
some advocates of manifest destiny envisioned a vast new empire of liberty that would include canada mexico caribbean and pacific islands and ultimately for the most ardent believers much of the rest of the world.
countering such bombast were politicians such as henry clay and others who warned that territorial expansion would reopen the painful controversy over slavery.
their voices however could not compete with the enthusiasm over expansion in the 1840s which began with the issues of texas and oregon.
americans in texas twice in the 1820s the united states had offered to purchase texas from the republic of mexico.
mexico indignantly refused and instead enacted a colonization law that time line texas declares independence from mexico polk elected president oregon boundary dispute settled treaty of guadalupe hidalgo taylor elected president california gold rush begins pierce elected president u s declares war on mexico wilmot proviso compromise of 1850 taylor dies fillmore becomes president gadsden purchase kansas nebraska act republican party formed 1855 1856 bleeding kansas buchanan elected president dred scott decision lecompton constitution defeated john brown raids harpers ferry lincoln elected president 297 298 chapter 26 were usually assigned more menial tasks and paid at a lower rate than their white counterparts.
but some women began to take on heavy industrial jobs that had long been considered rosie the riveter mens work the famous wartime image of rosie the riveter symbolized the new importance of the female industrial worker.
women joined unions in substantial numbers and helped erode at least some of the prejudice including the prejudice against mothers working that had previously kept many of them from paid employment.
most women workers during the war however were employed not in factories but in service sector jobs.
above all they worked for the government whose bureaucratic needs expanded dramatically alongside its military and industrial needs.
even within the miliwaacs and waves tary which enlisted substantial numbers of women as waacs army and waves navy most female work was clerical.
many mothers whose husbands were in the military had to combine work with child care.
the scarcity of child care facilities or other community services meant that some women had no choice but to leave young children at home alone or sometimes locked in cars in factory parking lots or with relatives or neighbors while they worked.
perhaps in part because of the family dislocations of the war juvenile crime rose markedly.
young boys were arrested at increasing rates for car theft burglary vandalism and vagrancy.
for many children however the distinctive experience of the war years was not crime but work.
more than a third of all teenagers between the ages of fourteen and eighteen were employed during the last years of the war causing some reduction in high school enrollments.
the return of prosperity helped increase the marriage rate and lower the age at which people married but many marriages were unable to survive the pressures of wartime separation.
the divorce rate rose rapidly.
even so the rise in the birthrate that accompanied the increase in marriages was the first sign of what would become the great postwar baby boom the growth of wartime conservatism late in 1943 franklin roosevelt publicly suggested that dr.
new deal as he called it had served its purpose and should now give way to dr.
win the war the statement reflected the presidents own genuine shift in concern victory was now more important than reform.
but it reflected too the political reality that had emerged during the first two years of war.
the greatest assault on new deal reforms came from conservatives in congress who seized on the war as a reason to do what many had wanted to do in peacetime dismantle many of conservative assault on the new deal the achievements of the new deal.
they were assisted by the end of mass unemployment which decreased the need for such relief programs as the civilian conservation corps and the works progress administration both of which congress abolished.
they were assisted too by their own increasing numbers.
in the congressional elections of 1942 republicans gained 47 seats in the house and 10 in the senate.
republicans approached the 1944 election determined to exploit what they believed was resentment of wartime regimentation and unhappiness with democratic reform.
they democrats drop wallace nominated as their candidate the young and vigorous governor of new york thomas e dewey.
roosevelt was unopposed within his party but democratic leaders pressured him to abandon vice president henry wallace an advanced new dealer and hero of the cio.
roosevelt agreed to replace him with a more moderate figure senator harry s truman of missouri.
truman had won acclaim as chairman of the senate war investigating committee known as the truman committee which compiled an impressive record uncovering waste and corruption in wartime production.
america in a world at war 643 the election revolved around domestic economic issues and indirectly the presidents health.
he was in fact gravely ill suffering from among other things advanced arteriosclerosis.
but the campaign seemed momentarily to revive him.
roosevelt made several strenuous public appearances late in october which dispelled popular doubts about his health and ensured his reelection.
he captured 53 5 percent of the p opular roosevelt reelected vote to deweys 46 percent and 432 electoral votes to deweys 99 democrats lost 1 seat in the senate gained 20 in the house and maintained control of both.
the defeat of the axis by the middle of 1943 america and its allies had succeeded in stopping the axis advance in both europe and the pacific.
in the next two years the allies themselves seized the offensive and launched a series of powerful drives that led the way to victory.
iceland allied offensives norwegian sea allies and allied controlled areas neutral nations axis powers faeroe is.
sweden shetland is.
finland norway great britain a se ba latvia l t lithuania east prussia moscow sp yalta black sea se a ca n tehran it.
turkey iran sicily algeria fr.
stalingrad august 1942 february 1943 greece morocco fr.
soviet union ia algiers battles sardinia it.
oran vichy france controlled by axis prior to allied invasion 1942 1944 ic denmark y casablanca por tu ga l north sea london germany 1944 calais neth.
1945 d day berlin warsaw belg.
june 1944 battle of the bulge poland december 1944 c ze paris chos dresden lux.
lovak ia france austria ary 1944 switz.
vichy ng u h romania u g o sl italy av a ri ia corsica spain ga rome fr.
bul 1 albania morocco sp.
farthest axis control leningrad estonia ireland at l a n t i c ocean dodecanese cyprus it.
kasserine pass february 1943 tunisia fr.
me crete dit erra n ea n s e a libya it.
lebanon fr.
palestine br.
transjordan br.
suez el alamein canal october november 1942 egypt saudi arabia world war ii in europe the allied counteroffensive 1943 1945 this map illustrates the final climactic movements in the war in europe the two great offensives against germany that began in 1943 and culminated in 1945 from the east the armies of the soviet union having halted the germans at stalingrad and moscow swept across eastern europe toward germany.
from the west and the south american british and other allied forces moved toward germany through italy and after the normandy invasion in june 1944 through france.
the two offensives met in berlin in may 1945 note too the northern routes that america and britain used to supply the soviet union during the war.
what problems did the position of the allied forces at the end of the war help produce.
644 chapter 26 spring they were ready to launch a final assault against berlin.
general omar bradley in the meantime was pushing toward the rhine from the west.
early in march bradleys forces captured the city of cologne on the rivers west bank.
the next day they discovered and seized an undamaged bridge over the river at remagen allied troops were soon pouring across the rhine.
in the following weeks the british commander montgomery with a million troops pushed into germany in the north while bradleys army sweeping through central germany completed the encirclement of 300 000 german soldiers in the ruhr.
the german resistance was now broken on both fronts.
american forces were moving eastward faster than they had anticipated and could have beaten the russians to berlin and prague.
the american and british high commands decided instead to halt the advance along the elbe river in central germany to await the russians.
that decision enabled the soviets to occupy eastern germany and czechoslovakia.
on april 30 with soviet forces on the outskirts of berlin adolf hitler killed himself in his bunker in the capital.
and on may 8 1945 the remaining german forces surrendered unconditionally.
the pacific offensive in february 1944 american naval forces under admiral chester nimitz won a series of victories in the marshall islands and cracked the outer perimeter of the japanese empire.
within a month the navy had destroyed other vital japanese bastions.
american submarines in the meantime were decimating japanese shipping and crippling japans domestic economy.
americas principal ally in asia was china.
to assist the chinese forces the army sent general joseph w stilwell to help provide critical supplies to china by a land route through india and across the himalayas.
it was a brutal task but in the fall of 1944 stilwells forces succeeded in constructing a road and pipelines across the mountains into china.
more dangerously the japanese were also threatening the wartime capital of china in chungking.
chiang kai shek the chinese premier was reluctant to use his troops against the japanese and seemed more concerned with attacking chinese communists who were also fighting the japanese.
after stilwell left china his successors continued to have trouble prodding chiang to confront the japanese.
the decisive battles of the pacific war occurred not in china but at sea.
in mid june 1944 an enormous american armada struck the heavily fortified mariana islands and after some of the bloodiest operations of the war captured tinian guam and saipan.
on october 20 general macarthurs troops landed on leyte island in the philippines.
the japanese now employed virtually their entire fleet against the allied invaders in three major encounters which together constituted the decisive battle of leyte gulf the largbattles of leyte gulf and iwo jima est naval engagement in history.
american forces held off the japanese onslaught and sank four japanese carriers all but destroying japans capacity to continue a serious naval war.
in february 1945 american marines seized the tiny volcanic island of iwo jima just 750 miles from tokyo but only after the costliest battle in the history of the marine corps.
the battle for okinawa an island only 370 miles south of japan gave evidence of the okinawa strength of the japanese resistance in these last desperate days.
week after week the japanese sent kamikaze suicide planes against american and british ships sacrificing america in a world at war 647 soviet union sakhalin island.
attu u s a l e kiska s utian island s nd sla li mongolia manchuria harbin vladivostok peking korea c h i na tibet nanking chungking shanghai bhutan formosa india br.
ri ku canton japan tokyo hiroshima august 6 1945 pacific nagasaki ocean august 9 1945 okinawa iwo jima april june 1945 february march 1945 mariana wake island islands december 23 1941 tinian july 24 1944 hong kong burma rangoon thailand french indochina bangkok philippines manila leyte gulf october 24 26 1944 malaya singapore su tra ma borneo borneo may august 1945 dutch east indies java indian ocean new java sea february march 1942 lombok strait february 18 19 1942 haw a ii a n is l an ds pearl harbor december 7 u s.
eniwetok february 17 1944 guam july 21 1944 c a r o l i n e i s l a n d s marshall islands palau september 15 1944 saigon midway june 3 6 1942 guin ea kwajalein january 31 1944 tarawa november 20 1943 gilbert islands solomon islands port moresby coral sea may 7 8 1942 guadalcanal august 1942 february 1943 coral sea allied controlled areas areas under japanese control farthest extent of japanese control neutral nations atomic bomb allied victories australia japanese victories allied forces japanese forces world war ii in the pacific this map illustrates the changing fortunes of the two combatants in the pacific phase of world war ii.
the long red line stretching from burma around to manchuria represents the eastern boundary of the vast areas of the pacific that had fallen under japanese control by the summer of 1942 the blue lines illustrate the advance of american forces back into the pacific beginning in may 1942 and accelerating in 1943 and after which drove back the japanese forces.
the american advance was a result of two separate offensives one in the central pacific under the command of chester nimitz which moved west from hawaii and the other under the command of douglas macarthur which moved north from australia.
by the summer of 1945 american forces were approaching the japanese mainland and were bombing tokyo itself.
the dropping of two american atomic bombs on hiroshima and nagasaki finally brought the war to an end.
why did the soviet union enter the pacific war in august 1945 as shown in the upper left corner of the map.
3 500 of them while inflicting great damage.
japanese troops on shore launched desperate nighttime attacks on the american lines.
the united states and its allies suffered nearly 50 000 casualties before finally capturing okinawa in late june 1945 over 100 000 japanese died in the siege.
it seemed likely that the same kind of bitter fighting would await the americans when they invaded japan.
but there were also some signs early in 1945 that such an invasion might not be necessary.
the japanese had almost no ships or planes left with which to fight.
the firebombing of tokyo in march in which american bombers tokyo firebombed dropped napalm on the city and created a firestorm in which over 80 000 people died debating the past the decision to drop the atomic bomb there has been continuing disagreement since 1945 among historians and many others about how to explain and evaluate president trumans decision to use the atomic bomb against japan.
truman himself both at the time and in his 1955 memoirs insisted that the decision was a simple and straightforward one.
the alternative to using atomic weapons he claimed was an american invasion of a japanese woman and child look grimly at a photographer as they hold pieces of bread in the aftermath of the dropping of the second american atomic bomb this one on nagasaki.
bettmann corbis nagasaki survivors 648 ainland japan that might have cost as m many as a million american lives.
that view has received considerable support from historians.
herbert feis argued in the atomic bomb and the end of world war ii 1966 that truman made his decision on purely military grounds to ensure a speedy american victory.
david mccullough the author of a popular biography of truman published in 1992 also accepted trumans own account of his actions largely uncritically as did alonzo l hamby in man of the people 1995 an important scholarly study of truman.
one consideration weighed most heavily on truman hamby concluded.
the longer the war lasted the more americans killed others have strongly disagreed.
as early as 1948 british physicist p m s blackett wrote in fear war and the bomb that the destruction of hiroshima and nagasaki was not so much the last military act of the second world war as the first major operation of the cold diplomatic war with russia the most important critic of trumans decision is the historian gar alperovitz the author of two influential books on the subject atomic diplomacy hiroshima and potsdam 1965 and the decision to use the atomic bomb 1995.
alperovitz dismissed the argument that the bomb was used to shorten the war and save lives.
japan was likely to have surrendered soon even if the bomb had not been used he claimed.
instead he argued the united states used the bomb less to influence japan than to intimidate the soviet union to make russia more manageable in europe john w dowers war without mercy 1986 contributed by implication at least to another controversial explanation of the american decision racism.
the japanese many americans came to believe during the war were almost a subhuman species.
even many of trumans harshest critics however note that it is as alperovitz has written all but impossible to find specific evidence that racism was an important factor in the decision to attack hiroshima and nagasaki the debate over the decision to drop the atomic bomb is an unusually emotional one and it has inspired bitter professional and personal attacks on advocates of almost e very position.
it illustrates clearly how history has often been and remains a powerful force in the way societies define themselves.
understand analyze evaluate 1 the united states dropped two atomic bombs on japan one on hiroshima and the other on nagasaki.
was dropping the bomb on hiroshima necessary.
was it justifiable.
do the reasons for dropping the bomb on hiroshima apply equally to the bombing of nagasaki.
2 how might the war in the pacific have been different if the united states had decided not to drop the bombs.
further weakened the japanese will to resist.
moderate japanese leaders who had long since concluded the war was lost were looking to end the fighting.
but they continued to face powerful opposition from military leaders.
whether the moderates could ultimately have prevailed is a question historians continue to debate.
in any case their efforts became superfluous in august 1945 when the united states made use of a terrible new weapon it had been developing throughout the war.
the manhattan project and atomic warfare reports had reached the united states in 1939 that nazi scientists had taken the first step toward the creation of an atomic bomb a weapon more powerful than any previously devised.
the united states and britain immediately began a race to develop the weapon before the germans did.
649 650 chapter 28 the national birthrate reversed a long pattern of decline with what is commonly called the baby boom which began during world war ii and peaked in 1957 the nations population rose almost 20 percent in the decade from 150 million in 1950 to 179 million in 1960 which meant increased consumer demand and expanding economic growth.
rapid suburban expansion a 47 percent increase in the 1950s helped stimulate growth in several important sectors of the economy.
the number of privately owned cars more than doubled in a decade.
demand for new homes helped sustain a vigorous housing industry.
the construction of roads stimulated the economy as well.
the combination of post wwii economic growth new standards of support from government spending and a booming population led to a renewed american vitality for the next thirty years.
and while that growth was far from equally distributed the average american in 1960 had over 20 percent more purchasing power than in 1945 and more than twice as much as during the prosperous 1920s.
the american people had achieved the highest standard of living of any society in the history of the world.
the rise of the modern west births per thousand women 15 44 years old no region experienced more dramatic changes than the american west.
its population expanded dramatically its cities boomed its industrial economy flourished.
by the 1960s some parts of the west were among the most important and populous industrial and cultural centers of the nation.
as during world war ii much of the growth of the west was a result of federal spending and investment on the dams power stations highways and other infrastructure projects that made additional economic development possible.
military contracts continued the american birthrate 1940 1960 this chart shows how the american birthrate grew rapidly during and after world war ii following a long period of decline in the 1930s to produce what became known as the baby boom at the peak of the baby boom during the 1950s the nations population grew by 20 percent.
what impact did the baby boom have on the nations economy.
the affluent society 681 to flow disproportionately to factories in california and texas many built with government funds during the war.
the growing number of automobiles created new demands for petroleum and contributed to the rapid growth of oil fields in texas and colorado and of the metropolitan centers among them houston dallas and denver.
state governments in the west invested heavily in their universities.
the university of texas and university of california systems in particular became among the nations largest and created important centers of research.
they helped attract technology intensive industries to the region.
climate also contributed to growth in the west.
southern california nevada and arizona in particular attracted many migrants from the east because of their warm dry climates.
the growth of los angeles after world war ii was a remarkable phenomenon more than 10 percent of all new businesses in the united states between 1945 and 1950 began in los angeles.
its population rose by over 50 percent between 1940 and 1960 capital and labor total represented by unions in millions booming corporations were reluctant to allow strikes to interfere with their operations and since the most important labor unions were now so large and entrenched that they could not easily be suppressed or intimidated leaders of large businesses made important concessions to them.
by the mid 1950s factory wages in most industries had risen substantially to an average of 80 per week.
in december 1955 the american federation of labor and the congress of industrial organizations ended their twenty year rivalry afl and cio merge and merged to create the afl cio under the leadership of george meany.
but success also bred stagnation and corruption in some union bureaucracies.
in 1957 the powerful teamsters union became the subject of a congressional investigation and its president david beck was charged with the misappropriation of union funds.
afl cio tinted area represents total number of union employees cio independent unions afl workers represented by unions 1920 2001 this chart shows the number of workers represented by unions over an eighty year period.
note the dramatic rise in the unionized workforce during the 1930s and 1940s the slower but still significant rise in the 1960s and 1970s and the steady decline that began in the 1980s.
the chart in fact understates the decline of unionized labor in the postwar era since it shows union membership in absolute numbers and not as a percentage of the rapidly growing workforce.
why did unions cease recruiting new members successfully in the 1970s and why did they begin actually losing members in the 1980s.

chapter 23.
the treaty fight at home wilson saw the flaws in the final treaty but he hoped that over time the league of nations could modify the treatys worst excesses.
to counter the initial burst of enthusiasm for joining the league republicans challenged wilsons idealistic pronouncements promising world peace.
are you ready to put your soldiers and your sailors at the disposition of other nations senator lodge asked the american people.
the political cartoon looking 20 16 europe and the middle east after the war.
the victorious allies dismantled the german austrohungarian and ottoman empires to create independent nations in central europe and colonies for themselves in the middle east.
view the image blowing bubbles 1919 peace a gift horse in the mouth 20 17 captured the publics mounting concern about the league.
while wilson tries to assure uncle sam that the league is better than nothing the senate carefully examines the mule.
wary of going against public opinion too strongly lodge did not urge outright rejection of the versailles treaty.
he instead proposed adding 14 american reservations.
the most important one required explicit congressional approval before american troops went overseas.
wilson refused to accept modifications.
instead he tried to create a groundswell of support for the league that would force the republicans to accept the treaty as written.
to reignite public enthusiasm for the league of nations the president traveled 10 000 miles in three weeks by train and made 40 speeches to hundreds of thousands of people.
the political cartoon ratification rapids 20 18 offered a sympathetic portrayal of wilson shown here using all his strength to steer the treaty and league covenant to safety.
in the cartoon a young woman clutches both documents to her breast symbolizing both the besieged nation and innocent victims of war.
wilson dismissed republican concerns about sending american troops throughout the world as impractical.
if you want to put out a fire in utah you dont send to oklahoma for the fire engine.
if you want to put out a fire in the balkans if you want to stamp out the smoldering flames in some part of central europe you dont send to the united states for troops wilson told an audience in salt lake city.
competing visions joining the league of nations page 620 explores the debate between wilson and lodge.
pushing himself to the limit an exhausted wilson paid the price.
on september 25 1919 hours after he reminded a pueblo colorado audience that american soldiers had died to protect the liberty of the world the president fell ill his physician rushed a twitching and nauseous wilson 20 18 ratification rapids this sympathetic portrait of woodrow wilson trying to steer the versailles treaty through the ratification process illustrates how contentious the treaty debate became.
20 17 looking a gift horse in the mouth this political cartoon expresses skepticism about the league of nations.
by taking a closer look the senate realizes that the league represented here as a broken down mule is not strong enough to handle the hard work of keeping the peace.
what competing views do these political cartoons offer on the question of ratifying the versailles treaty.
chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 to the people who had lived in the americas for millennia the idea that theirs was a new world would have seemed strange.
scientists continue to debate when the first people arrived in the americas from asia but estimates range from between 40 000 and 14 000 years ago.
in the millennia that followed the peoples of the americas fanned out and established a range of societies.
yet to the europeans who arrived in the americas toward the end of the fifteenth century america was indeed a brave new world as william shakespeare wrote inhabited by exotic plants animals and peoples.
in images and words europeans portrayed this extraordinary land in the most fantastic terms.
some accounts spoke of america as an eden like earthly paradise inhabited by good natured but primitive peoples.
others emphasized themes like those featured in this engraving amerigo vespucci awakens a sleeping america.
vespucci an italian spanish navigator from whose first name the new world came to be called the americas gazes upon a naked native woman rising from her hammock.
her nudity symbolizes the wild sexuality europeans believed characterized the native inhabitants of the americas.
the cannibals behind her devouring human flesh represent savagery a second prominent element of the european vision of the new world.
neither vision of the americas was accurate but both would greatly complicate europeans understanding of the american civilizations they encountered leading to a legacy of violence exploitation and conquest.
the european arrival in the americas was part of a process of exploration and colonization pursued primarily by portugal spain france and england.
this impulse was driven both by a hunger for riches as well as by profound changes in european society religion economics and politics brought on by the renaissance and reformation.
africa was eventually drawn into this vast trading network encompassing the entire atlantic world.
colonization almost always involved the severe exploitation of native peoples including dispossession of land and coerced labor.
eventually europeans turned to the international slave trade and the labor of enslaved africans to draw the wealth from the mines and fields of the new world.
your magnificence must know that herein they are so inhuman that they outdo every custom even of beasts for they eat all their enemies whom they kill or capture.
and are libidinous beyond measure amerigo vespucci 1497 chapter review congress passes espionage act wilson gives fourteen points speech wilson supports female suffrage germany signs the versailles treaty establishes democracy free trade and collective security as key postwar goals ends picketing outside white house by suffragists punitive terms create resentments hitler will later exploit to rise to power dilutes civil liberties and freedom of speech race riot in east st louis illinois racial animosities intensify as southern blacks migrate north peak of influenza pandemic armistice between allies and germany deadly flu virus kills 675 000 americans 30 million worldwide germany capitulates before allies cross into germany senate rejects the versailles treaty ends strident debate on the merits of joining the league of nations myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of the great war.
questions for analysis 1 how did the lusitania crisis shape u s foreign policy.
view the closer look choices and consequences other resources from this chapter 21 a turbulent decade the twenties many families chose to take all day drives.
cars let teenagers take their courting out of the family parlor and into the backseat of the family automobile to the dismay of parents everywhere.
the best way to keep children home is to make the home atmosphere pleasant and let air out of the tires quipped author dorothy parker.
automobiles also made it harder for town officials to regulate red light districts causing one judge to declare that the automobile has become a house of prostitution on wheels welfare capitalism and consumer culture during world war i the government had mandated that industrialists with wartime contracts pay high wages provide clean and safe working conditions and allow unions to organize within their factories see chapter the chesapeake colonies p 36 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 choices and consequences the ordeal of pocahontas desperate to force the local powhatan indians to negotiate a peace treaty english settlers embarked on an audacious plan.
they abducted a local powhatan indian woman they knew as pocahontas whose adult indian name was matoaka hoping to force her people to accept a peace treaty.
her kidnappers took her to henrico a heavily fortified settlement upriver from jamestown.
the plan was to isolate her from her people.
the english placed matoaka in the household of a minister who instructed her in the english language and customs and began indoctrinating her in christianity.
at the weekly prayer meetings hosted by the minister she met john rolfe an influential englishman recently widowed.
within a year of her abduction matoaka was baptized a christian and had adopted a new english name rebecca.
john rolfe proposed marriage to the newly christianized woman.
matoaka now faced three options.
choices reject the offer of marriage and remain a captive among the english until her people rescued her or negotiated for her freedom.
attempt to escape.
marry rolfe and through that marriage help her people forge an alliance with the virginians.
decision matoaka chose the third option she married john rolfe.
two years after their marriage the couple journeyed to england where she became something of a celebrity and was even introduced at court.
consequences marrying rolfe gained matoaka rebecca her freedom.
in her new role as the wife of a high status englishman she became a mediator between her people and the english.
indeed had she not become ill and died within a year after arriving in england she might have been able to expand this important role.
continuing controversies how do indian conceptions of gender roles help explain pocahontass decision to marry.
scholars have suggested different explanations for her decision.
some have seen it as an expression of romantic love others as sheer expedience.
the most recent and perhaps most persuasive explanation of her conversion and marriage to john rolfe acknowledges the key role of women as cultural intermediaries in indian what role did women play in indian diplomacy.
by creating ties of kin to bind potentially warring nations in a blood bond marriage served an important diplomatic function.
with this explanation rather than viewing her decision as a slight to her indian heritage one can see her decision as likely having increased her status with her tribe by allowing her to assume an important diplomatic role the chesapeake colonies in europe a fact reflected in this humorous painting showing a group of monkeys in a tavern eagerly consuming tobacco 2 2.
playing on the popular notion that monkeys have a great capacity for imitation the artist ridicules the consumption of tobacco as a bad habit all too easily emulated.
smoking tobacco for pleasure became popular among all classes in european society.
tobacco was also believed to have many medicinal uses it was recommended as a cure for colds and an aid to digestion.
rolfe sent his first consignment of tobacco to england in 1613 tobacco proved to be the colonys economic salvation profits from its sale created a boom in the colony which then led its inhabitants to devote nearly every acre of land to the sot weed exports increased dramatically in the decades following the introduction of the crop.
although tobacco agriculture made some virginians wealthy the pursuit of profits diverted time and other resources from basic tasks such as planting food crops and repairing buildings.
as a result of this neglect settlers in boom time virginia continued to die at an alarming rate.
establishing political order in virginia proved far more difficult than the founders of the colony had expected.
in 1618 sir edwin sandys became the virginia company of londons treasurer and instituted reforms to make the government of the colony more effective.
a key reform was the creation of a representative body to make laws.
the privilege of voting for representatives was extended to free men of property who were to elect representatives who would then enact laws for the colony.
virginias new legislative body the house of burgesses representatives first convened in july 1619 rather than take orders from company officials the colonists gained some control over their own political affairs a milestone in the evolution of representative government in america.
because laborers continued to be scarce in virginia sandys also introduced a new system to 2 2 the smoking room with monkeys artist abraham teniers mocked the popularity of smoking substituting monkeys for humans.
in european art monkeys often symbolized the baser instincts of humankind.
what important reforms did sir edwin sandys implement in 1618.
chapter 27.
why did garvey elicit such strong emotions among both followers and critics.
racial violence and civil rights competing visions debating garveyism many of the traditional civil rights elite despised marcus garvey whom they accused of swindling the poor of their hard earned money and stirring up racial animosity within the united states.
garvey in turn accused lightskinned african american leaders of racial prejudice arguing that they could not accept the dark skinned garvey as their equal.
in the following excerpts garvey lays out his reasons for urging black americans to go back to africa while w e b du bois one of the light skinned elites garvey attacked criticizes garveys vision.
how does garvey propose to stop crimes against the race.
what portrait does du bois offer of garvey.
in the true solution of the negro problem 1922 marcus garvey argued that creating a homeland in africa could solve the problem of racial violence in the united states.
in this 1923 biographical sketch marcus garvey w e b du bois views garvey as misguided and inept.
garvey soon developed in america a definite and in many respects original and alluring program.
he proposed to establish the black star line of steamships under we cannot allow a continuation of these crimes lynching negro ownership and with negro money to trade between and disenfranchisement against our race.
as four hundred the united states the west indies and africa.
he proposed million men women and children worthy of the existence to establish a factories corporation which was going to given us by the divine creator we are determined to solve build factories and manufacture goods both for local our own problem by redeeming our motherland africa consumption of negroes and for export when from the hands of alien exploiters and found there mr garvey brought his cohorts to madison a government a nation of our own strong square garden and when ducking his dark enough to lend protection to the members of head at the audience he yelled we are our race scattered all over the world and going to africa to tell england france and to compel the respect of the nations and belgium to get out of there america sat races of the earth.
up listened laughed and said here at do they lynch englishmen frenchmen least is something new thus the germans or japanese.
black star line arose and disappeared because these people are represented and with it went some 800 000 of the by great governments mighty nations savings of west indians and a few and empires ever ready to shed the american negroes last drop of blood and spend the last penny his african program was made impossible by in the national treasury to protect the honor his own pigheadedness.
he proposed to make a and integrity of a citizen outraged anywhere.
button won by marcus start in liberia with industrial enterprises.
from garvey supporters until the negro reaches this point of national this center he would penetrate all africa and independence all he does as a race will count for gradually subdue it.
instead of keeping this plan hidden naught because the prejudice that will stand out against and working cautiously and intelligently toward it he yelled him even with his ballot in his hand with his industrial and shouted and telegraphed it all over the world.
without progress to show will be of such an overwhelming nature consulting the liberians he apparently was ready to assume as to perpetuate mob violence and mob rule partial charge of their state h is talk about conquest and if the negro were to live in this western hemisphere for driving europe out aroused european governments another five hundred years he would still be outnumbered the present generation of negroes has survived two by other races who are prejudiced against him.
he cannot grave temptations the greater one fathered by booker t resort to the government for protection for government washington which said let politics alone keep in your will be in the hands of the majority of the people who are place work hard and do not complain and which meant prejudiced against him hence for the negro to depend on perpetual color caste for colored folk by their own cooperation the ballot and his industrial progress alone will be hopeless and consent and the lesser fathered by marcus garvey as it does not help him when he is lynched burned jimwhich said give up.
the struggle is useless back crowed and segregated.
the future of the negro therefore to africa and fight the white world outside of africa spells ruin and disaster.
view the closer look competing visions debating garveyism how did garvey and du bois link the u s civil rights movement to international politics.
chapter 21 a turbulent decade the twenties the harlem renaissance claude mckay if we must die 1919 if we must die let it not be like hogs hunted and penned in an inglorious spot while round us bark the mad and hungry dogs making their mock at our accursed lot.
if we must die o let us nobly die so that our precious blood may not be shed in vain then even the monsters we defy shall be constrained to honor us though dead.
o kinsmen we must meet the common foe.
though far outnumbered let us show us brave and for their thousand blows deal one deathblow.
what though before us lies the open grave.
like men well face the murderous cowardly pack pressed to the wall dying but fighting back.
countee cullen incident 1924 once riding in old baltimore heart filled head filled with glee i saw a baltimorean keep looking straight at me.
now i was eight and very small and he was no whit bigger and so i smiled but he poked out his tongue and called me nigger i saw the whole of baltimore from may until december of all the things that happened there thats all that i remember.
in these poems how do responses to racism vary.
garvey based the unia in harlem a thriving african american neighborhood in new york city that became the hub of black politics and culture in the 1920s.
african american artists photographers musicians and writers celebrated the distinctiveness of black culture.
many writers published their works in black magazines such as the crisis and the messenger.
white literary figures like carl van vechten also helped black writers publish their works with commercial presses exposing white america to black artistic endeavors.
the african american philosopher alain locke captured the creative impulse of the harlem renaissance in 1925 when he published the new negro an anthology of essays and poems by emerging literary voices.
according to locke the new negro embodied a spirit of black racial pride and militancy that set a younger generation of african american artists and civil rights leaders apart from their predecessors who had emphasized assimilating into white culture.
harlem renaissance writers took up themes previously absent from serious works of literature.
poet langston hughes discussed black americans aspirations jean toomers novel cane explored the rhythms of working class life in the countryside and city zora neale huston exposed the power of female sexuality in her novel their eyes were watching god poet countee cullen confronted the psychological impact of racism and claude mckay celebrated manly violence in his poems and novels.
the poems displayed here show how mckay cullen and hughes protested racial discrimination.
the harlem renaissance also included the jazz music innovations of trumpeter louis armstrong pianist and arranger fletcher henderson and pianist and composer ferdinand jelly roll morton.
jazz was an original american musical style that melded african american and european musical traditions.
white and black patrons flocked to harlem to listen to black bands at venues like the cotton club and the savoy while white musicians nationwide formed jazz bands of their own.
thanks to new commercial radio stations and the growing record industry jazz became so popular that americans began calling the twenties the jazz age jazz music the white conductor leopold stokowski rejoiced was an expression of the times of the breathless energetic superactive times in which we are living james weldon johnsons poem the prodigal son highlighted the dangers awaiting recent southern migrants unschooled in big city ways hear the audio if we must die poem and reading by claude mckay racial violence and civil rights who flocked to harlems jazz clubs.
in the twodimensional drawing by african american artist aaron douglas that accompanied the poem 21 11 female dancers surround a young man and gyrate to the music provided by a hovering jazz trombone.
the fragments of a dollar playing card and gin label evoke the temptations confronting this young man.
johnsons poem echoed the rhythms of sermons that folk preachers delivered to their rural southern congregations about the evils of city life with the sweet sinning women of babylon and they stripped him of his money and they stripped him of his clothes and they left him broke and ragged in the streets of babylon as johnsons poem suggested african americans expressed conflicting views about jazz.
many artists celebrated the musics originality and exuberance.
like southern preachers however the urban black middle class viewed jazz as the devils music believing that its syncopated rhythms aroused sexual impulses and encouraged lewd behavior.
jazz clubs often served illegal alcohol purchased from organized crime rings linking jazz music to the immoral lifestyle that many black middle class prohibition i too sing america.
langston hughes i too sing america 1925 i am the darker brother.
they send me to eat in the kitchen when company comes but i laugh and eat well and grow strong.
tomorrow ill be at the table when company comes.
nobodyll dare say to me eat in the kitchen then.
besides theyll see how beautiful i am and be ashamed i too am america.
advocates wanted to eradicate.
the middle class preferred religious spirituals a distinctive african american musical tradition that they felt projected a more respectable image of black culture to mainstream america.
the literature of the harlem renaissance also drew fire.
du bois criticized claude mckay for depicting black working class culture as a collection of pimps criminals drunks and whores in his 1928 novel home to harlem.
du bois lambasted mckay for reinforcing the negative stereotypes that white america held of african american culture thereby undermining the possibility of using art to challenge the racial status quo.
defending new negro aesthetics and the principle of artistic freedom langston hughes countered we younger negro artists who create now intend to express our dark skinned selves without fear or shame.
if white people are pleased we are glad.
if they are not it doesnt matter.
we know we are beautiful 21 11 prodigal son 1927 aaron douglass innovative angular style evoked the fast pace of modern life in an illustration that both portrayed and epitomized the artistic innovations of the harlem renaissance.
hear the audio i too poem and reading by langston hughes what competing views arose over the purpose of art during the harlem renaissance.
chapter hear the audio prohibition is a failure p 633 if we must die poem and reading by claude mckay p 642 i too poem and reading by langston hughes p 643 of the automotive industry p 626 read the document a mitchell palmer on the menace of 2 what did it mean to be part of the lost generation.
watch the video video lecture post war disillusionment communism p 634 view the closer look in the 1920s p 632 3 how did the klan define americanism.
read the document the creed of klanswomen envisioning evidence scientific management in action p 629 immigration to the united states 1870 1915 p 635 immigration quotas p 636 competing visions debating garveyism p 641 images as history advertising the new woman p 645 1924 p 639 view the image charles lindbergh and spirit of st louis p 631 4 what attributes of the new woman are portrayed in this image.
view the image feminine tipplers ankle flask 1922 p 644 5 what disagreements arose over the compatibility of birth control and marriage.
view the closer look competing visions marriage and birth control p 646 watch the video video lecture 1920s media p 630 what caused the great depression.
a new president and a new deal p 662 chapter the early days of the depression p 656 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter culture and society in the eighteenth century p 66 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter 2.
slave codes gave masters almost unlimited authority over their slaves.
the codes also legally defined as slaves children born to slave mothers even when fathered by free whites.
although deprived of any legal means to protect themselves slaves developed strategies for coping with the horrors of slavery and escaping the domination of their masters.
stealing shirking responsibility feigning illness or breaking tools all of these actions deliberately slowed the pace of their work and provided temporary relief.
some slaves ran away simply hiding in the woods seeking refuge with a family on nearby plantations in the slave quarters.
avoiding the white patrols that were always on the lookout for runaways made this a risky option.
in those parts of the south closer to indian country or spanish territory including parts of the carolinas and georgia slaves might try to find refuge in a territory beyond the control of the english colonists.
slaves who took part in south carolinas stono rebellion of 1739 took advantage of the colonies proximity to spanish florida.
the rebels broke into a storehouse and seized arms murdered whites and torched the homes of slave owners.
the rebels hoped that other slaves would rally to their standard and some slaves from the many of the white people in these provinces take little or no care of negro marriages.
they often part men from their wives by selling them far asunder john woolman journal 1774 surrounding countryside did join the rebellion whose numbers rose to around 150 the slave rebels hoped to find refuge in spanish florida.
but the carolina militia intercepted the rebels before they could reach it and the better organized and armed militia routed the stono rebels slaughtering them by the dozens and executing those who survived.
in response to the stono rebellion south carolina passed harsher slave codes and temporarily blocked importation of slaves into the region a ban that was soon lifted because of the economic importance of slave labor.
the stono rebellion was the largest african american uprising in the colonial era but it would not be the last in the history of american slavery.
an african american culture emerges under slavery most slaves did not adopt rebellion as their primary strategy for challenging the authority of their masters.
simply establishing families building an african american community and practicing their own religion were more realistic goals for most slaves but all were difficult to achieve given the constraints imposed by slavery.
forming a family under slavery was not easy.
for one thing the sex ratio among slaves during much of the colonial period was sharply skewed with many more males than females.
during the early years of the slave trade slave owners preferred males for the backbreaking agricultural work required to produce rice tobacco or sugarcane.
so most slaves imported into the americas were male the odds of a male slave finding a wife were slim.
during the eighteenth century as more slaves were born in america the sex ratio became more balanced because roughly comparable numbers of boys and girls were born.
but even if the chances of a man finding a mate increased slavery made how did slaves resist the authority of their masters.
chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 family formation difficult.
slave marriages had no legal standing.
so slaves faced the constant threat of separation from their spouses.
the decision to break up slave families rested entirely with the master and many children were sold from their families.
on relatively small plantations slaves usually sought a spouse on a neighboring plantation which left couples at the mercy of masters who could withhold visiting privileges and prevent husbands and wives from seeing one another.
nevertheless many slaves did manage to find partners and create stable families.
one of the many aspects of traditional african culture preserved by slaves was naming practices.
as was customary in many parts of west africa slave parents might name their children after the day of the week on which they were born.
plantation records commonly show west african names like cudjo monday for boys or cuba wednesday for girls evidence that slaves continued to honor their ancestral practices.
3 14 slaves dancing and playing banjo this image of slaves dancing in the slave quarters prominently features a banjo.
the instrument was modeled on an instrument that was well known in africa.
what evidence exists for the persistence of african cultural traits among american slaves.
slaves also drew on african traditions in shaping distinctive music and dance forms which provided an outlet for cultural expression.
using african techniques they constructed musical instruments including drums and stringed instruments.
masters typically found african styles of dancing and singing exotic and alien to their european sensibilities.
one british visitor to maryland noted that on sundays the one day that masters generally allowed slaves to rest blacks met to amuse themselves with dancing which was a most violent exercise this rare colonial era painting of slaves dancing not only illustrates the intensity of african inspired dance but also shows the importance of an african style instrument that would become a fixture in american music the banjo 3 14.
music could serve ulterior purposes as well.
shortly after the stono rebellion south carolina banned drumming fearing that slaves could drum and communicate secret messages from one plantation to another.
immigration regional economies and inequality immigration regional economies and inequality although distinctions of wealth emerged almost immediately in american society especially in the cities the relative abundance of land in the seventeenth century allowed many rural colonists to own their own land a goal almost unattainable in europe where the aristocracy owned most land.
even in cities those without a farmstead generally earned higher wages than they would have in europe because labor commanded a higher price in the colonies where skilled craftsmen were rarer.
although all of these facts contributed to the prosperity of the colonists population growth natural increase and immigration and the dwindling availability of land became serious problems by the mid eighteenth century.
in the colonies expanding cities the gulf between the rich and poor widened and in rural areas young people faced the prospect that they might not be able to obtain land for their own farms.
immigration to the colonies regional economies the population of british north america expanded rapidly in the eighteenth century.
between 1700 and 1750 the white population of the colonies rose from around 250 000 to more than a million.
in contrast to americas first predominantly english colonists who arrived in the early 1600s eighteenth century immigrants varied in national origin and ethnic identity.
as chart 3 15 illustrates the colonies attracted settlers from elsewhere in britain including scotland ireland and wales.
immigration from the european continent also included many dutch and germans.
the decision to immigrate to america was a momentous one.
the financial and personal costs of immigration could demand heavy sacrifices.
the trans atlantic crossing which could take four months meant enduring cramped conditions on a ship with few amenities.
additionally the cost of the trans atlantic passage was well beyond the yearly wages of the average englishman and even more expensive for those from the european continent.
to finance their passage many immigrants men and women alike contracted to work as indentured servants.
in exchange for having their passage paid indentured servants agreed to work for a specified number of years usually seven.
in some cases the indenture system separated family members with husband and wife indenturing themselves to different families.
by the mid eighteenth century the british had settled the eastern seaboard from georgia to new hampshire.
although each of the thirteen colonies functioned as its own separate political unit historians have grouped the colonies into five regions new england the mid atlantic the upper south the lower south and the back country reflecting their unique histories distinctive patterns of settlement and diverse economies 3 16.
race ethnicity and religious composition also lent a distinctive quality to each of the major regions of colonial america.
view the map interactive map colonial products 3 15 ancestry of the population of the british mainland colonies in the eighteenth century during the eighteenth century the number of non english immigrants increased.
immigrants from other parts of the british empire including scotland and ireland rose as well.
another major source of immigration was continental europe especially germany and holland.
source adapted from thomas l purvis the european ancestry of the united states population 1790 william and mary quarterly.
3d series 41 1984 p 98.
english and welsh 51 other european 2 african 20 dutch 3 scottish 4 german 7 scots irish 8 irish 5 how did the ethnic composition of america change in the eighteenth century.
chapter 22 a new deal for america the great depression 1929 1940 the resurgence of labor government regulation gave crucial support to unions but the task of building a successful labor movement lay with workers.
overcoming workers fears that they would lose their jobs if they joined a union posed a significant hurdle for all organizers.
when the united auto workers uaw took on henry ford a strident opponent of unions organizers passed out handbills assuring workers that the wagner bill is behind you.
now get behind yourselves ford had offered the best terms of employment with his 5 a day wages and eighthour workdays in the 1910s and revolutionized american industry with his introduction of the assembly line see chapter review americas first circulating library review questions 1 how did changes in architecture and home furnishing reflect anglicization and the rise of gentility in colonial america.
2 what were the leading enlightenment ideals and what was the significance of americas role in that movement.
in what ways did the colony of georgia strive to embody enlightenment ideals.
3 how did the experience of slavery differ between the upper south and the lower south.
4 how did the french and indian war affect colonial indian relations.
what new problems did the british victory create for the empire.
key terms enlightenment an international philosophical movement that extolled the virtues of reason and science and applied these new insights to politics and social reform.
great awakening a religious revival movement that emphasized a more emotional style of religious practice.
anglicization the colonial american desire to emulate english society including english taste in foods customs and architecture.
virtual representation a theory of representation in which legislators do not serve their localities but rather the whole nation.
old lights opponents of the great awakening who favored traditional forms of religious worship.
new lights supporters of the great awakening and its more emotional style of worship.
middle passage the harrowing voyage across the atlantic from africa to the americas during which slaves endured meager rations and horrendously unsanitary conditions.
indentured servants a form of bound labor in which a number of years of service were specified as payment for passage to america.
middle ground a cultural and geographical region of the great lakes in which indians and the french negotiated with each other for goods and neither side could impose its will on the other.
chapter 21.
the japanese armys 1931 invasion of chinese held manchuria land long disputed by china russia and japan however signaled the beginning of a direct confrontation between japan and the united states.
claiming that manchuria rightfully belonged to japan the japanese army assumed control of all raw materials and industry to support japans military endeavors.
in july 1937 japan attacked china unleashing a brutal war of conquest.
during the infamous rape of nanking a chinese city over 250 000 chinese perished including 20 000 women who were raped tortured and then executed.
soldiers impaled babies on bayonets and tossed them still alive into pots of boiling water a japanese soldier later admitted.
the japanese killed more than six million chinese over the next eight years.
american sympathy for chinese victims and concern over protecting american economic interests in asia coincided with rising tensions in europe.
by 1940 aiding britain had become fdrs foreign policy priority.
containing japan through escalating economic sanctions and warnings fdr reasoned was the best way to defuse the situation in the pacific 23 6 japanese model of pearl harbor this mock up of pearl harbor constructed for a japanese wartime film of the attack showed american battleships lined up in a row making them easy targets for aerial bombs.
how did the united states respond to increasing japanese aggression.
chapter 4 revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 quebec qu que q uebec c 4 12 northern campaigns although the british won important victories around new york city washingtons triumphs at trenton and princeton helped restore american morale.
the turning point in the war in the north however was the defeat of the british at saratoga which helped persuade the french to increase their support for the american cause.
montreal k e n n e b e c r lake champlain connect icut r ft ticonderoga castine lake o nta r i o ft stanwix saratoga ft niagara m o h aw k r bennington cherry valley 6 albany boston d e law ar e wyoming valley west point r.
hudson r newtown morristown easton princeton germantown valley forge brandywine new york atl antic monmouth trenton philadelphia ocean british patriots british victories patriot victories a british army under general john burgoyne marched south from canada.
burgoyne hoped to join forces with howe moving up the hudson river from new york city.
but howe moved against philadelphia instead and an american force under general horatio gates defeated burgoyne at saratoga in upstate new york 4 12.
in addition to providing americans with an important victory and morale boost the british defeat at saratoga persuaded the french to commit troops and naval forces to aid the colonists.
despite this impressive victory the americans had failed to retake philadelphia and the beleaguered continental army took up quarters at valley forge pennsylvania in the winter of 1777 1778.
what role did the french navy play in the victory at yorktown.
william howe withdraws from boston to halifax 1776 howe brothers capture new york 1776 washington retreats then re crosses the delaware 1776 1777 1777 william howe sails from new york moves on philadelphia a 1777 washington meets howe at brandywine and germantown wn 1777 gates forces burgoynes surrender at saratoga 1777 the active entry of france in march 1778 changed the dynamics of the conflict.
rather than simply providing money and munitions france was now at war with britain and committed to helping america win independence.
in 1778 france and america signed a treaty promising to fight until american independence was secured.
spain soon joined france as an opponent of britain and attacked british outposts in the mississippi valley and florida.
within two years britain declared war on holland which had become an important source of supplies for the american war effort.
the great western european powers were now at war.
what had begun as a colonial war for independence fought exclusively in north america had america at war charlottesville m ja es r british williamsburg patriots yorktown british victories patriot victories da n r.
sycamore shoals guilford courthouse clinton and cornwallis force surrender of charleston may 1780 cornwallis bests gates at camden and moves north august 1780 morgan meets british at cowpens defeats tarleton january 1781 c r a p e fe a kings mountain charlotte 3 fishing creek cowpens moores creek bridge 1776 r cornwallis pursues greenes army across the dan river february 1781 greene confronts cornwallis at guilford courthouse march 1781 after a retreat to wilmington cornwallis moves to virginia april 1781 washington moves south pins cornwallis at yorktown august 1781 french admiral de grasse from west indies defeats the british fleet september 1781 wilmington camden s av an atl antic n ah r ocean charleston savannah 4 13 southern campaigns although the british scored impressive victories in the south in 1780 especially at charleston and savannah american forces recovered and forced cornwallis to move to virginia in 1781 this proved to be a strategic error since it allowed the french fleet to cut off cornwallis and enabled washington to trap the british at yorktown.
mushroomed into a global conflict involving the mediterranean africa india and the caribbean.
france attacked britains wealthy caribbean sugar islands and captured some of them.
in the mediterranean a joint french and spanish force besieged the british fortress of gibraltar.
britain had to divert resources from north america to protect these possessions.
fighting a war on multiple fronts drained british resources.
the southern campaigns and final victory at yorktown in 1779 1780 the british shifted their attention to the south where there was considerable loyalist sympathy.
they also saw the south with its cash crops of tobacco indigo and rice as more valuable economically than the north.
initially the british strategy seemed to pay off.
in 1780 british troops scored impressive victories at savannah georgia charleston south carolina and camden south carolina.
but they could not consolidate their power in the region.
the colonial militias harassed loyalists and sustained the patriot cause.
the british were especially vulnerable to hit and run operations by commanders such as south carolinas francis marion.
nicknamed the swamp fox marion would attack out of nowhere and then disappear into the swamps before the british could retaliate.
the war in the south changed dramatically in 1781 when general daniel morgan defeated the british forces at cowpens south carolina.
american forces also inflicted heavy losses on the british at guilford court house north carolina.
although the british still controlled savannah and charleston the british commander lord cornwallis then moved to virginia and established a well fortified base at yorktown in the winter of 1781 4 13.
cornwalliss retreat to yorktown proved to be a strategic blunder for the british that washington turned to americas advantage.
before saratoga what role did the french navy play in the american victory at yorktown.
chapter opening image p.
the impact of the revolution was even seen in home furnishings.
before the revolution decorative elements on american furniture copied british fashions including fanciful designs such as the scrolled pediment with rosettes on this chest of drawers 5 1 george washington as the modern cincinnatus george washington is cast as the modern cincinnatus in this sculpture.
he stands in front of a plow and beside the roman fasces a bundle of rods and an ax that symbolized the legal power of magistrates.
his sword rests on the fasces a visual reminder that in a republic military power resides with civilian leaders.
what was the newburgh conspiracy.
following the english philosopher john locke enlightenment thinkers believed that people were born a blank slate upon which society could write its own moral code.
many american founders including jefferson were also influenced by other enlightenment ideas.
philosophers of the enlightenment believed that humans had an innate moral sense akin to the five physical senses.
in the same way that people see different shades of the color spectrum so the moral sense helped people see the difference between right and wrong.
one need only cultivate this inborn sense to produce enlightened citizens.
taken together lockean psychology and enlightenment moral theory led many americans to put enormous faith in educations ability to shape morality and mold character.
inspired by enlightenment ideals about education and the american revolutions faith in representative government americans founded new educational institutions to help create an enlightened citizenry.
ezra stiles the president of yale college wrote in 1786 that the spirit for academy making is vigorous the charter for one of these new academies in north carolina declared that the good education of youth has the most direct tendency to promote the virtue increase the wealth and extend the fame of any people north carolina was one of the states that founded a university.
georgia and vermont also established public institutions of higher education.
among the new private colleges were williams massachusetts transylvania kentucky the college of charleston south carolina and bowdoin maine.
educators also published new republican materials to instruct children in reading writing and arithmetic.
spellers and readers included patriotic lessons with illustrations that reinforced their republican message.
in a book of alphabet rhymes for example the bald eagle from the great seal of read the document noah webster an american school teacher calls for an american language 1789 republicanism and the politics of virtue america the new nations official symbol represented the letter e 5 4.
the design of the great seal had gone through many versions before congress finally approved one that included an american eagle clutching an olive branch and thirteen arrows symbolizing the new governments power to make war and negotiate peace.
the thirteen states are represented by the same number of stars stripes and arrows.
charles thomson the secretary of congress observed that the eagle bore a shield to symbolize that the united states ought to rely on their own virtue the expansion of education opened up possibilities for white women.
whereas jeffersons plan for educational reform called for basic education for women other reformers recommended more ambitious plans to educate the nations female population.
jeffersons friend the eminent philadelphia physician benjamin rush offered a robust statement of the importance of education in a republic but also framed a bold call to educate women for their role as republican citizens.
women needed to be familiar with the political ideas of republicanism.
as the mothers of future citizens of the republic women had a special role to play.
rush was not alone in championing female education.
the philadelphia young ladies academy 1787 was typical of the new institutions for educating women.
in addition to music dance and needlework these new schools taught girls subjects such as rhetoric oratory and history once exclusively taught to boys.
martha ryan a student at one of the new schools in north carolina inscribed the phrase liberty or death in her cipher book 5 5.
although influenced by republican ideas her book also revealed the continuing importance of traditional ideas about womens roles.
bound into the book were penmanship exercises that intoned such traditional moral injunctions as honour father and mother images as history womens roles tradition and change explores the effects of republican ideas on womens roles page 134.
supporters of enlightenment ideas such as rush and jefferson believed that education would help nurture the virtue necessary for the survival of republicanism.
other americans however looked to religion to foster virtue.
one minister reminded his parishioners that although the civil authority have no right to establish religion it was still true that religion is connected with the morals of the people another minister noted that by instilling good sentiments into the tender minds 5 4 book of childrens verses this book of childrens verse uses americas new national symbol the bald eagle taken from the great seal of the united states.
educational materials such as this one included republican and patriotic themes.
5 5 martha ryans cipher book the cover of martha ryans cipher book proclaims liberty.
yet the book included penmanship exercises with such traditional precepts as honour father and mother a good girl will mind why was education so important to the founders of the american republic.
chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 5 12 constitutional convention jeffersons observation that the framers of the constitution were an assembly of demigods is captured in thomas rossiters nineteenth century painting of the philadelphia convention.
rather than appearing in a dark conclave the members of the convention are bathed in light.
model of government that had both federal and national features.
the states would retain power but the new national government would be supreme in those areas in which it was given authority.
the virginia plan created a new government composed of a single executive the branch of government charged with among other things the execution of laws a two house legislature congress the lawmaking body and a separate judiciary courts.
the lower house of congress would be directly elected by the people and the upper house would be elected by the lower house from a list provided by the state legislatures.
under the articles of confederation small states such as maryland had the same vote as large states such as virginia.
rather than this one state one vote principle each state would have representation in proportion to its population.
the new congress would have the power to legislate in all cases to which the separate states are incompetent or in which the harmony of why did small states oppose the virginia plan.
the united states may be interrupted by the exercise of individual state legislation although this did not explicitly address nettlesome issues such as the power to tax such powers were clearly within the purview of this broad grant of authority.
the authors of the virginia plan especially james madison thought that a more general grant of authority rather than a long list of enumerated powers would be more politically acceptable to the delegates.
representatives from the small states opposed the virginia plan.
two weeks after the virginia plan was introduced william patterson of new jersey made a counterproposal often dubbed the new jersey plan.
it called for a modified federal system based on the existing articles of confederation.
it proposed a single legislature in which each state would have one vote which would maintain the parity between small and large states.
in contrast to the articles of confederation the new national legislature would be the supreme law read the document virginia or randolph plan the movement for constitutional reform of the land and would be binding on the states.
the national legislature would have the power to tax and regulate interstate commerce.
although the new jersey plan was defeated it had revealed the difficulty of reaching a consensus without accommodating the concerns of the small states which feared that the new system would give larger states inordinate influence over the new government.
the figure 5 13 shows the differences between the virginia and new jersey plans and how each differed from the articles of confederation.
although both of these plans would have given the new central government broad new powers particularly over economic matters representatives from the large and small states remained divided over how the legislature would be structured.
on june 29 1787 oliver ellsworth of connecticut reintroduced an earlier compromise that he and roger sherman also of connecticut had devised.
the plan provided for equal representation for large and small states in the upper house and a lower house in which representation would be apportioned on the basis of population.
on july 16 1787 the convention adopted the great compromise sometimes known as the connecticut compromise because of ellsworth and shermans role in framing it.
the great compromise solved one of the most difficult issues facing the convention the struggle over representation based on population versus equal representation among the states.
conflict over slavery although the connecticut compromise solved one of the most difficult problems faced by the convention it also focused attention on another equally contentious issue whether to count slaves in the apportionment of the new lower house.
the southern states seeking sufficient representation in the new legislature to protect slavery were determined that their slaves be counted.
opponents of slavery by contrast wished to see slaves taxed as property but did not wish to count them when calculating representation in the new lower house.
the convention settled on a solution in which slaves were counted as three fifths of a person for purposes of taxation and legislative apportionment.
the threefifths ratio had been worked out by the confederation congress earlier when it faced another issue pertaining to slavery.
conflict flared over the slave trade.
one of the most intense attacks on the slave trade was voiced by virginian george mason the largest slave owner in the convention who warned his fellow delegates of the threat to the republic of the institution of slavery every master of slaves is born a petty tyrant slavery discourages arts manufactures mason recommended ending the slave trade as a first step toward eliminating slavery.
several delegates viewed masons actions cynically.
virginia had an excess of slaves and would profit enormously from an internal slave trade if the external trade with africa were abolished.
south carolinian articles of confederation virginia plan new jersey plan structure of the legislature single house one state one vote two houses both determined by population single house one state one vote taxation no power to tax power to tax power to tax judicial power no judicial power apart from courts to hear admiralty cases federal judiciary federal judiciary single executive chosen by national legislature single or plural executive elected by congress executive power no permanent executive a committee of the states exercises executive functions when congress is not in session 5 13 comparison of the articles of confederation virginia and new jersey plans although the virginia and new jersey plans differed on representation each would have given the new government the vital power of taxation.
watch the video lecture slavery and the constitution how did the conflict over slavery shape the debates of the constitutional convention.
chapter 24 24 9 the price of victory a soldier grieves for his lost buddy an american soldier comforts a comrade distraught over the death of a friend during the korean war in 1950 a divided world the early cold war 1945 1963 status quo of a divided korea he decided to try to reunify korea under an anti communist government.
rolling back communism rather than containing it became the new goal sanctioned by the un in october 1950 at that same moment however china was preparing to aid north korea.
when american troops crossed the 38th parallel into north korea they did not know that mao was massing chinese troops and guns along the north korean chinese border.
still unaware of maos intentions american troops moved swiftly up the peninsula to celebrate thanksgiving by the yalu river.
victory seemed assured macarthur promised truman that the troops would be home by christmas.
then in late november waves of chinese troops began pouring across the border shrieking and blowing bugles.
terrified un forces suffered heavy casualties as they withdrew in the harsh winter.
life photographer david how did the entry of the chinese into the korean war affect political and military debates within the united states.
douglas duncan warming his camera in his coat pocket to keep the film from breaking chronicled the bitter retreat of 10 000 marines who fought their way to safety.
nearly every soldier suffered frostbite half the men were wounded or killed.
if i were god and could give you anything you wanted what would you ask for duncan asked one marine.
after several minutes the marine replied give me tomorrow military leaders disagreed over how to respond as the chinese continued their advance which un forces eventually contained around the 38th parallel.
the joint chiefs of staff urged truman to seek a negotiated peace advice he followed.
macarthur however publicly endorsed all out war utilizing nuclear weapons.
the president and theater commander now began to pursue two competing visions.
as truman made diplomatic overtures to the chinese for a ceasefire along the 38th parallel macarthur warned the chinese to surrender or face destruction.
there is no substitute for victory macarthur wrote to republican congressman joseph martin of massachusetts echoing the feelings of countless americans.
this was not however trumans vision of how to end the war when martin read these words on the house floor he sealed macarthurs fate.
truman fired macarthur the next week triggering as secretary of state acheson had predicted the biggest fight of your administration macarthur came home not in disgrace but to great acclaim.
many americans shared his frustrations with the stalemate on the battlefield.
six years after defeating two great military powers in world war ii the united states found itself unable to reunify korea under an anti communist government.
responding to macarthurs vision of total victory huge crowds greeted the general when his ship docked in san francisco and he reveled in a ticker tape parade held in his honor in new york city.
congress debated impeaching truman but then opted instead to hold hearings into macarthurs removal.
during the hearings macarthurs critics interrogated the fighting communism cold and hot war general about the possibility that using nuclear weapons in korea might lead to a global nuclear war.
macarthurs response that doesnt happen to be my responsibility caused the generals popularity to plummet.
the cooling enthusiasm for macarthurs vision of all out war did little to bolster public confidence in truman.
in public opinion polls only 24 percent of americans approved of how he was handling the presidency reflecting public disappointment over korea anger at losing china and well publicized soviet spy scandals that together revived the image of truman as an ineffectual leader.
his aggressive support for civil rights and his domestic reform agenda see chapter 21 and his wife eventually adopted the boys and changed their names.
as adults they were active in leftist causes and until recently steadfastly maintained their parents innocence.
for decades the right and the left embraced two competing visions of the rosenbergs case.
the right viewed the couple as traitors whose cooperation with the soviet union demonstrated the internal threat that the nation faced from soviet spies.
the left believing the rosenbergs innocent felt that mainstream politicians exaggerated the communist menace to gain public support for eradicating all leftleaning political groups from american society.
in some respects both portraits were accurate.
newly released soviet documents reveal that julius did indeed pass valuable atomic data to the soviet union but it appears that ethel knew nothing of her husbands espionage activities making her along with countless others in the 1950s a victim of overzealous investigators who equated leftist politics with treason.
what competing visions arose over the hiss and rosenbergs spy cases.
spies in our midst huac against hollywood the effort to expose the evildoings of communists went far beyond punishing government officials who spied for the soviet union.
in 1947 huac began an investigation into alleged communist activities in hollywood.
hundreds of screenwriters producers directors and actors were called to testify.
initial hearings focused on the supposedly subversive plotlines and imagery of selected motion pictures such as mission to moscow a world war ii era film that presented the soviet union as paradise on earth.
jack warner the head of warner studies had produced mission to moscow after the roosevelt administration requested a film that would improve the publics impression of the nations wartime ally.
this episode in producing leftwing political propaganda was the exception rather than the rule in hollywood.
most studio heads subscribed to sam goldwyns view that if you want to send a message use western union the iron grip of the hollywood studio system allowed directors little independence to include political content in their films that was not approved by the studio bosses.
as a result huac could find little evidence of subversive content in hollywood films.
rather than abandoning its investigation of hollywood however huac shifted focus to the political affiliations and beliefs of the people involved in making movies.
after ten screenwriters dubbed the hollywood ten were convicted of contempt of congress for refusing to cooperate with huac investigations and sentenced to a year in prison studio executives created a hollywood blacklist of individuals with suspected past or present communist ties whom film studios refused to hire.
the fbi had already infiltrated the communist party and provided huac with the names of all those in hollywood with present or past communist affiliations.
huac nonetheless pressured subpoenaed witnesses to publicly name names not to gain information but to test witnesses loyalty.
many cooperated with huac to salvage their careers.
most of those who refused to testify or to name names never worked in films again.
others like future president ronald reagan then the president of the screen actors guild joined the anti communist crusade by privately providing the fbi with the names of individuals in hollywood with potential communist connections.
reagan testified before huac as a liberal democrat his shift to the right came later where he denied that communists have ever at any time been able to use the read the document joseph mccarthy wheeling west virginia speech 1950 motion picture screen as a sounding board for their philosophy director elia kazan and playwright arthur miller used their artistic work to explain the different choices they made when asked to testify by huac.
kazans film on the waterfront 1954 starred marlon brando as an ex prizefighter turned longshoreman who overcomes his aversion to ratting on your friends and testifies against his corrupt union bosses.
kazan who had been a member of the communist party in the 1930s made the film to justify his own decision in 1952 to provide huac with the names of eight former communist party colleagues see competing visions naming names in hollywood page 740.
on the waterfront won academy awards for best picture best director and best actor.
conversely miller refused to testify when called before huac in 1956 and criticized the hysteria created by the second red scare in his play the crucible which likened the huac investigations to the salem witch trials in colonial massachusetts.
we will not knowingly employ a communist nor a member of any party or groups which advocates the overthrow of the government of the united states by force or by illegal or unconstitutional methods studio executives statement announcing the creation of a hollywood blacklist 1947 mccarthyism the governments anti communist crusade during the second red scare also became known as mccarthyism named for the media savvy republican senator joseph mccarthy from wisconsin who along with huac spearheaded numerous investigations into communist activities many of them spurious.
anti communist spy investigations predated mccarthy but his flair for the dramatic made the senator an instant media sensation.
mccarthy burst onto the scene after waving around a piece of paper during a speech before the womens republican club in wheeling west virginia on february 9 1950 thundering that he what was the purpose and impact of huacs hollywood investigations.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 hamiltons ambitious program in 1789 congress requested that secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton issue a report on the new nations economy.
between 1790 and 1791 hamilton responded with a series of reports each corresponding to a major part of his overall plan to bolster americas economy.
these included reports on public credit a national bank the establishment of a mint to coin money and manufactures.
hamilton saw a strong national government as a necessity to promote american prosperity and protect the young nations economic interests against foreign threats.
in his view the constitution had created a central government with considerable power over the economy.
in his reports he urged congress and the president to use this authority to encourage economic growth.
to accomplish this hamilton looked to britain as a model.
with a robust manufacturing and financial section and the powerful bank of england to energize its economy britain had the most diverse and sophisticated economy in europe.
hamiltons vision for the new republic alexander hamilton envisioned america as a powerful nation with a strong government and a vigorous commercial economy.
before he could implement his ambitious program to realize this vision however hamilton would have to overcome opponents at nearly every turn.
hamiltons bold program not only frightened former antifederalists but also alarmed strong supporters of the constitution notably james madison who did in place of that noble love of liberty and republican government which carried us triumphantly through the war a pro british monarchical aristocratical party has sprung up whose avowed object is to draw over us the substance as they have already done the forms of the british government thomas jefferson 1796 why did hamilton believe that america needed to create a national bank.
not wish to see the new government become a powerful state modeled on that of britain.
hamiltons economic vision also clashed with thomas jeffersons vision of a nation of small farmers.
the new opposition to federalist efforts to create a powerful centralized government who called themselves republicans united former anti federalists and those federalists who shared the concerns of madison and jefferson.
republicans believed that liberty could flourish only if the states remained powerful enough to protect their citizens from the new federal government.
the leader who conceived this audacious federalist agenda a vision that would transform america was a self made man who lacked the aristocratic upbringing of his chief opponents virginians jefferson and madison.
hamilton came from a modest background.
born in the west indies the illegitimate son of a scottish merchant and a planters daughter hamilton was orphaned at an early age but became an apprentice clerk in a merchant firm.
at age 14 he wrote my ambition is so prevalent that he loathed the grovling condition of a clerk or the like to which my fortune etc.
condemns me and would willingly risk my life tho not my character to exalt my station hamilton was talented ambitious and hard working.
the proprietor of the merchant firm recognized his talent and helped him finance his education.
hamilton attended kings college now columbia university in new york city.
during the american revolution he rose rapidly through the ranks of the continental army to become read the document alexander hamilton opposing visions for the new nation hamiltons ambitious program in almost all the questions great and small which have arisen since the first session of congress mr jefferson and mr madison have been found among those who are disposed to narrow the federal authority.
alexander hamilton 1792 washingtons personal aide.
marrying into a prominent new york family he became an important political figure in that state.
a successful lawyer he had many friends and allies within new yorks merchant community.
new york merchants commissioned this portrait 6 2 of alexander hamilton to honor his contribution to their prosperity.
it provides one measure of his power and influence particularly within the new nations financial world.
yet the painting is as notable for what the artist omitted as for what he included.
hamilton insisted that no references to his important political accomplishments be included something that commissioners of the portrait had requested.
realizing that his political life was controversial hamilton directed the artist to avoid such references.
rather than depicting the complex often contentious quality of his life the painting presents the image of a disinterested republican statesman and writer.
hamilton was an unabashed american nationalist and an elitist who viewed democracy with suspicion.
he believed that there would always be class divisions.
to survive and prosper the new nation had to win the allegiance of the rich and powerful binding their interests to those of the new federal government.
the assumption of state debts hamiltons report on public credit addressed the war debt of the states and the federal government.
the new nation and the states had incurred 6 2 alexander hamilton new york citys merchants commissioned a portrait of hamilton in 1792 hamilton decided against having the painting represent his political career which was steeped in controversy he chose instead to have himself painted in a plain brown suit standing beside a table with an inkwell and quill.
considerable debt financing the american revolution.
this debt consisted of many different types of paper currency and securities that the confederation government and the individual states had issued.
the new nation owed 75 million a figure that alarmed some but not hamilton who saw the debt as a means of bringing america into the modern era in which debt was an essential tool of state finance.
how does hamiltons own life help explain his vision for americas future.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 launching the new government although intense partisanship had characterized american politics during the colonial and revolutionary eras the republican ideas championed during the revolution stressed the need for a virtuous citizenry.
the constitution created a system designed to check the dangers of factionalism.
leaders were expected to put the good of the nation above any factional interest.
fortunately for america the nations first president george washington was such a figure a leader who tried to remain above partisanship.
appointing alexander hamilton and thomas jefferson to his cabinet demonstrated his commitment to this ideal.
these were men whose views on government were almost at opposite extremes and from them washington sought policy alternatives to deal with the pressing issues facing the new nation.
choosing the first president 6 1 triumphal arch near trenton new jersey at trenton women erected a 20 foot 20 foot arch made of evergreens and laurels.
on the right washington w ashing ash ington ton rides rides toward the arch.
the constitution had created an electoral college a group of electors appointed by the states who had the responsibility of picking the president.
on february 4 1789 electors from all the states that had ratified the constitution met in their state capitals and unanimously selected george washington to be the nations first president.
john adams another prominent revolutionary leader received half that number of votes becoming the first vice president.
the remaining votes were split among ten other candidates.
the nation celebrated washingtons election in a grand style.
he traveled from his home at mount vernon in virginia to the site of his inaugural in new york city feted along the way.
many towns erected triumphal arches such as this one near trenton 6 1.
although leading men in the community typically greeted washington giving him a military salute in trenton he met the local women who had erected the arch and who serenaded him.
a placard on the arch proudly proclaimed that the defender of the mothers will also defend the daughters the first federal elections completing the constitution although there had been little doubt that washington would be americas first president the divisions why did madison shift his views on the need for a bill of rights.
between federalists and anti federalists influenced the first congressional elections.
the issue of constitutional amendments was among the most contentious issues debated in the first federal elections.
federalists were eager to have james madison run for congress.
madison agreed to run but he balked at actively campaigning for a seat believing that behaving in such a partisan fashion was inconsistent with republican ideals.
fortunately madisons supporters persuaded him that if he did not take his case directly to the people virginia would send an anti federalist dominated delegation to congress.
madison set aside his reluctance to appeal for votes and won election to congress.
one group critical to madisons success were the baptists who were eager to obtain explicit protection for freedom of religion in the constitution.
the task of shaping a set of amendments thus fell to federalist james madison.
madison recognized that if properly framed amendments might go a long way to eliminating lingering anti federalist suspicions of the new federal government.
thus although he had originally opposed anti federalist calls for amendments during the struggle over ratification madison now recognized their political necessity.
he accepted what he described as the nauseous project of amendments knowing that the process would be deeply politicized and that the few ardent anti federalists in congress would agitate for weakening the federal government.
still madison pared down the view the image george washingtons arrival in new york city 1789 launching the new government dozens of amendments proposed by the state ratification conventions to seventeen.
the senate then whittled these down to twelve provisions and sent them to the states to ratify.
the states did not adopt the first two proposed amendments which dealt with legislative apportionment and congressional salaries.
more than 200 years later the states finally adopted what became the twenty seventh amendment which prohibits raises for congress from taking effect until a new house of representatives has taken office a restraint that makes it more difficult for congress to vote itself frequent salary increases.
the first ten of the original twelve amendments to the constitution eventually became known as the bill of rights and included protections for both basic individual liberties and for the states.
the first amendment protected freedom of the press and religion.
the second amendment guaranteed that the people would have a right to keep and bear arms in a well regulated militia.
this right has since been expanded to include private arms used for individual self defense within the home.
the third amendment forbade the government to quarter troops in the homes of private citizens.
several amendments protected the procedural rights associated with jury trial.
the ninth amendment declared that enumeration of some rights did not mean the denial of others retained by the people.
finally lest the new government try to expand its powers by exploiting the vague clauses of the constitution the tenth amendment stated that those powers not delegated to the federal government were reserved to the states and the people.
these amendments assuaged the concerns of most moderate anti federalists even if they did not placate the most ardent opponents of federal power who wished to restrict the powers of the new central government to those expressly delegated by the text of the new constitution.
their adoption resolved the most important issue remaining from the struggle between federalists and anti federalists clearing the way for new issues to come to the fore.
filling out the branches of government the constitution created a blueprint for the new federal government but congress and the president still had to work out important details including the structure of the executive and the judiciary departments.
congress took almost six months to work out a structure for the new federal courts.
lingering fears about the power of the federal government complicated drafting legislation to set up the federal courts.
senator william maclay of pennsylvania warned for example that the federal courts would swallow all the state constitutions by degree eventually congress created a three tier system of district courts circuit courts and the supreme court.
each state would have at least one district court.
circuit courts composed of a district court judge and two members of the supreme court were supposed to ride circuit travel to hear appeals from the district courts and to have primary jurisdiction in certain types of cases such as those between citizens of different states.
for the executive branch congress created new cabinet positions for a secretary of state to advise the president on foreign affairs a secretary of the treasury for economic policy a secretary of war to oversee the army and an attorney general to be the chief legal advisor to government.
for his cabinet washington assembled an impressive group of leaders who had distinguished themselves in american public life.
henry knox the secretary of war was a leading general edmund randolph the new attorney general had introduced the virginia plan in the constitutional convention thomas jefferson the secretary of state had been the primary author of the declaration of independence and the first american minister to france the first secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton had been one of the co authors of the federalist along with john jay who became the first chief justice of the supreme court.
although none of these men had been anti federalists washingtons choices cut across a wide section of the political spectrum with hamilton representing the extreme nationalist position and jefferson far more sympathetic to state power.
during ratification anti federalists had expressed fear that the constitution would create a large expensive government with a vast bureaucracy.
in reality the federal government was far less imposing.
scattered among buildings near new york citys wall street the temporary home of the new government the government offices bore slight resemblance to the nightmare that anti federalists had predicted.
the scale of the new government was modest and its bureaucracy small about 350 officers.
jeffersons state department employed two clerks two assistants and a part time translator.
the modern state department employs 8 000 people in washington d c and 11 000 overseas.
the largest department was hamiltons treasury.
within a year of its creation it boasted nearly ten times the number of employees of the department of state.
its budget was more than triple the combined budgets of the state and war departments.
apart from his close relationship to washington his role as secretary of the treasury ensured that hamilton was a figure to be reckoned with in the new government.
why were some ardent anti federalists not satisfied with the madisons proposed amendments.
chapter 6 6 10 allegory of female education in this needlework young maria crowninshield a student at the ladies academy in dorchester massachusetts depicts a young student receiving instruction from a female teacher.
the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 charlotte is abandoned suffers physical and mental depredations and dies soon after giving birth to a child out of wedlock.
immigrating to america in 1793 rowson fared much better than charlotte.
after a brief career as an actress rowson established the young ladies academy in boston 1797.
her curriculum included reading writing arithmetic and needlework.
another female author judith sargent murray became an outspoken advocate of equality and education for women.
her essay on the equality of the sexes published in the massachusetts magazine in 1790 under the pen name constantia argued that womens intellectual abilities were equal to those of men and that if properly educated women could equal men in accomplishment.
murray also used the novel to spread her ideals about the equality of the sexes.
her novel the story of margaretta 1798 recast the conventions of sentimental novels such as charlotte temple to reflect her views of female education.
rather than fall prey to seduction abandonment and ruin a fate typical of many female characters in popular novels margaretta uses her intelligence and superior education to avoid these perils.
murray helped found the dorchester ladies academy in massachusetts.
a 15 year old student at the academy maria crowninshield produced this allegory of female education 6 10.
although at one level this fine needlework conformed to the traditional ideas of female education which included sewing skills the subject matter signals the artists commitment to a modern expansive conception of female education.
the young girl depicted is reading a copy of english author hannah moores strictures on the modern system of female education 1799.
moores book which advocated an expansion of educational opportunities for women was one of many tracts defending womens education.
the most radical voice demanding changes in womens roles was mary wollstonecraft an english writer whose a vindication of the rights of women 1792 sparked a lively debate on both sides of the atlantic in the 1790s about the need for equality of education for men and women.
federalists republicans and the politics of race the political passions and divisions of the age also extended to the politics of race.
this became a major concern as a result of events in the caribbean where slaves in saint domingue modern haiti rose up against their french masters and seized control of the colony in 1791 federalists and republicans were divided over how to respond to events there.
toussaint louverture a former slave forged an all black fighting force that routed the planters.
america was forced to decide between supporting this slave revolution and siding with france which sought to repress it.
at first the washington administration supported the ruling white elite but as louvertures forces solidified their hold over saint domingue the american government accepted the need to establish stable relations with the new government.
indeed as relations with france worsened many federalists began to urge washington to strengthen relations with saintdomingue hoping to renew the lucrative trade with the former french colony.
however whereas federalists supported recognition of saintdomingue republicans in congress opposed it.
how is virtue represented in maria crowninshields allegory of female education.
read the document james wilson on womans legal disabilities in james wilson an introductory lecture to a course of law lectures 1791 cultural politics in a passionate age their opposition was motivated in part by their loyalty to france which was eager to recapture the colony but also reflected the partys commitment to protecting slavery.
republicans feared that american slaves might emulate their oppressed brethren in the caribbean.
saint domingue conjured up a nightmare for slave owners such as the depiction of bloodletting during the revolution produced by a german engraver 6 11.
although fears of slave insurrection were most keen in the south northern republicans also voiced concerns.
congressman albert gallatin of pennsylvania warned that supporters of louvertures ideas might spread their views among the negro people there in america and excite dangerous insurrections among them even among those most opposed to slavery few were willing to support racial equality.
racist attitudes were found among ardent supporters of abolitionism.
images as history liberty displaying the arts and sciences explores the tensions within early abolitionist thought.
6 11 saint domingue revolution for republicans particularly in the south images such as this conjured up their worst nightmare a bloody slave insurrection.
why did republicans oppose normalizing relations with saint domingue.
chapter 25 in a land of plenty contentment and discord 1945 1960 a middle class america by any measure the 1950s were a prosperous decade.
from 1945 to 1960 per capita consumption rose 50 percent wages grew by one third and unemployment averaged 4 6 percent.
american productivity also boomed.
with only six percent of the world population the united states produced half of the worlds manufactured goods in the 1950s.
the 1950s gave the generation raised in the austerity of the great depression something they had never known affluence.
for the first time many americans enjoyed the trappings of middle class life a suburban home filled with modern appliances and a car in the garage previously available only to a small segment of the population.
by 1960 the nation crossed a significant historic threshold when 60 percent of americans were classified as middle class.
the united states was no longer a primarily working class society.
postwar prosperity in 1948 vernon presley brought his family to memphis tennessee to escape the grinding poverty of mississippi.
gladys presley later recalled that her son elvis would hear us worrying about our debts being out of work and sickness and hed say dont you worry none baby.
when i grow up im going to buy you a fine house.
and get two cadillacs one for you and daddy and one for me elvis presley fulfilled this promise to his parents when he 25 3 and 25 4 buying on credit what they have vs what they own the before and after photos of this life magazine spread demonstrated americans reliance on credit to accumulate the trappings of middle class life in the fifties.
why did standards of living improve for many americans in the 1950s.
became the most famous rock and roll star of the era.
for the rest of his life elvis an extreme example of the eras conspicuous consumption gave away cars to friends and family.
few americans enjoyed this level of financial success but the kind of deprivation that elvis experienced as a child became a relic of the past for millions in the 1950s.
the typical american has access to amenities foods entertainment personal transportation and plumbing in which not even the rich rejoiced a century ago economist john a middle class america kenneth galbraith noted.
having discretionary income for a television vacations or sending a child to college transformed the lives of american workers.
if what we lived through in the 1950s was not liberation jack metzgar the son of pennsylvania steelworkers noted then liberation never happens in real human lives an aggressive union movement seeking higher wages and benefits and the new deal safety net of guaranteed pensions and unemployment insurance helped fuel this leap into the middle class for many industrial workers.
other government initiatives also helped transform the way americans lived.
in 1944 just 44 percent of americans owned their homes.
by 1960 this figure had risen to 60 percent thanks to the 1944 gi bill of rights that offered returning veterans low interest loans and to a tax code that provided incentives for homeowners.
in addition state and federal governments constructed the roads schools bridges and sewers that new suburban developments required.
during world war ii production of consumer goods was scant and many americans had accumulated savings that they were now eager to spend.
in 1950 alone americans snatched up 6 2 million refrigerators 14 6 million radios and 6 2 million automobiles.
this represented three quarters of the appliances purchased worldwide.
installment plans helped millions of americans purchase these key consumer items.
consumer debt rose from 8 3 billion in 1946 to 56 1 billion in 1960 a trend that caught lifes attention in 1955 to illustrate the newly affluent lifestyle of middle class americans life photographer loomis dean put a couple with their two children in front of their los angeles suburban home alongside all their furnishings and car.
the first picture 25 3 showed what they have an oven refrigerator two television sets car and furniture.
the second photograph 25 4 what they own put the family in front of the foundations of a house and automobile tires to reflect how far along they were in their mortgage and car payments.
the refrigerator couch stove and one television set all bought on credit were missing.
by purchasing so heavily with credit this family risked losing nearly everything if a recession hit and the father lost his job.
american leaders felt that their nations material abundance demonstrated the superiority of capitalist societies over communist ones where basic consumer items were often in short supply.
others condemned american materialism.
in his biting social commentary the status seekers vance packard criticized americans for jettisoning the frugality of the past in favor of status seeking conspicuous consumption.
manufacturers helped create this compare this familys possessions and home life to those of previous generations.
chapter review john adams elected president alien and sedition acts second kentucky resolution jefferson elected president washington declines to serve a third term and is succeeded by federalist john adams congress enacts a series of new acts to control aliens and punish attacks on the government jefferson introduces concept of nullification in his second kentucky resolutions peaceful transfer of power from federalists to republicans virginia and kentucky resolutions madison and jefferson draft resolutions protesting the sedition act and asserting the right of the states to check unconstitutional acts of the federal government myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of the new republic.
questions for analysis 1 what was hamiltons vision for the new republic.
read the document alexander hamilton opposing visions for the new nation p 160 2 what was jeffersons vision for the new republic.
other resources from this chapter 7 jeffersonian america an expanding empire of liberty 1800 1824 politics in jeffersonian america jeffersons presidential triumph in 1800 ushered in a new era in american political life.
after a decade of federalist rule and despite the courts remaining bastions of federalist power republicans now controlled the presidency and congress.
despite jeffersons efforts to avoid the bitter partisanship that had characterized politics during the previous decade american politics remained deeply divisive.
in an age when gentlemen lived by a code of honor political insults could easily turn into personal affronts and might result in tragic results.
before the end of his presidency jeffersons vice president aaron burr would slay jeffersons longtime opponent alexander hamilton in a duel and burr would become a fugitive from justice.
former president john adams sarcastically observed that his fellow citizens had made great strides in the arts of lying and libeling and the other arts which grow out of them such as wielding the cudgel and pistol liberty and small government jefferson set out his views of government in his inaugural address on march 4 1801 although he invoked shared values including faith in representative government and the rule of law jefferson also made clear how his idea of government differed from that of his opponents.
throughout the 1790s federalists had worked to endow the new government of the united states with sufficient power to become a great nation modeled on britains commercial and military might.
following hamiltons lead federalists had increased the size of the central government and military and had also used their expansive view of federal power to crush political opposition.
by contrast jefferson hoped to reduce the size of the federal government.
jefferson invoked the ideal of liberty not power.
he described the state governments as the proper defenders of liberty.
in contrast to federalists who supported a national bank and enacted a host of taxes including the unpopular whiskey tax jefferson sought to reduce the burdens government placed on the people.
rather than favor commerce he emphasized the encouragement of agriculture with commerce as its handmaid to achieve economy in public expense he would scale back the size of government.
an alert citizenry a vigorous militia and strong state governments were the foundation upon which to build americas future.
finally opposing laws such as the sedition act jefferson praised freedom of the press reminding americans that political conflict was a testimony to the vitality of american life not a sign of weakness.
what does monticello reveal about jeffersons values.
the jeffersonian style jeffersons inaugural not only set out his philosophical differences with federalists but also gave him the occasion to dramatize them.
jeffersons vision had always melded democratic ideals to aristocratic tastes.
he labored to create a different presidential style from those who came before him.
jefferson loathed the pomp and ceremony that washington and adams had used to exalt the presidency.
rather than ride to his inaugural in an elegant coach jefferson walked behind a small band of maryland militia.
instead of delivering his annual address to congress from a monarch like throne as his predecessors had done he had a clerk read them.
jefferson also rejected the elegant balls that federalists had staged during the washington and adams presidencies as smacking too much of european style monarchy.
abandoning the pomp and aristocratic style of his predecessors and replacing it with a more democratic style defined the public face of jeffersons presidency.
yet jefferson remained a rich virginian slaveholder whose tastes were anything but common.
although jefferson dispensed with much of the formality of his predecessors his presidency still reflected his aristocratic tastes.
dinner with jefferson involved an unusual mix of informality and aristocratic style.
he dressed informally when he entertained guests wearing a pair of worn leather slippers which shocked those used to the formality of washington and adams.
yet those invited to monticello the home jefferson designed himself in the mountains of western virginia 7 1 found themselves in an architectural masterpiece that confidently proclaimed its owners wealth and exquisite read the document jeffersons first inaugural address politics in jeffersonian america taste.
the food and wine served at these dinners were equally impressive.
jefferson regaled his dinner guests with the sensual delights of his table and the dazzling brilliance of his conversation which ranged over everything from philosophy to agriculture.
a connoisseur of fine wines jeffersons annual wine bill for his first term in office came to 2 400 almost ten times the yearly income of a typical artisan.
political slurs and the politics of honor literate and urbane thomas jefferson was deeply influenced by the enlightenment particularly its emphasis on reason and science.
one of his many interests was fossils.
jefferson wrote about mammoths in his book notes on virginia.
four months after his inauguration his friend the artist charles wilson peale set out to exhume the remains of a mastodon in upstate new york.
president jefferson enthusiastically supporting peale even authorized the use of u s military equipment to aid in the dig.
the expedition proved to be a monumental undertaking as reflected in peales painting of the event 7 2.
the disinterment of the giant fossil testified to american ingenuity.
to jefferson the expedition was a symbol of the new nations commitment to the values of the enlightenment.
his interest in fossils and mastodon bones however provided an easy target for his enemies who mocked him as the mammoth philosopher or the mammoth of democracy in response his supporters attempted to turn jeffersons passionate interest in 7 1 jeffersons monticello jeffersons design for monticello borrowed elements from english architecture including the classical columns and the latest parisian styles such as the domed roof that caps the building.
mastodons to his advantage.
the president was presented with a mammoth cheese weighing more than 1 200 pounds.
the delivery of the cheese to the president became a sensation and filled newspaper columns for months.
mammoth jokes however were among the milder partisan attacks leveled at jefferson.
his lavish home at monticello also prompted sarcastic comments.
federalists pointed out the obvious contradiction between the presidents support for democracy and his own aristocratic tastes in architecture food and wine.
his enemies also highlighted the contradiction between jeffersons impassioned defense of liberty and his life as a slaveholder.
monticello was a large working plantation and was therefore home to a sizable african american slave community.
indeed as the chart and illustration in envisioning evidence the world of slavery at monticello show slaves vastly outnumbered monticellos free white population which included jeffersons family and white laborers on the mountaintop.
7 2 exhuming the first american mastodon charles wilson peales painting of the exhumation of the mammoth is a tribute to american ingenuity and the enlightenment values esteemed by jefferson.
the centerpiece of the painting is not the fossils but a machine to remove water from the dig a visual tribute to american science and engineering.
what does monticello reveal about thomas jeffersons ideas and values.
chapter 7 7 7 intercourse or impartial dealings jefferson stands helpless caught between king george iii and napoleon.
jeffersonian america an expanding empire of liberty 1800 1824 clintons candidacy fizzled but monroe gained support.
borrowing from a practice begun in 1800 congressmen met in a caucus to decide on a presidential and vice presidential candidate.
the republican caucus decided that madison would carry forward jeffersons mantle.
jeffersons embargo act not only divided republicans but also strengthened the fortunes of the federalists in places such as new england where the economic impact of the embargo hit hardest.
the federalist candidate charles pinckney received three times as many votes as he had in 1804 doing particularly well in new england.
despite the strong federalist showing in new england and new york madison defeated pinckney by 122 to 47 electoral votes to become the fourth president of the united states.
unfortunately for madison he had inherited a major foreign policy crisis from jefferson.
the embargo had not forced britain and france to change their policy.
the main casualties from this policy had been southern agriculture and new england commerce.
madisons faith in a peaceful solution received a boost when britains ambassador opened talks about ending the embargo.
britain even accepted madisons insistence that it pay reparations for the chesapeake incident and offered to stop view the image british impressment searching and seizing american vessels in neutral waters.
however the british government repudiated the generous terms negotiated by the british ambassador dashing hopes for peace.
frustrated by the diplomatic impasse congress sought another solution to the problem.
a house select committee headed by nathaniel macon proposed to provide muchneeded customs revenue by allowing british and french goods back into american harbors if they were transported on american ships.
although the measure failed a second proposal macons bill no.
2 did pass.
the most important provision of macons bill no.
2 stipulated that when either britain or france repealed its restrictions on neutral trade america would reinstate sanctions against the other nation.
seizing on this law napoleon promised that france would honor the rights of neutrals.
napoleon who had little intention of keeping his word thus used macons bill to drive a wedge between the united states and britain.
the british pointed out that napoleons promise was hardly sufficient proof to meet the terms set by macon bill no.
2 to lift commercial sanctions.
britain complained that americas new posture toward france and continuing hostility to britain were not justified.
rather than provide a means to normalize relations with both france and britain american policy heightened tensions with britain.
the repeated violation of their neutrality was not the only american grievance against britain.
as american settlers streamed into the new state of ohio 1803 and the indiana territory many of them blamed the british for instigating indians to attack them.
britains lucrative trade with these indians included the sale of firearms and these weapons proved especially useful to tecumseh whose pan indian resistance movement was gathering followers as indians faced further encroachments on their land.
although tecumsehs brother the prophet exhorted his followers to reject all aspects of white civilization european military technology proved too useful to abandon.
tecumseh worked to convince various tribes to unite to oppose further american expansion.
indigenous peoples resolve to resist western expansion intensified after a series of treaties how did british relations with indians in the northwest exacerbate political tensions with america.
america confronts a world at war signed at fort wayne 1809 in which the united states wrested three million acres of land from the delaware and potawatomi in indiana.
to squash resistance william henry harrison led a military expedition against tecumseh and his supporters in 1811 harrisons expedition burned to the ground the village of tippecanoe the center of tecumsehs pan indian movement.
after this attack tecumseh entered into a formal alliance with the british who supplied further arms to the indians.
confident that their alliance with the british would help defeat american forces tecumseh and his allies stepped up attacks on american settlements along the frontier.
the war of 1812 frustrated by the inability of peaceable coercion to force britain to respect american rights on the high seas and angered by british support for tecumseh madison began preparations for war.
he called congress into an early session in fall 1811 republicans dominated congress but were divided over war against britain.
many republicans from the mid atlantic especially new york were reluctant to take on the most powerful navy in the world.
old republicans the more radical states rights wing of the jeffersonian coalition who were particularly strong in madisons home state of virginia feared that war would lead to the creation of a large military establishment and new taxes.
madison drew his strongest support from a group of war hawks young republican congressmen from the south and west who were intensely nationalistic resented british attacks on american rights and favored an aggressive policy of expansion into indian occupied territory and the annexation of canada.
the two leading war hawks were henry clay a first term congressmen from kentucky and john c calhoun an up country south carolinian educated at yale.
the house voted to declare war by 79 to 49 the margin in the senate was 19 to 13 no single pattern accounts for all the votes but enthusiasm for the war ran high in many parts of america.
regional economic and party identities shaped the final vote.
british involvement with western native american tribes particularly in the supply of guns angered westerners.
northeastern republicans who favored war were motivated by anger against this latest threat to american freedom from british tyranny.
they saw a struggle that had begun during the revolution and would not end until america was truly free of british power.
federalists viewed the vote as another example of the republicans distorted vision of the world.
for federalists france not britain was the true enemy.
federalists were unanimously opposed to the war a sentiment which intensified when they learned that the british had been prepared to yield on some points of contention.
anger over federalist opposition to war led to violence.
one baltimore federalist newspaper editor who criticized the war was targeted by a mob of angry republicans who attacked his office and destroyed his printing press.
his attempt to resume printing after the incident triggered a full scale riot that plunged the city into chaos and was put down only when the militia was called out.
the resulting destruction of property and loss of life were the worst instance of public unrest in the young nations short history and earned baltimore the nickname mob town the war pitted the united states against britain for the second time in less than a half century.
as this political cartoon shows 7 8 the primary justification for the war of 1812 was britains violation of american neutrality and seizure of american sailors.
in the cartoon columbia the symbol of america reminds france and britain that they must respect free trade and seamens rights or face retribution.
the other issue british support for indian attacks on frontier settlements also galvanized popular support for the war effort particularly in the west.
for a better understanding of the division over entering the war see competing visions war hawks and their critics.
7 8 columbia teaches john bull his new lesson columbia depicted as the goddess of liberty stands before other symbols of the new american nation including an eagle and a shield bearing the stars and stripes of the american flag.
she warns frances napoleon and britains john bull to respect american rights.
who were the war hawks.
chapter review jefferson is accused of having a slave mistress marbury v madison john marshall asserts power of supreme court to decide constitutionality of acts of congress judicial review review questions 1 what role did honor play in the political culture of the new nation.
2 why was jefferson ridiculed as the mammoth of democracy.
4 what were the main causes of the war of 1812.
what were its most important economic consequences.
5 what was the era of good feelings.
3 which features of jeffersons domestic policy agenda were the most successful and why.
key terms louisiana purchase the acquisition by the united states of the louisiana territory from france in 1803 thereby securing control of the mississippi river and nearly doubling the size of the nation.
embargo act of 1807 the cornerstone of jeffersons plan of peaceable coercion that attempted to block u s trade with england and france to force them to respect american neutrality.
war of 1812 the war fought between britain and america over restrictions on american trade.
british trade with american indians particularly trade in weapons was also an issue.
hartford convention a meeting of federalists in hartford connecticut to protest the war of 1812 the convention proposed several constitutional amendments intended to weaken the powers of the slave states and protect new england interests.
era of good feelings a term that the press coined to describe the absence of bitter partisan conflict during the presidency of james monroe.
monroe doctrine a foreign policy statement by president monroe declaring that the americas were no longer open to colonization and that the united states would view any effort to reassert colonial control over independent nations in the western hemisphere as a threat to america.
cotton gin eli whitneys invention for removing seeds from cotton.
panic of 1819 a downturn in the american economy in 1819 that plunged the nation into depression and economic hardship.
missouri compromise the congressional compromise in which missouri entered the union as a slave state and maine was admitted as a free state to preserve the balance of slave and free states in congress.
the law also drew an imaginary line at 36 30 through the louisiana territory.
slavery was prohibited north of this line.
denmark vesey uprising an alleged plot led by a free black man denmark vesey to free slaves in charleston and kill their masters.
chapter 24.
the french government used some of this aid to finance the war in vietnam.
the united states also agreed to support french efforts to regain control of its vietnamese colony.
in 1950 the strategic importance of vietnam for the united states changed dramatically.
the fall of china to communism in 1949 and the outbreak of the korean war in 1950 when communist led north korea invaded the anti communist south korea created fears that all of asia might fall to communism.
the who lost china debate hurt truman politically and no subsequent president wanted to be the one blamed for vietnam falling to communism.
containing communism in both europe and asia became cornerstones of american foreign policy from this point on requiring the united states to maintain military bases throughout western europe and along a string of pacific islands from japan to the philippines.
as the cold war spread to asia key presidential advisors saw the hand of the soviet union behind every communist victory.
by the early 1950s national security council report 68 or nsc 68 a document that described a global communist monolith set the tone for u s foreign policy see chapter 8 democrats and whigs democracy and american culture 1820 1840 competing visions should white men without property have the vote.
in 1821 new yorkers gathered to revise their states 1777 constitution.
the issue of property requirements for elections proved to be one of the most heated in the convention.
james kent a conservative lawyer and judge who began his career as a federalist defended property requirements.
his vision of politics was deeply hierarchical which led him to oppose an expansion of suffrage.
kent was opposed by a group of younger politicians.
nathan sanford a man who entered politics fully a decade later than kent began his career as a jeffersonian democrat.
jeffersons election to the presidency in 1800 had not ushered in the reign of terror that his federalist enemies predicted and sanford embraced the growing enthusiasm for democracy that marked politics in the early nineteenth century.
which man has a more optimistic view of human nature.
which theory of politics seems closer in spirit to the ideas behind the federal constitution.
the most eloquent champion of retaining property requirements was james kent a former state supreme court judge and chancellor of the state of new york an english style judicial office that no longer exists.
kent warned that an unchecked democracy in which the property less and working classes enjoyed the same power as the propertied would threaten political stability and the rights of private property.
the tendency of universal suffrage is to jeopardize the rights of property and the principles of liberty.
there is a constant tendency in human society and the history of every age proves it there is a tendency in the poor to covet and to share the plunder of the rich in the debtor to relax or avoid the obligation of contract there is a tendency in ambitious and wicked men to inflame these combustible materials.
the notion that every man that works a day on the road or serves an idle hour in the militia is entitled as of right to an equal participation in the whole power of government is most unreasonable and has no foundation in justice.
society is an association for the protection of property as well as life and the individual who contributes only one cent to the common stock ought not to have the same power and influence in directing the property and concerns of the partnership as he who contributes his thousands.
nathan sanford was a lawyer from long island who entered politics as a jeffersonian holding various state offices before being elected as a u s senator from new york.
rather than focus on the need to protect property sanford argued that those who bore the burdens of government had earned a right to have a say in it.
the question before us is the right of suffrage who shall or who shall not have the right to vote the principle of the scheme now proposed is that those who bear the burthens of the state paid taxes served in the militia or consented to volunteer to work on public works projects such as roads should choose those that rule it.
to me and the majority of the committee it appeared the only reasonable scheme that those who are to be affected by the acts of the government should be annually entitled to vote for those who administer it.
fourth of july in center square by john lewis krimmel 1819 why did james kent oppose eliminating property requirements.
andrew jackson and his age andrew jackson and his age the new democratic spirit of american politics helped elevate andrew jacksons political career and he in turn did everything in his power to promote his vision of democracy.
jacksons democratic ideas stopped well short of the most radical egalitarian ideas of his day.
indeed jacksons vision of democracy had no room for blacks indians or women.
still his invocation of the will of the people marked a turning point in american political development.
after jackson politicians from across the political spectrum would outdo each other in affirming their commitment to democracy and praising the wisdom of the people.
jacksons long road to the presidency began with his narrow defeat in 1824 which led to his decisive victory in 1828 unlike earlier presidents who were drawn from the nations elite jackson was a self made man.
an orphan who became a rich planter and influential political figure in his home state of tennessee jackson became a symbol for american democracy.
indeed one of his supporters characterized the presidential election of 1828 in which jackson squared off against john quincy adams for the second time as a struggle in which the aristocracy and democracy of the country are arrayed against each other others viewed jacksons democratic leanings in a less positive light however seeing his election as the start of the reign of king mob jacksons presidency was marred by deep divisions within his own administration and challenges from outside.
in particular south carolinas decision to respond to federal tariff policy by calling a convention to nullify federal law forced a showdown between jackson and a new radical version of the theory of states rights.
the election of 1824 and the corrupt bargain james monroe the fourth virginian to occupy the presidency since the adoption of the constitution 1817 1825 anointed no political figure to be his successor and carry forward his policies and ideas.
following washingtons model monroe had sought out a talented but diverse collection of men for his cabinet who represented a broad spectrum of political and economic views.
three of these cabinet ministers sought the presidency in 1824 william crawford secretary of the treasury john quincy adams secretary of state and john c calhoun secretary of war.
a fourth candidate was henry clay speaker of the house of representatives.
andrew jackson hero of the battle of new orleans also joined the race.
jackson had served in congress as a judge in tennessee and as the appointed governor of the florida territory.
crawford born in virginia but raised in georgia was heir to the old jeffersonian republican vision of politics with its emphasis on states rights and strict construction of the constitution.
crawford opposed monroes national republican synthesis view the image 1824 election cartoon of jeffersonian politics with hamiltonian economics see chapter 8 8 3 our country home industry this election broadside links john quincy adams with clays american system.
the images at the top the loom ship and plough symbolize the way the american system would help manufacturing commerce and agriculture.
democrats and whigs democracy and american culture 1820 1840 decided to withdraw from the crowded race and soon emerged as the strongest candidate for vicepresident.
calhoun expected to bide his time until the moment was more auspicious to mount another try for the presidency.
henry clay the vivacious speaker of the house from kentucky began his career as a war hawk during the war of 1812 on economic issues clay had the most clearly developed vision of americas future.
clay built on monroes neohamiltonian policies pushing them in a more nationalistic direction.
as a matter of policy monroe favored federal support for internal improvements such as roads and canals but he maintained some of the same constitutional reservations about such policies that his predecessors jefferson and madison had articulated.
clay was an unapologetic champion of aggressive federal involvement in economic development.
the american system clays plan for using the power of the federal government to encourage american industry included tariffs to what role did clays american system play in the election of john qunicy adams.
help protect american industry by keeping cheap foreign goods from undermining american producers continuing support for a national bank and an ambitious program of federal funding for internal improvements.
clays theory sought a harmonious interplay among agriculture industry and commerce.
adams endorsed the essence of clays american system.
this election broadside 8 3 reflects his support for clays economic policies.
the central image of a ship symbolizes commerce while the two smaller figures depict a farmer at the plow and a worker at a loom.
the name of the ship john quincy adams symbolizes adamss claim to be a proven leader who could pilot the nation to a prosperous future.
of the major candidates for the presidency in 1824 andrew jacksons agenda was the least defined.
clay and adams sought to portray jackson as an opponent of the american system and jackson tried to finesse the issue by stressing that he wished to support commerce agriculture and industry.
his campaign focused less on issues and more on character and underlying political values.
jackson fashioned himself as a frontier democrat whose honesty and courage were his primary credentials for the presidency.
in the divided field jackson won 44 percent of the popular vote and the most electoral votes but he fell short of the majority in the electoral college necessary to win the election 8 4.
under such circumstances the constitution directed that the house of representatives choose from among the top five candidates.
clay had only come in fourth but as speaker of the house he was a key player in determining the outcome.
given the choice among crawford an old style jeffersonian who opposed clays vision for americas future jackson whose support for a more nationalist economic program was lukewarm at best and adams who was sympathetic to clays american system the choice was easy for clay.
with clays support adams won.
having secured the presidency adams then chose clay to be his secretary of state which in this era functioned as the stepping stone for aspiring future presidential candidates.
since world war ii the vice presidency has sometimes served the same function.
jackson and his supporters charged that clay had traded his support for the office of secretary of state in a corrupt bargain that deprived read the document michel chevalier society manners and politics in the u s andrew jackson and his age adams appointed men on the basis of merit with little concern for their political loyalties or even their commitment to his agenda or 8 4 to him personally.
adams proudly proclaimed his intention to discard every element of rancor and yield to talents and virtue one exasperated supporter complained that the friends of the administration have to contend not only against their enemies but against the administration itself which leaves its power in the hands of its own enemies adams sought to move beyond partisanship at a time when america was becoming more politically polarized.
electoral vote by state electoral vote popular vote adams made another tactical error 84 32 108 740 31 john quincy adams when he chastised congress for refusing democratic republican to embrace his economic agenda.
he ac153 544 44 99 38 andrew jackson cused legislators of being hampered by democratic republican the will of their constituents seen in william h crawford 41 16 40 856 12 light of his republican belief in the need democratic republican for virtuous leadership adams was invithenry clay 37 14 47 531 14 ing congress to lead rather than follow democratic republican the nation.
for his opponents however states that split the remark smacked of condescension and elitelectoral votes ism.
his comments were out of step with the rising tide of democratic sentiment that had swept over 8 4 electoral and popular votes 1824 american society.
for those who supported this although jackson won the most votes no candidate new more democratic ethos adams had maligned gained a majority in the electoral college.
after the house of representatives decided the outcome jackson claimed that the people.
jackson and his supporters used adadams and clay had struck a corrupt bargain to deprive him amss gaffe to highlight their own commitment to of the presidency.
jackson extolled the voice of the people and attacked adams for his apparent haughty contempt for the popular will.
jackson of the presidency and gave the election to adams.
adams embraced clays american system.
in addition to supporting clays plan for public expenditures on internal improvements including new roads and canals adams hoped to create a nathe election of 1828 which saw andrew jackson tional university and an astronomical observatory.
squaring off with john quincy adams for a secyet while he embraced the forward looking nationond try at the presidency was a pivotal moment in alist vision of economic development associated american politics.
jackson trumpeted his humble with clays american system adams was an eighorigins military career and support for democratic teenth century politician when it came to thinking values.
his supporters applauded their candidates about the role of the president as a virtuous leader commitment to democracy and lambasted adamss who stood above partisan bickering.
he believed aristocratic pretensions.
adamss supporters dethat monroes goal of rising above party was not fended his traditional republican ideals and support only laudable but achievable.
rather than use his for the american system and warned voters that patronage powers as president to reward his political jackson was a demagogue who would undermine friends and consolidate his administrations power americas constitutional system.
the election of 1828 old hickorys triumph why did jackson view the election of 1824 as a corrupt bargain.
chapter 8 8 5 some account of the bloody deeds of general jackson this pro adams broadside dubbed the coffin handbill features the images of coffins prominently.
it casts jackson as a brutal despot whose military record demonstrated that he was unfit to be president.
the coffins symbolized militiamen jackson executed for desertion during the creek wars 1813 1814.
democrats and whigs democracy and american culture 1820 1840 at a more fundamental level jackson rejected the antiparty sentiments of monroe and adams.
jackson set out to win the presidency in 1828 forming an alliance with crawford and calhoun to defeat adams and clay.
new yorks martin van buren formulated the strategy for this new alliance.
van buren was an influential republican who had served both as a state senator and a u s senator.
his supporters were nicknamed bucktails because they wore deer tails on their hats instead of feathers.
van buren embraced the idea of party with a passion.
his goal was to re create the old jeffersonian coalition which united the planters of the south and the plain republicans of the north how did the coffin handbill attempt to discredit andrew jackson.
jackson felt personally aggrieved by the result of the election of 1824 charges that adams had stolen that election colored the rhetoric of the 1828 campaign which marked a new low in the use of personal attacks and negative campaigning.
jacksons campaign portrayed adams as an aristocrat of dubious morality pointing out that adams had installed a billiard table in the white house.
although now considered a popular recreation originally billiards was an aristocratic pastime.
perhaps the most sensational claim the jackson campaign made was that during adamss time as a diplomat in russia he had made use of a beautiful girl to seduce the passions of the emperor the jacksonians charged that adams was a licentious aristocrat with perverse sexual values.
the attack on adamss character was more than matched by the ferocious assaults on jacksons morality.
the smear campaign also charged jackson with sexual immorality challenging the legality of his marriage.
supporters of adams claimed that jackson had seduced a married woman and lived with her in open and notorious lewdness before she had divorced her first husband.
jackson they claimed was a violent brawling frontiersman who could not be trusted with the nations highest office.
the adams campaign even attacked jacksons military record.
philadelphia printer john binns coffin handbill 8 5 detailed the bloody deeds of general jackson who had in fact executed six militiamen during the wars against the creek indians.
binn warned americans against putting at the head of our government a man who was never known to govern himself in jacksons defense his supporters cast the general as old hickory a rough and tumble democrat and latter day george washington whose plain frontier code of ethics contrasted with adamss elitist eastern values.
to call attention to jacksons reputation as the hero of the battle of new orleans his supporters gathered on the anniversary of the victory to plant hickory trees and raise liberty poles made of hickory wood.
they ridiculed adamss bookish temperament chanting adams can write but jackson can fight adamss supporters answered the smears by praising his long and varied public services his great experience his talent his learning to get out their message jacksons supporters developed a sophisticated campaign apparatus.
a central committee in nashville directed local and state jackson committees who in turn worked with andrew jackson and his age local hickory clubs in addition to these innovations in campaign organization jacksons supporters created a network of pro jackson newspapers to get out the word about their candidate.
eighteen new pro jackson newspapers sprouted up in ohio alone.
the jacksonians also pioneered new fundraising tactics to pay for their campaign including public banquets and other ticketed events in which supporters celebrated the achievements of their candidate.
they developed an astonishing range of campaign knick knacks and mementos including badges plates sewing boxes and ceramics.
jacksonians also used rallies and parades to spark enthusiasm for their candidate.
the tactics of jackson and his supporters galvanized the electorate.
in 1824 only about one fourth of the eligible voters had participated in 1828 more than half of the electorate turned out to vote.
in the end jackson garnered more than twice as many electoral votes as adams.
the reign of king mob andrew jacksons inaugural in 1829 captured the new democratic spirit of the age.
his supporters poured into washington for the event shown in this contemporary print of the crowds who thronged the white house 8 6.
margaret bayard smith a washington socialite described the scene in detail thousands and thousands of people without distinction of rank collected in an immense mass around the capitol she was shocked not only by the composition of the crowd but also by its rowdiness.
the boisterous attendees she recounted broke glass and bone china to the amount of several thousand dollars smith was clearly ambivalent about the inauguration of the peoples president she was impressed by the majesty of the people assembled at the swearing in ceremony but disturbed by the rude and disorderly behavior of jacksons supporters at the reception that followed at the white house.
this print of the inaugural confirms smiths impressions that jacksons inaugural was a popular affair drawing a much more diverse crowd than previous inaugurals.
not everyone was as impressed by the peoples majesty.
supreme court justice joseph story complained that jacksons inaugural had ushered in the the reign of king mob in contrast to adams who refused to use his powers of appointment to reward his political supporters jackson was unabashed in appointing his supporters to office.
in his first inaugural jackson defended the need for rotation in government offices.
jackson rejected the traditional republican notion advanced by john quincy adams that government offices were best reserved for a small elite typically drawn from the ranks of the wealthy and well educated.
the duties of all public officers jackson maintained were plain and simple one jackson supporter proudly proclaimed that he saw nothing wrong in the rule that to the victor belong the spoils of the enemy opponents mocked jacksons appointments as men of narrow minds who were hardly gentlemen and attacked jacksons system of replacing government officeholders with those loyal to him as the spoils system.
8 6 presidents levee or all creation going to the white house this image of the boisterous crowd in front of the white house during jacksons inaugural reception or levee captures the fear that his presidency would usher in the reign of king mob read the document john adams a corrupt bargain or politics as usual how did the spoils system promote jacksons democratic agenda.
chapter 27.
this was the first trip that jackie kennedy had taken with her husband since the death of their two day old son patrick three months photographer malcolm browne before.
kennedy decided to ride in an on photographing thich quang ducs open air convertible rejecting the sugself immolation in 1963 gestion from his secret service guards that he sit within a bulletproof clear glass bubble for the ride past the crowds.
an amateur movie by abraham zapruder a russian immigrant the military coup supported by president kennedy and kennedy supporter gave the nation its most enled to the murder of diem and nhu but americans during images of this killing film stills that provoked had little time to reflect on these events.
three weeks countless controversies over who killed the president.
later on november 22 1963 lee harvey oswald in its investigation of the assassination the warren shot and killed president kennedy in dallas texas commission cited the zapruder film as evidence that as kennedy waved to onlookers from an open oswald acted alone claiming that the film footage convertible with his wife by his side.
in the midst of showed bullets entering the presidents body from i must say that during the monk episode i had no impulse to try to go in and save him.
i knew for one thing that he intended it this way 26 3 burning monk thich quang duc wanted the western press to photograph his 1963 suicide to publicize the buddhist protest against the corrupt diem regime.
the kennedy assassination what insights does the story behind this 1963 photo offer into the vietnam war.
chapter 26 26 9 doonesbury lampoons body counts cartoonist gary b trudeau underscored the meaninglessness of the official body count figure.
many americans were becoming skeptical of the governments claim that victory was imminent.
a nation divided the vietnam war 1945 1975 unintentionally created incentives for soldiers to lie.
you guys want a day off we got to be getting more kills one commander told his men.
in compiling their body counts troops made little effort to separate friend from foe.
the credo if its dead and its vietnamese its vietcong lumped enemy soldiers with innocent civilians.
eventually the inaccuracy of body counts became common knowledge.
gary trudeau mocked the preoccupation with body counts in this doonesbury comic strip 26 9.
his rendition of an american captain using the days had killed more enemy soldiers than the communists could replace in the field.
to boost morale at home westmoreland publicly assured the nation that we have reached an important point where the end begins to come into view johnson was also upbeat.
the enemy is not beaten he told the nation before christmas but he knows that he has met his master in the field a vietnamese offensive in 1968 exposed the hollowness of these claims.
on january 30 1968 during the vietnamese new year holiday known as tet date as his official body count echoed an uncomfortable truth about the value of these officially circulated figures.
north vietnamese and vietcong forces launched the tet offensive a massive coordinated assault against more than 100 cities and towns in south vietnam.
the map of vietnam 26 10 depicts the wideranging attacks.
uncle ho was already quite old and the entire army and population were exerted to do their best to liberate the south before his passing a north vietnamese officer recalled.
by demonstrating their determination to fight forever the north vietnamese wanted to convince johnson that the cost of an american victory was too high.
the communists also expected their attack on previously calm cities to spark a revolution within south vietnam.
before the tet offensive the communists had lured nearly fifty thousand american troops away from the cities by laying siege to a remote marine garrison in khe sanh and attacking a few isolated towns.
the weakened american presence left the urban centers vulnerable to enemy attack.
a shocked american public watched on television as 19 vietcong commandos entered the courtyard of the american embassy complex in saigon and battled guards there for six hours.
it took heavy fighting and more than a month before american troops regained control of south the tet offensive in 1967 americans support for the war began to flounder.
nearly nineteen thousand american soldiers had died so far and each month draft boards inducted another thirty thousand into the military.
johnsons call for new taxes to meet rising war expenses further dismayed americans.
some leading policymakers also changed their minds.
secretary of defense robert mcnamara underwent the greatest shift in views.
he went from strenuously advocating war some critics called it mcnamaras war to conceding that ho chi minh is a tough old s o b.
and he wont quit no matter how much bombing we do rather than making his breach with the president over vietnam public however mcnamara quietly left the administration.
in the same year general westmoreland assured johnson that the war of attrition had reached a crossover point meaning that american soldiers why was using enemy body counts to measure victory problematic.
fighting in vietnam mekong r vietnamese towns and cities.
in the end the communists paid a heavy price china for forsaking the jungles and tunnels that provided such effective cover sufferr ed ing forty thousand casualr.
north ties and military defeat.
major battles vietcong tet offensive 1968 vietnam nearly twelve thousand major battles vietcong easter offensive 1972 us air raids 1966 1968 1972 gulf of civilians died during the ho chi minh trail north vietnamese supply lines haiphong to n k i n dien bien phu hanoi us withdrawal apr 30 1975 battle along with 3 500 harbor us and south vietnamese troop movements american and south vietvietminh defeat french 1954 boat people flee after 1975 hainan namese soldiers.
island yet rather than gulf of tonkin incident laos results in gulf of tonkin celebrating this victory resolution 1964 over the communists invasion 1971 by south vietnamese troops with dmz 17th parallel demilitarized zone americans support for american air support established 1954 the war plunged.
the daily televised images of the vientiane battle that drew us troops out khe sanh of cities before tet 1968 months fierce fighting unda nang dercut the rosy predictions first us ground combat of imminent victory issued troops arrive 1965 by the white house.
at a us troops massacre time when 60 percent of thailand 500 villagers 1968 my lai americans got their news pleiku from television vietnam s o ut h became the first war in v i e t na m which americans viewed cambodia the fighting in the comfort of their living rooms on invasion 1970 by american south ground troops a nightly basis.
televised gulf of china sea news reports suggested thailand phnom penh that no matter who won communists enter us embassy courtyard the battle the fighting tet offensive 1968 civilians evacuated by saigon helicopter april 1975 would go on.
these newscasts stoked the shift in public sentiment already well under way before tet.
images as history the power of the press in vietnam page 794 considers how viewers political chiefs pressed the president for more troops 26 10 map of vietnam leanings influenced their interpretation of photo i couldnt get hold of a plan to win the war from from the french graphs from the battlefront.
the revered cbs tv the military clifford later complained.
when i defeat at dien bien news anchor walter cronkite spoke for millions asked how many more men it would take would phu in 1954 to the final evacuation of when he declared the war a stalemate.
we have 206 000 more men do the job no one could be ceru s.
personnel in been too often disappointed by the optimism of the tain responding to these rising doubts johnson 1975 the united american leaders both in vietnam and washington made a surprise announcement in a televised adstates tried to defeat communist forces in to have faith any longer in the silver linings they find dress to the nation on march 31 1968.
i want to vietnam.
in the darkest clouds cronkite told his listeners on speak to you of peace in vietnam johnson told february 27 1968 he urged the government to seek a listeners.
he would not seek reelection he said.
innegotiated peace.
stead of campaigning he would halt most bombing cronkites assessment mirrored reports from the of north vietnam and devote the rest of his time in new secretary of defense clark clifford.
as the joint office to peace negotiations.
view the map interactive map the vietnam war why did the 1968 tet offensive have such tremendous political fallout.
chapter 26 a nation divided the vietnam war 1945 1975 controversy on the home front advocates for peace have opposed every american war but their dissent rarely influenced the mainstream political debate.
during the vietnam war these rebellious voices offering an alternative vision of peace moved from the fringes to the center of american political life.
growing in strength as more americans began to oppose the war the peace movement made itself visible through mass demonstrations propaganda posters and press coverage of celebrities who joined it.
the very existence of a vocal peace movement in the midst of a war however also invited controversy because americans held differing views on the legitimacy of wartime dissent.
many peace activists believed they were preserving the american tradition of freedom of speech.
public opinion polls from 1965 to 1973 however consistently showed that most americans disliked both the war and the peace movement.
the antiwar movement in announcing his decision not to run for reelection in 1968 johnson noted that there is division in the american house right now in the 1960s the rise of a youth based counterculture and a powerful civil rights movement roiled the country see chapter 7 the smears of the jacksonian era sunk even lower.
eager to discredit him the whigs spread rumors that van buren was a sexual pervert who had instructed the groundskeeper at the white house to create a mound in the shape of a breast.
gender and social class the whig appeal another innovative aspect of the whigs electoral strategy was their mobilization of women.
although women could not vote the whigs hoped to get them to deliver their husbands votes.
the whig appeal to women relied on two elements a defense of morality against corruption and an appeal to economic interest.
whig newspaper editor horace greeleys description of the choice americans faced in the 1840 election captures the appeal of the whigs to many women.
greeley characterized the whigs as supporters of the family and christian morality and accused the democrats of being atheists and sexual perverts wherever you find a bitter blasphemous atheist and enemy of marriage morality and social order there you may be certain of one vote for van buren although such appeals to traditional family values and morality motivated some women to support the whig cause other women were inspired by economic arguments that whigs directed at male voters.
the ladies they flockd to their windows in numbers i say not a few and held out their starspangled banners all to the honor of tippecanoe.
harrison campaign lyric 1840 why were women drawn to the whig message.
chapter 27 a decade of discord the challenge of the 1960s in april 1968 civil rights leader martin luther king jr traveled to memphis tennessee to support a black garbage mens strike.
around 6 00 p m on april 4 1968 as king leaned over a balcony railing outside his second story room at the lorraine motel to chat with two friends in the courtyard below shots rang out.
a wounded king collapsed on the floor of the balcony and colleagues frantically tried to stem the bleeding with towels while waiting for the ambulance to arrive.
within an hour hospital doctors pronounced the 38 year old minister dead.
as news of kings assassination spread rioting erupted in black communities throughout the nation and images of violence saturated the television airwaves.
in this photo kings 13 year old daughter yolanda sits inside a car peering at mourners reflected in the car window while her mother coretta scott king sits solemnly behind her as they leave kings funeral in atlanta georgia.
this somber photograph as much as the images of rioters captured the crushing disappointment of dashed dreams.
it was a sentiment shared by many americans in the 1960s white and black who failed to fully realize their goals of either reforming america or ending the cultural turmoil.
america was rife with discord during the 1960s.
much debate centered on liberalism and its willingness to use the government to protect civil rights and expand economic opportunity.
throughout the decade social reformers working within the liberal tradition advanced competing visions of social justice and shared prosperity.
some visions were bold some truly radical.
king dreamed of using nonviolence to achieve racial equality more militant activists advocated armed self defense.
building on the reform legacies of the progressive era and the new deal democratic presidents john f kennedy and lyndon b johnson launched their own wars against poverty.
their legislative agendas were too timid for young radical activists who wanted to revolutionize american capitalism.
feminists chicano activists and native american protesters also mobilized to demand equal rights.
these visions of reform especially the more radical revolutionary ones appeared like nightmares to conservative segments of the population that abhorred liberalism.
southern segregationists organized to prevent government mandated dismantling of jim crow and white northerners increasingly resented taxpayer supported programs for unruly minorities.
the rise of a hippie counterculture that emphasized love and pleasure convinced many working and middle class whites that liberalism meant the end of law and order and traditional values.
if there was one point of agreement throughout the 1960s it was that the political and cultural battles that defined the decade for good or ill transformed the nation.
by 1970 frustration over unfulfilled dreams left americans divided over whether the nation had changed too much or not enough.
we know through painful experience that freedom is never voluntarily given by the oppressor it must be demanded by the oppressed martin luther king jr 1963 chapter 9 workers farmers and slaves the transformation of the american economy 1815 1848 the spread of industrialization in the early nineteenth century the united states began a transition from a predominantly agricultural economy to an industrial one.
this process unfolded unevenly across different sectors of the american economy and followed different models depending on the industry and region.
driven by new manufacturing technology and techniques industrialization led to a vast increase in the number of goods everything from clothing and shoes to tools and toys available to the american consumer.
but for many workers especially skilled artisans the new industrial economy led to a devaluation of their skills and loss of social status.
for less skilled workers industrialization often meant exploitation long hours and low pay.
for others however the new manufacturing economy opened up opportunities for advancement.
from artisan to worker the group of workers most dramatically affected by the onset of industrialization was artisans or workers who used specialized skills to produce consumer goods from shoes to bread to candles.
in the colonial period skilled artisans worked in small shops attached to their homes using hand tools to produce goods for local consumption.
they also used an apprenticeship system training boys in their skills until about age 20 in exchange for their labor.
the relationship between artisan and apprentice was close.
typically an apprentice lived in his masters house receiving food clothing and education.
in the new factory system first pioneered by samuel slater in rhode island see chapter 7 the artisan system of small scale production was replaced with a new set of roles owners managers and wage workers.
the owner provided the money for the enterprise the manager supervised the workers and the laborers did the actual work which was usually less skilled than the traditional crafts practiced by skilled artisans.
some industries such as textiles shifted relatively rapidly to the use of power driven machinery.
shoe production by contrast continued to employ many manual laborers into the 1860s.
in both cases manufacturers undermined the old craft traditions of artisans by breaking down the productive process into simple steps that could be performed by workers with minimal training.
factory work forced laborers to give up many aspects of working class culture.
the work rhythm of artisans before the rise of the factory included periods of intense activity followed by slack periods how did the factory change work.
in which artisans might socialize with one another perhaps meeting in a tavern to drink and discuss politics.
under industrialization the clock ruled.
factory workers were required to follow a strict schedule and perform at a steady pace day in and day out.
beyond the rigid regulations of the workers day the factory robbed them of the pride of craft associated with handmade goods.
in contrast to artisan production where a skilled craftsman might create one of a kind pieces factory goods were designed to be identical.
in addition to creating a labor force of less skilled workers the new system also led to a sharp separation between home and workplace.
before 1800 most artisans in new york had workshops attached to their homes but by 1840 two thirds of them lived in one place and worked in another.
the factory system separated home and workplace.
the apprenticeship system also suffered.
by 1827 less than a quarter of apprentices lived with their employers.
if the factory system diminished the control that working people had over their time and work it increased the goods they could buy.
because factorymade goods cost less to produce families of modest means could now afford items once available only to the wealthy.
ordinary americans could now purchase furniture clocks dishes silverware and the latest fabrics.
women and work the factory system had a tremendous impact on the lifestyle and status of american women.
while mens work increasingly shifted to sites outside the home womens economic activity remained the spread of industrialization primarily within.
nevertheless some women participated more directly in the new manufacturing economy through outwork in this system skilled processes were broken down into simpler tasks that could be farmed out to women to perform in their homes.
manufacturers provided the materials to women with a specified completion date.
they saved money because they did not have to provide a workshop or factory and they paid women a fraction of the wages a skilled male artisan earned.
in new england during the 1830s 33 000 women took part in outwork production of palm leaf hats.
they also produced paper boxes hoopskirts artificial flowers and cloaks.
in urban areas many women depended on the meager earnings of outwork for their survival.
in rural areas such as parts of new england women might rely on outwork for supplemental income while continuing to do traditional agricultural work such as producing milk butter and cheese.
rural new england women would eventually provide the labor force for one of the most ambitious industrial experiments of the day the lowell mills.
the lowell experiment in 1814 a group of boston merchants decided to expand on samuel slaters mill village model see chapter 17 harrington made the lives of the nations poor visible to the rest of the nation.
harrington claimed that a culture of poverty filled with extramarital sex illegitimate children and broken families created a different kind of people who did not share the values or outlook of middle class america.
like riis 70 years earlier harrington succeeded in awakening the social consciousness of affluent liberals including john f kennedy.
while campaigning in west virginia during his 1960 presidential bid kennedy came face to face with appalling poverty as he sat and talked with coal miners pictured here 27 1 about their lives.
this moment of intimate conversation one of his speechwriters noted was kennedy at his best as he gathered details about children who never drank 27 1 presidential candidate john f kennedy speaking with coal miners 1960 kennedys personal touch and charisma helped him connect with voters who educated him about the entrenched poverty endemic to many rural and industrial communities.
what social problems associated with poverty became visible in the early 1960s.
view the image new frontier legislation the liberal moment milk and their fathers dangerous work underground.
i was better off in the war than they are in the coal mines kennedy a world war ii veteran told his campaign staff after this photo was taken.
its not right let us begin anew john f kennedy told the nation in his 1961 inaugural address setting a tone ask not what your country can do for you ask what you can do for your country kennedys inaugural address 1961 of hope that inspired young people and liberals throughout the nation.
after eight years with the moderate republican dwight eisenhower in the white house kennedy wanted to reinvigorate the liberal agenda through a legislative program called the new frontier.
kennedys proposed reforms included raising the minimum wage reducing overcrowding in schools and providing health care for the elderly.
kennedy advocated cutting taxes and increasing government spending to stimulate the economy reasoning that as incomes rose more tax revenue would flow into federal coffers to pay for these programs.
kennedy also needed large sums for the ongoing space race with the soviet union begun when the soviets launched sputnik in 1957 see chapters 5 and 6.
why did the protestors at lowell seek to wrap their cause in the banner of the american revolution and its ideals.
the lowell mill women cast themselves as the heirs to the patriots who fought the american revolution.
their appeal for public support focused on issues of rights and independence themes that echoed the language of the american revolution.
union is power our present object is to have union and exertion and we remain in possession of our unquestionable rights.
we circulate this paper wishing to obtain the names of all who imbibe the spirit of our patriotic ancestors who preferred privation poverty to bondage and parted with all that renders life desirable and even life itself to procure independence for their children.
the oppressing hand of avarice greed would enslave us and to gain their object they gravely tell us of the pressure of the time this we are already sensible of and deplore it.
if any are in want of assistance the ladies will be compassionate and assist them but we prefer to have the disposing of our charities in our own hands and as we are free we would remain in possession of what kind providence has bestowed upon us and remain daughters of freemen still.
union is power petition of the striking lowell women 1834 in this contemporary report of the lowell protest a boston newspaper highlighted the radical and unladylike behavior of the strikers.
we learn that extraordinary excitement was occasioned at lowell last week by an announcement that the wages paid in some of the departments would be reduced 15 percent on the 1st of march.
the reduction principally affected the female operatives and they held several meetings or caucuses at which a young woman presided who took an active part in persuading her associates to give notice that they should quit the mills.
the number soon increased to nearly 800 a procession was formed and they marched about the town to the amusement of a mob of idlers and boys and we are sorry to add not altogether to the credit of yankee girls.
we are told that one of the leaders mounted a stump and made a flaming mary wollstonecraft speech on the rights of women and the iniquities of the monied aristocracy salem gazette february 18 1834 label showing women at work in the mill source merrimack manufacturing co 1822 cloth label.
american textile history museum lowell ma view the closer look competing visions the lowell strike of 1834 how did ideas about gender shape the response of critics of the lowell strike.
chapter 9 workers farmers and slaves the transformation of the american economy 1815 1848 southern society even as northern society changed dramatically between 1815 and 1860 due to immigration urbanization and industrialization southern society remained committed to slavery and a cash crop economy.
the rise of cotton cultivation and the expansion of plantations into the band of fertile land from georgia to texas transformed slavery.
although most southerners did not own slaves slavery suffused southern culture and society.
a few planters dominated the political and economic life of the whole south.
one leader reminded a southern audience in 1850 that slavery was bound up with all of the souths institutions and affected the personal interests of every white man i could easily prove that almost all the differences which may be noticed between the characters of the americans in the southern and in the northern states have originated in slavery alexis de tocqueville democracy in america 1838 3 4 brick wall the planter class few planters lived in the grand luxury many people today associate with the world of nineteenth century slavery.
for example at nottoway in louisiana john hampden randolph built a magnificent mansion that contained 64 rooms 200 windows and 165 doors.
but the typical planter lived far more modestly in a simple two story wood framed house.
his home generally described as the big house because it was always the largest domestic dwelling on a plantation was at the center of smaller outbuildings including a kitchen well dairy ice house smokehouse and laundry.
more substantial plantations included many other types of buildings such as barns stables sheds and storehouses.
georgia rice planter henry mcalpins hermitage plantation 9 12 resembled a small town with multiple residences a hospital and other buildings.
indeed the slave quarters constituted an even smaller village within this self contained community.
most what do plantation architecture and the arrangement of buildings tell us about slavery.
legend mansion kitchen smoke house stables coach house 6 lot sunken garden 8 overseers house 9 hospital 10 slave huts 9 12 schematic map of hermitage plantation large plantations were like small towns.
this plantation included a separate overseers house hospital and slave huts.
southern society plantations were far more modest.
most slave owners owned between one and nine slaves.
less than one percent owned 100 or more slaves.
the typical slaveholder worked a small family farm of about 100 acres with fewer than ten slaves.
planters created something akin to englishstyle landed aristocracy.
thomas dabney who had migrated to mississippi from virginia in 1835 to establish a large cotton plantation aspired to this aristocratic lifestyle.
he emulated the life of an english country gentleman taking tea in the afternoon and treating his less affluent neighbors as social inferiors.
while industrialization in the north created a sharp divide between work and home physically separating the two realms southern plantations fused them together.
a large body of advice literature geared toward plantation management that appeared in southern magazines urged planters to act so that the negro should feel that his master is his lawgiver and judge and yet his protector and friend an 1842 book reminded planters that because slaves were placed under our control masters had to care for and instruct them so that they could receive moral and religious uplift in theory masters sought to govern absolutely plantation government a georgia planter wrote should be eminently patriarchal the planter was not only the head of the family but also should in one sense be the father of the whole concern negroes and all planters wives or widows or the eldest daughters in families without a matriarch often helped manage plantation life.
the plantation mistress as she was called supervised slaves who might work in the kitchen nursery laundry stable or garden.
whereas husbands often relied on overseers to assist them and frequently left the plantation to attend to business or public affairs the planters wife was often left to her own devices to run a home that was more like a small village.
southern men claimed that slavery had helped elevate the status of the white woman and liberated her from the drudgery of domestic life making her no longer the slave but the equal and idol of man hospitality was a central part of southern plantation culture and the plantation mistress played a key role in the rituals associated with it.
although lavish entertainment was one part of this reality the evidence found in the surviving diaries and letters of many mistresses suggest that the typical plantation mistress was more apt to feel isolated than the center of a vivacious social life.
mary kendall for example wrote in her diary about her loneliness for about three weeks i did not have the pleasure of seeing one white female face kendalls sense of isolation lent her description of plantation life a melancholy quality.
yeomen and tenant farmers most southern whites were not planters but yeoman farmers independent landowners who worked their own small farms.
in 1860 more than three quarters of southerners owned no slaves.
as a result yeomen farmers depended on neighborliness and communal cooperation to complete tasks such as planting harvesting or building.
lacking the urban centers and cheap transportation that allowed many small farmers in the north to enter fully into the market economy many southern yeomen did not produce large surpluses for market.
instead they devoted most of their resources to producing food for their own families and generally allocated only a small portion of their lands for cash crops that could be sold to purchase seeds sugar and the occasional manufactured good.
since they could not afford the cost of transporting their surpluses to market yeoman farmers depended on planters to market their small surpluses.
they also depended on planters for the use of the plantation mill to grind corn into meal.
in much of the south where planters and yeomen resided side by side a complex web of economic political and social ties bound these two classes together.
but many yeomen in the upcountry regions of the south were fiercely independent and resented the more affluent planters who dominated their states militia legislatures and courts.
indeed most southern state legislators judges and militia officers were drawn from the planter class.
but the yeomanry formed the core of the militia system that tried to catch runaway slaves and guard against slave insurrection.
in this antislavery woodcut the slave patrol is terrorizing a slave 9 13 traveling without the pass needed to leave the plantation.
passes were written by owners and traveling slaves had to have them.
many southerners owned no land and worked as tenant farmers.
in parts of the south estimates by historians vary but between 30 50 percent of the white population fell into this category.
although some landless southerners were young men waiting to inherit land from their fathers many others rarely entered the ranks of the solid yeomanry.
in parts of the deep south with many african american slaves poor whites fraternized with slaves smuggling liquor into the slave quarters helping runaways or forming sexual liaisons and permanent relationships with slaves.
more often however a white supremacist ideology overcame class solidarity across racial lines.
what values defined the planter class.
free southern blacks had to carry identification to prove that they were not slaves.
they could not hold office and in some areas even testify in court against whites.
although life for free blacks in the south was difficult the shortage of skilled artisans in many southern cities enabled them to enter trades such how did the experience of free blacks in the south compare with those in the north.
as cabinet making.
southern cities were also less spatially segregated than northern cities and southern african americans played a prominent role as domestics and in some fields and trades such as tailoring and hair cutting.
the free black community in new orleans was one of the most affluent in the south.
it published its own newspapers and its elite members held lavish balls each year.
religious institutions were also important for the free african american community.
in addition to tending to the spiritual needs of their congregations ministers were often community leaders.
southern black churches had much larger memberships than similar institutions in the north.
thus the largest african american congregation in the north new yorks abyssinian baptist church had a membership of 440 at mid century whereas the first african church of richmond counted 3 160 members.
view the image free black church southern society white southern culture wealthy white southerners in the antebellum years entertained on a lavish scale hosting parties balls fox hunts and horse races.
aristocratic affectations even led some to sponsor medieval tournaments that included jousting.
southerners took pride in their resorts along the gulf coast gracious vacation spots characterized by a quiet ease new orleans gradually replaced new york as the horse racing capital of the nation.
blood sports such as cock fighting also remained popular particularly among less affluent southerners.
reputation and honor were central values in the male oriented southern culture.
an unsullied reputation one observer noted was all that a man required to be on a social level with his fellows a scottish traveler remarked that southern men consider themselves men of honor and more frequently resent any indignity shown them even at the expense of their life or that of those who venture to insult them when a social inferior insulted a gentleman the appropriate response was to cane or horsewhip the offender.
dueling was reserved for settling matters of honor among gentlemen.
in 1838 john wilson a former governor of south carolina published the code of honor or the rules for the government of principals and seconds in duelling which explained such things as the role of seconds and the choice of weapons.
the centrality of honor to southern culture was the chief reason dueling endured in this region long after it had been outlawed in the north.
many of the souths leading politicians including andrew jackson and henry clay had fought duels during their careers.
this contemporary drawing by a northern opponent of slavery 9 14 portrays the south as a culture dominated by dueling brawling and mobbing.
for some northerners especially those opposed to slavery the dueling and other violence they associated with the south were a result of the brutality inherent in slavery.
the connection between slavery and southern violence figures prominently in the image which shows a cruel master whipping a helpless slave child.
9 14 southern violence this northern drawing links the brawling and dueling of southerners with the brutal labor regime of slavery.
abolitionist attacks on southern culture often mentioned the pistol and the lash.
what role did honor play in southern culture.
chapter 9 workers farmers and slaves the transformation of the american economy 1815 1848 9 18 woodcut image of nat turners rebellion this image reflects the views of southerners who were horrified by turners uprising.
slavery and the law steal away to jesus.
steal away steal southern state passed its own set of laws or slave away home.
i aint got long to stay here.
each codes governing slavery.
these laws described the my lord calls me he calls me by the property rights of masters slaves were categorized between property and people the duties thunder the trumpet sounds within my somewhere slaves owed to their masters and the punishments for soul i aint got long to stay here various crimes.
although laws varied from state to spiritual steal away to jesus heroic 9 18.
the bottom of the image shows the militia riding to rescue these helpless victims.
many northerners however viewed nat turner as a righteous and heroic warrior against the evil of slavery.
after the rebellion southern states enacted more repressive laws to prevent another revolt.
these laws prevented african americans from preaching and limited the access of free blacks to firearms.
states also strengthened their militias and made assaults by slaves against whites capital offenses.
on the other hand the virginia legislature debated abolishing slavery before voting 73 to 58 against a proposal to end it.
state slave codes generally accorded slaves minimal rights.
these laws curtailed the movements of slaves forbidding them to travel without written permission from their masters.
laws also proscribed teaching slaves to read or write.
slaves had no right to testify in court and planters served as both judge and jury on their plantations meting out punishment.
on rare occasions a slave did obtain a day in court as when a south carolina court ruled that a slave could not be tried for the same crime twice an application of the constitutional prohibition on double jeopardy that was a bedrock of american law.
despite such modest protections however slaves still enjoyed only the slimmest legal protection and remained at the mercy of their masters see choices and consequences conscience or duty.
justice ruffins quandary.
no one can read this decision state v mann so fine and clear in expression so dignified and solemn in its earnestness and so dreadful in its results without feeling at once deep respect for the man and horror for the system abolitionist harriet beecher stowe the key to uncle toms cabin 1853 who was nat turner.
life and labor under slavery choices and consequences conscience or duty.
justice ruffins quandary in 1829 chief justice thomas ruffin of the north carolina supreme court issued his opinion in state v mann a case involving an assault on a slave named lydia by john mann.
lydias owner elizabeth jones instigated the case against mann slaves had no legal standing to bring charges for wounding her slave.
mann had rented lydia from jones and the law recognized that as a temporary owner he did not have the same long term interests in protecting his property.
thus although mann was legally entitled to discipline lydia his power over her was more limited than that of her legal owner.
when mann tried to discipline lydia she ran off.
mann then shot and wounded her.
rather than try to recover monetary damages in a civil trial an option precluded because mann was too poor to pay damages lydias owner pursued criminal charges.
a lower court convicted mann of an assault and battery on lydia and mann then appealed the case to the state supreme court.
state v mann explored legal questions at the heart of slavery.
in deciding how to handle the case justice ruffin faced difficult choices.
choices uphold manns conviction and affirm that the doctrine that a temporary masters power to discipline was limited overrule the lower court and assert that mann had the same legal authority as lydias owner including the right to punish disobedience and affirm that a masters power over slaves was unlimited decide the case on the narrowest grounds possible.
affirm the lower court ruling and avoid sweeping statements about the nature of the masters powers by focusing squarely on the facts the excessive use of force by a disreputable person with a history of violence.
decision ruffin chose to overrule the lower court.
although tempted to sympathize with the plight of slaves and offer them legal protections he argued that the law denied them such protections the power of the master must be absolute to render the submission of the slave perfect to bestow on slaves basic rights would undermine slavery itself.
consequences woodcut image of master shooting slave within five years in state v will ruffins fellow justices partially repudiated his decision.
the case did not dispute ruffins major premise that a slave must be totally submissive but it rejected his claim that the only means to accomplish this goal was to give the master total power.
the court accepted that the masters power was limited and the use of excessive or lethal force to discipline a slave was not protected by the law of slavery.
continuing controversies what role did ideas of justice play in justice ruffins understanding of the rule of law.
most modern scholars agree that the decision in state v mann reflects the fundamental immorality of slavery.
but the controversy over the decision focuses on a more basic question about law itself.
does law simply reflect the dominant power relations of society.
or can the law embody ideals of justice or fairness that are not simply a mask to disguise the naked exercise of power.
ruffins decision reinforced the power of the planter class and many view it as vindicating those who believe that the law is a tool that enables the powerful the masters to dominate the weak the slaves.
however ruffins anguish and the later ruling in state v will might be seen as proof that the rule of law does impose constraints on the powerful.
does the law of slavery support the claim that the law is a tool of the powerful or a constraint on them.
chapter 26.
sds at first embraced the liberal vision of using representative government to implement incremental reforms but in the course of its antiwar protests the group became more radical.
by 1968 new left leaders expressed open admiration for marxist inspired communist revolutionaries like the vietnamese leader ho chi minh and ernesto che guevara a colleague of cuban dictator fidel castro trying to foster revolution in bolivia and the congo.
when student led protests roiled europe and south america in 1968 the american new left assumed they were part of a global youth rebellion that would reshape the world.
once the novelty of student demonstrations wore off getting television reporters to cover their protests required more outlandish theatrics images that increasingly radicalized student leaders eagerly provided.
press scrutiny sometimes backfired however.
nightly news reports of demonstrators hurling bricks and expletives frightened read the document the report of the presidents commission on campus unrest the fractured left moderates who viewed the new left as unpatriotic and dangerous.
the challenge to the liberal vision went beyond the new left.
an emerging counterculture the heir to the beat cultural ethos of the 1950s see chapter 3.
where calvinists stressed predestination the belief that god predetermined our individual destinies including who will and will not be saved finney instead stressed free will peoples ability to seek out salvation through their own efforts.
the idea of perfectionism grew out of his emphasis on free will.
by aiming for perfection finney preached human beings could usher in the millennium.
in contrast to the pessimistic message of calvinism which condemned most people to damnation finney emphasized sobriety and hard work along with his religious message.
his sermons appealed to the expanding middle class and the wealthy.
finney found an especially eager audience in men and women in the cities and towns along the erie canal in upstate new york.
a dramatic revival occurred in rochester new york in 1830 1831.
finney adapted many of the new political techniques associated with jacksonian democracy designed to get voters involved in politics to his revivals.
politicians finney noted get up meetings circulate handbills and pamphlets blaze away in the newspapers the goal of such actions was to stimulate excitement and bring the people out finney and other evangelicals took advantage of the opportunities provided by the market revolution particularly the expansion of the publishing industry to churn out tracts bibles and evangelical periodicals.
organizations such as the american bible society and the american tract society led the way in marketing evangelical publications making an effort to use high quality wood cut images in many of them to visually reinforce the text.
temperance rising levels of alcohol consumption spurred the growth of temperance the reform movement that advocated abstinence from alcohol.
by 1830 consumption of spirits reached an all time high almost seven gallons per person of pure alcohol a year more than twice the amount that the average american drinks today.
alcohol had always been we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created temperate that they are endowed by their creator with certain natural and innocent desires that among these are the appetite for cold water and the pursuit of happiness manifesto of the washington total abstinence societies 1841 how did finney use the tools of the market revolution to further the goals of the second great awakening.
chapter 27 a decade of discord the challenge of the 1960s press only saw their rifles.
the black panthers organized paramilitary patrols that openly carried weapons then legal under california law and newton explained stopped whenever we saw the police questioning a brother or a sister to ensure that no beatings or abuse occurred.
in may 1967 30 armed black panthers filed onto the floor of the california state assembly in sacramento to protest the imminent passage of a law banning the open display of weapons a bill meant to shut down the black panther street patrols.
as security forces disarmed them bobby seale called on black communities of america to rise up as one man by october 1967 newton was under arrest wounded by police during a shoot out and accused of killing a white policeman who died in the melee.
fbi chief j edgar hoover viewed the panthers as the greatest threat to the internal security of the country and used spies to plan raids on panther offices and create rifts within the group to weaken the panthers internally.
when the courts overturned newtons conviction in 1970 he emerged from jail to find the black panthers in shambles.
the womens liberation movement another fracture within the civil rights movement this one between men and women energized the modern womens movement.
when young white female activists began leaving the civil rights movement to join the womens movement they joined a crusade already well underway.
feminists did not speak with one voice but instead offered competing visions of how to empower women.
helen gurley brown and betty friedan each wrote bestsellers that helped re ignite the womens movement which had faltered since the 1920s.
marriage was overrated brown asserted in sex and the single girl a 1962 advice book counseling young single women to explore their sexuality while they im a server of food and a putter on of pants and a bedmaker but who am i a middle class housewife quoted in the feminine mystique 1963 what competing visions did brown and friedan offer on empowering women.
had the chance.
by using their sex appeal intelligently young women could thrive despite earning less than men and having fewer career opportunities.
browns prescription was find a job you liked flirt to get special treatment have your dates pay for everything and wait to get married until your looks start to deteriorate.
friedan also challenged the accepted notion that women should focus solely on homemaking and child rearing.
men were free to make careers enjoy hobbies and engage in politics friedan noted in her 1963 treatise the feminine mystique.
by contrast women never had a chance to be anything else than a housewife mother as they shopped for groceries made beds and drove their children to afterschool activities many wondered is this all unlike brown friedan did not believe that sex could fill the void nor did she urge women to avoid marriage or having children.
instead she believed that women should be able to engage in the full range of meaningful activities available to men.
her analysis resonated strongly among white middleclass women who felt imprisoned within their suburban lives.
brown continued to promote her philosophy of empowerment through sexuality in cosmopolitan a provocative womens magazine that she launched in 1965 friedan took a different path joining the political activists frustrated with the governments failure to fully enforce the civil rights act of 1964 which barred discrimination in employment on the basis of race religion ethnicity or sex.
the new equal employment opportunity commission took complaints of racial discrimination seriously but ignored charges of sexual discrimination.
men are entitled to female secretaries the commission chairman glibly remarked.
in 1966 friedan helped found the national organization for women now to secure equal rights for women in employment education and politics traditionally male domains.
now also wanted to give women control over their own bodies through unfettered access to contraception and legal abortions.
a relatively small organization with only 5 000 members in the late 1960s now nonetheless convinced president johnson to issue an executive order that required government agencies and federal contractors to create affirmative action programs to hire and promote women and minority men.
now also persuaded airlines to stop employing only attractive single women under age 32 as flight attendants.
watch the video video lecture the birth control pill the solution to the worlds problems or sexual chaos.
the fractured left the womens movement grew as younger female activists unhappy with gender discrimination within the civil rights movement and new left took up the cause of female liberation.
collegeage women had participated enthusiastically in freedom summer by teaching in the freedom schools and registering blacks to vote.
women however also performed virtually all the clerical chores and housework for sncc and this gendered allocation of work provoked complaints.
at the height of freedom summer black female sncc workers staged a sit in at a sncc office in atlanta to protest gender discrimination within the civil rights movement.
the assumptions of male superiority are as crippling to the woman as the assumptions of white supremacy are to the negro asserted white activists mary king and casey hayden.
few males took these complaints seriously.
what is the position of women in sncc joked stokely carmichael while relaxing with staffers one evening.
the position of women in sncc is prone the punch line won carmichael appreciative laughter from his male colleagues but this oft repeated story hastened the departure of white female activists.
women in the new left experiencing similar problems with gender discrimination within sds also redirected their energies to the womens movement.
black women were more reluctant to abandon the civil rights movement.
in their view racial oppression affected them more severely than sexual discrimination.
the feminists who founded now lobbied for legislative solutions to womens problems.
in contrast more radicalized feminists steeped in new left ideology and nonviolent tactics adopted a grassroots approach that used consciousness raising heightening awareness of social and political issues to help women understand the universality of our oppression they emphasized changing attitudes rather than lobbying for legislative changes.
to combat the ways that sexism pervaded normal social interactions feminists introduced the word ms into the american lexicon to replace miss or mrs titles that linked a womans identity to her marital status.
when robin morgan brought busloads of women to atlantic city to protest the annual miss america pageant in 1968 she sought maximum media coverage.
demonstrators carried the photograph 27 14 of an attractive naked young woman with lines dividing her body like cuts of beef to protest how beauty pageants dehumanized women.
welcome to the miss america cattle auction they chanted while filling a trash can with bras high heeled shoes fashion magazines and copies of playboy items they believed reinforced the mindless sex object image of women.
in deference to a local ordinance the protesters never set the trash can on fire but from this point onward detractors dismissed feminists as bra burners despite their different styles and messages both moderate and radical feminists had trouble expanding their support beyond the white middle class.
if your husband is a factory worker or a tugboat operator you dont want his job noted democratic congresswoman barbara mikulski to explain why nows emphasis on equality in employment failed to resonate among working class women.
27 14 feminists picket the miss america pageant this satirical portrait of a woman marked up like a side of beef criticizes beauty pageants for reducing a womans value to the quality of her body parts.
how did activists competing visions and media coverage shape the womens liberation movement.
chapter 9 contributed to new ideas about the family and gender roles.
a new concept of domesticity and the related notion that mens and womens proper roles lay in separate spheres of activity became the cornerstone of a new middle class ideal.
society defined the public world of work and politics as male whereas the private world of home and family became womens domain.
female reformers defended the new ideal and attacked the social evils that threatened it.
the new domestic ideal horace bushnell an influential new england minister captured the profound change that transformed american economic and social life when he remarked that the transition from mother anddaughter power to water and steam power is a great one and had produced a complete revolution in domestic life one consequence of the rise of industry was a growing separation between home and workplace.
this change facilitated the rise of a new middleclass ideology that defined womens role as a separate sphere of domesticity.
a cult of true womanhood emerged in which female values were defined in opposition to the aggressive and competitive marketplace.
women were identified with piety motherhood and sexual passivity.
although this ideal was largely unattainable for rural farm women urban working class women and free black women all of whom had to work to maintain even minimal economic subsistence this middle class ideal suffused american culture.
magazines such as godeys ladys book the growing body of middle class advice literature such as catherine beechers treatise on domestic economy and the ubiquitous prints produced by currier and ives all celebrated the new domestic ideal.
lilly martin spenser the most renowned female artist of her day made the new domestic ideal a central theme in her paintings.
rather than depict her subjects in the formal settings garbed in rich velvet clothing and seated in poses borrowed from paintings of royalty and aristocracy characteristic of the family portraits favored by earlier artists spencer often chose intimate scenes of domestic life as her settings.
in domestic happiness she depicts a husband and wife standing before their two sleeping children.
the mothers hand gently touches her husband symbolizing the new domestic ideals emphasis on emotional intimacy between husband and wife 10 8.
she also appears to be gently read the document catherine beecher treatise on domestic economy 10 8 domestic happiness lily martin spencers painting captures the new ideal of domesticity in which women were assigned the role of instilling the values of piety family and sexual passivity.
how does domestic happiness represent the ideal of the family.
chapter 10 revivalism reform and artistic renaissance 1820 1850 literature and popular culture the danger posed by the tyranny of the majority a subject explored in some detail by alexis de tocqueville in democracy in america attracted the attention of intellectuals and writers such as ralph waldo emerson a harvard trained minister who rejected orthodox religion in favor of philosophical exploration.
emersons essays beginning with his manifesto the american scholar enjoined americans to wake up reject the latest fashions of the marketplace and discover the deeper philosophical truths to be found in nature and selfreflection.
within two decades of emersons address nathaniel hawthorne published the scarlet letter 1850 herman melville moby dick 1851 henry david thoreau walden 1854 and walt whitman leaves of grass 1855.
the vigorous intellectual and poetic activity of these writers and thinkers constituted a veritable american renaissance.
some of the best known works of these literary giants explored the problems of american society in a fictional setting.
although a few literary figures crafted rich and sophisticated works of fiction and poetry many now forgotten writers marketed their books to the growing mass audience of readers.
many popular works depicted lurid tales of city life including murder and prostitution.
the marketplace also adapted to the intellectual ferment of the era by creating new institutions devoted to presenting to the people lectures by leading intellectuals including emerson.
in addition to hearing literary figures such as emerson one might also learn about the latest intellectual fads including phrenology a pseudo science that purported to enable practitioners to discern a persons character and intellect from the shape of his or her head.
finally architects explored a variety of different building styles hoping that improvements in the built environment would lead to moral and spiritual uplift.
in some cases architects turned to the lessons of the past looking to the styles of antiquity greek temples or egyptian monuments for inspiration.
those seeking a more exalted and spiritual ideal turned to the medieval period for models.
these ideas influenced everything from cemetery design to country farm houses.
literature and social criticism emersons american scholar address marked the beginning of one of the greatest periods of american literary achievement.
emerson became the leading exponent of the philosophy of transcendentalism a loose set of ideas that looked to nature for inspiration and insights.
the other leading literary figure associated with this movement was henry david thoreau.
in his masterpiece walden thoreau decried the impact of the market on american society.
ostensibly a tale of his effort to get back to nature walden asserted that the mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation.
the greater part of what my neighbors call good i believe in my soul to be bad only by rejecting the numbing conformity of american society the tyranny of the majority and the worldly values of the how did thoreau hawthorne and melville respond to the market revolution.
marketplace could americans rekindle the divine spark in each person.
other american literary figures turned a critical eye to american history and society.
nathaniel hawthorne parodied the excesses of utopian movements in the blithedale romance and explored the shakers views of the family in the shaker bridal see competing visions reactions to shaker gender roles.
in the celestial railroad he took aim at the connections between revivalism and the market revolution.
in this tale an updating of the christian story of the religious pilgrims search for salvation hawthorne provided his spiritual seeker with a comfortable seat on a railroad coach.
rather than patiently wait until arriving at the heavenly city the trains final stop most of the travelers prefer to exit at vanity fair a glittering city that was an epitome of whatever is brilliant gay and literature and popular culture fascinating although they failed to achieve salvation the residents of vanity fair were well supplied with clergy churches and lecturers on the latest topics of discussion and the stores sold the most fashionable goods.
herman melvilles epic novel moby dick told the story of captain ahabs pursuit of a great white whale.
a rich and complex novel ahabs quest provided another metaphor for the search for meaning spiritual fulfillment and truth by those working within an economic system that increasingly treated people as commodities.
as was true for hawthorne melvilles writing grappled with the alienation of americans resulting from the economic changes wrought by the market revolution.
one group melville discussed was the new expanding middle class of clerks for whom ocean reveries provided an escape from their dreary lives.
melville wrote of these cogs in the great machine of industry tied to counters nailed to benches clinched to desks melvilles own experiences at sea not only provided him with details for his tale of the great white whale but also allowed him to escape the fate of those clerks trapped at their desks that he chronicled in his writing.
indeed one of melvilles most famous literary creations was a lowly and alienated clerk bartleby the scrivener a man drained of all creativity and energy who symbolized how commerce could turn individuals into utterly passive victims of larger social and economic forces.
bartleby responds to every request from his employer with the same bored refrain i would prefer not to susana warners the wide wide world 1850 sold more than 40 000 copies in its first year and was reprinted 67 times.
this tale of an orphaned but resourceful child who must find her way in the wider world recast the traditional tale of the christian pilgrim on the road to salvation in terms of the ideals of middle class domesticity.
by discovering her inner strength the heroine demonstrates her talents and virtues.
after proving her determination and character she finds a virtuous man whom she weds thus fulfilling the ideal of domesticity.
this general plotline carries through most of the eras works of sentimental writing and domestic fiction.
domestic fiction mirrored the same cultural values that led to the creation of the first popular board game in american history the mansion of happiness ann abbott the daughter of a massachusetts minister invented the game in 1843 players traveled along a spiral board that led to the mansion of happiness at the center.
if they landed on such desirable spaces as temperance piety and chastity they could move forward.
landing on a space such as idleness sent the player backward.
rather than use dice which were associated with the evil of gambling players used a numbered top to determine how many spaces to move on a turn 10 12.
the game 10 12 the mansion of happiness modern style board games were invented during the period of the market revolution and moral reform to instill values into children.
this popular board game embodied many of the ideals of domestic fiction and prints.
the game sets players on a journey along a path toward piety in which they must avoid sin if they hope to finally arrive at the mansion of happiness.
domestic fiction board games and crime stories many popular writers of hawthorne and melvilles day were women which prompted hawthorne to lash out angrily at the damned mob of scribbling women whose books often sold in the hundreds of thousands many more copies than authors of serious fiction such as hawthorne ever sold.
indeed women had written the top five bestsellers by mid century.
women favored sentimental writing and domestic fiction which were immensely popular.
what ideas about the family and religion are reflected in the mansion of happiness.
chapter 10 10 13 first edition of douglass narrative of the life of frederick douglass an american slave 1845 the eloquence of douglass led some to suggest that his account of his own escape from slavery could not have been written by an exslave.
to underscore that the book was genuine an image of douglass and a copy of his signature are prominently displayed alongside the title page.
revivalism reform and artistic renaissance 1820 1850 shared the ideals of popular prints such as the way of good and evil which also imagined life as a journey along a path between piety and sin see page 283.
although domestic fiction and games such as the mansion of happiness popularized the domestic values esteemed by reformers there was also a market for stories about the very evils these works advised americans to avoid lest they wind up in prison or the asylum.
the new penny press included a host of papers such as the national police gazette and the new york sun whose pages were filled with tales of crime and moral depravity.
literature embraced the sordid as much as the spiritual and crime fiction was especially popular.
george lippards the quaker city or the monks of monk hall a romance of philadelphia life mystery and crime 1845 spun a lurid tale that explored the evils of urban life.
in contrast to susana warner lippard imbued his tale of seduction murder and intrigue with a subtle classconscious critique of the debauched elites who gathered in a dilapidated old mansion monks hall filled with secret passages and murder victims.
the one writer who managed to transform such gothic tales of crime and horror into high art was edgar allan poe.
in stories such as the tell tale heart and the black cat poe explored the psychological dimensions of crime.
why did douglass need to prove that he was the author of his autobiography.
his taut gripping stories were models of literary craftsmanship.
poe brought the techniques of high literature to bear on topics that were usually the province of popular writers.
slaves tell their story slavery in american literature while the writers of the american renaissance were formulating their critique of american society other voices were also entering the expanding literary marketplace.
accounts published by runaway slaves described the brutality of slavery.
the most famous and influential slave autobiography was frederick douglasss narrative of the life of frederick douglass an american slave published in 1845 more than 30 000 copies sold within a decade of its publication.
douglass awakened americans to the injustice of slavery by exposing the cruelties of it as i had myself felt them the accuracy of his account was a key element of its appeal but critics questioned his books authenticity.
douglass thus went to great lengths to prove that it was not an abolitionist hoax.
indeed douglass worried that his eloquence might itself be used as proof that a former slave could not have written the book.
to establish his credibility douglass included a daguerreotype image of himself a forerunner of modern photography a copy of his signature a sign of his literacy and two testimonials swearing that the narrative was indeed authentic 10 13.
harriet jacobss incidents in the life of a slave girl was published under the pen name linda brent.
jacobs had escaped to freedom in 1842 but it took almost another two decades for her to improve her writing to the point where she could publish an account of her ordeal under slavery.
she described her purpose in writing in forceful terms i have not written my experiences in order to attract attention to myself on the contrary literature and popular culture it would have been more pleasant to me to have been silent about my own history undaunted she felt compelled to add my testimony to that of abler pens to convince the people of the free states what slavery really is.
jacobss account of her life particularly the firsthand accounts of the sexual predations of white southerners on black women exposed the plight of female slaves.
lyceums and lectures josiah holbrook a teacher and lecturer began the lyceum movement in 1826 named after the place in ancient athens where the philosopher aristotle lectured to his pupils the lyceum movement provided a forum for public lectures and debates on intellectual issues.
by 1834 more than 3 000 lyceums appeared in towns and cities across america.
as transportation improved with the rise of the railroad the lyceum movement created a national market for speakers on topics of general interest.
an especially popular lecture topic was phrenology a pseudoscience that focused on the relationship between the bumps and shape of the human head and character and personality.
americans could pay to have their heads analyzed by phrenologists at salons in major cities and towns.
by the 1850s the american phrenological journal had a circulation of more than 50 000 phrenology became an american obsession in the mid nineteenth century.
phrenological heads made of plaster or ceramic were commonplace decorations in many american homes prompting the boston christian examiner in 1834 to complain that heads of chalk inscribed with mystic numbers disfigured every mantelpiece few of these were as striking as this impressive folk sculpture of a young girls head with the different zones of the cranium colored according to phrenological theory 10 14.
phrenology also attracted the notice of many leading public figures such as supreme court justice joseph story the moral reformer horace mann and the artist hiram powers.
godeys ladys book even advised women to use hats and other head coverings to hide or accentuate their phrenological character.
phrenology appealed to americans at a time when the nation was experiencing rapid change.
in particular it spoke to the fears of urban americans who increasingly lived and worked in a world filled with strangers.
the new market economy opened up countless opportunities for swindlers and rogues prompting a new term confidence man someone who exploited a strangers trust to fleece him of his property or money.
although one might dress like a member of the respectable middle class appearances were often deceiving and the rise of the confidence man was symbolic of the danger posed by the anonymous world of the market.
phrenology promised to allow one to see beyond appearances into a persons true character and thus past the masks and disguises of confidence men 10 14 phrenological head this colorful folk sculpture of a young girls head included hand painted zones that phrenologists believed controlled human emotion and behavior.
why was phrenology so popular during this period.
chapter 27 went to the hospital he had doctors put a large bandage on his broken nose.
landsmark knew that the appearance of severe injuries would draw more press attention.
the portrait of raw racial hatred captured in the photograph and landsmarks heavily bandaged face at how does this photograph compare to the images of racial violence in the south seen in earlier chapter review 1839 1843 1845 1847 thomas cole publishes his essay on american scenery joseph smith leads the mormons to illinois and founds the mormon city of nauvoo publication of frederick douglasss autobiography seneca falls convention cole defends the value of nature and helps define an american vision of art mormons establish a utopian settlement douglasss popular narrative of his life as a slave expose the evils of slavery womens rights advocates gather to demand legal equality for women oneida community established in new york founding of one of the most radical utopian experiments millerite william miller predicts the end of the world the millerites are dispirited and the movement collapses.
elements of their belief are picked up by the seventh day adventists myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of democrats and whigs.
questions for analysis 1 what do american concerns about intemperance reveal about cultural anxieties in the era of the market revolution.
watch the video video lecture drinking and the temperance movement p 286 2 why did horace mann believe education could transform america and eliminate most social ills.
other resources from this chapter 1.
the image of the noble indian chief had been propagated by artists such as benjamin west in the death of general wolfe see chapter 11 11 5 the nauvoo temple the mormon temple at nauvoo stood on the highest point of land in the new town and towered over the surrounding landscape.
its architecture includes greek revival elements masonic symbolism and ideas inspired by mormon theology.
overspread the continent westward expansion and political conflict 1840 1848 in nauvoo.
as this contemporary image shows the temple 11 5 dominated the landscape around it.
as smith and his followers faced increasing hostility from their non mormon neighbors the church also encountered internal dissent.
when dissident mormons founded an anti smith paper in nauvoo smith who was also the mayor of nauvoo ordered the city marshal and nauvoo militia to shut down the paper and destroy its printing press.
the governor of illinois then ordered the state militia to seize smith and bring him to carthage illinois for trial.
while awaiting trial an angry crowd burst into smiths jail cell and shot him to death.
smiths successor brigham young decided to move the entire mormon community to the west beyond the reach of the churchs critics.
some 16 000 mormons eventually migrated to the salt lake valley of what is now utah.
youngs organizational skills and an almost military discipline among his people helped them negotiate the difficult journey.
it also helped the mormons survive and in their new environment.
during the first years of settlement when food rationing became necessary young confiscated how did mormon communalism affect their experiences at nauvoo.
food surpluses and distributed them to those in need.
mormon communalism again helped the community through a difficult time.
over time the mormons built an economic and religious community that combined communalism and private enterprise.
safely ensconced in the great salt lake basin far beyond the control of the federal government they also began openly to practice polygamy the practice of men taking more than one wife.
brigham young himself took over 20 wives.
polygamy shocked americans particularly in an era when the dominant culture venerated the conventional nuclear family and the cult of true womanhood see chapter 8.
polk shared jacksons view of the importance of a strong executive and his belief in the necessity and inevitability of western expansion.
he also shared jacksons racial views which watch the video video lecture the annexation of texas american expansionism into the southwest 11 9 mexican war rmont sonoma f this map depicts the major offensan francisco sives of the war.
unorganized territory fort leavenworth frmont el brazito r a rka n s a s r disputed by texas and mexico el paso kearny san diego territory las vegas albuquerque san pasqual s tat e s indian santa f los angeles united red r republic of pi santa barbara y mississip ke a r n bents fort texas ri o gra new orleans e f lf o chihuahua ca n ue lif a n u s sa tampico nta mexico city na vy an na scott ott sc san luis potosi gulf of mexico lor tay annexed by united states in 1845 included support for american forces slavery and disregard mexican forces for native american american victory rights.
indeed former mexican victory president john quincy adams who had become a prominent whig congressman denounced polk as a slave holding exterminator of indians polk wasted little time in acting on his expansionist vision.
polk first moved to acquire oregon an area that the united states and britain had been wrangling over for decades.
polk had campaigned on the slogan fifty four forty or fight a reference to the u s demand that the geographical boundary separating oregon from british canada be fixed at the latitude 54 40.
ultimately polk agreed to a border further south that extended across the 49th parallel.
this shrewd compromise secured the most valuable agricultural lands sought by american settlers.
the oregon settlement in 1846 enabled polk to focus his attention on mexico.
as the ardently pro expansion democratic paper the new york herald noted we can now thrash mexico into decency at our leisure the annexation of texas in 1845 had left open the question of the exact boundary between the united states and mexico.
polk sent john slidell a lawyer and democratic politician to mexico to settle the boundary question and debts that mexicans owed to americans.
slidell was also instructed to santa anna mazatlan matamoros santa anna ni ea buena vista san lucas palo alto monterrey mexico la paz san jose corpus christi ces r taylor or oc vy na ic.
u s cif nd gu pa 1836 45 san antonio jalapa veracruz cerro gordo puebla inquire about buying california and new mexico.
this aggressive negotiating posture reflected polks expansionist desires.
he and his advisors feared that mexico might pay off part of its debts by ceding california to britain americas chief commercial rival.
by being so belligerent polk ensured that the negotiations would fail.
still angry over the loss of texas mexicans were not interested in losing any further land.
the specific issue dividing the united states and mexico was the exact boundary between texas and mexico.
the mexican government claimed the southern boundary of texas was the nueces river not the rio grande as the united states maintained 11 9.
the rio grande would give texas more territory at the expense of mexico.
polk dispatched american troops under general zachary taylor into the disputed zone between the two rivers.
when a small group of mexican forces attacked taylors troops on april 25 1846 polk informed congress that mexico has passed the boundary of the united states and shed american blood on american soil congress formally declared war on mexico on may 13 view the map interactive map the mexican war 1846 1848 how did polk purse his expansionist agenda.
chapter 28 he saw no other option.
his decision angered many conservative republicans and some never forgave him.
read my lips i lied ran one new york post headline.
the combination of a huge deficit and an unfriendly democratic majority in congress discouraged bush from proposing dramatic new domestic initiatives.
a revolution of sorts nonetheless occurred when bush signed the americans with disabilities act a 1990 civil rights law that prohibited discrimination against the disabled in employment public accommodations and telecommunications.
the disabled gained unprecedented freedom of movement as legally required elevators ramps and sloped curbs became commonplace.
which gender and racial issues dominated the headlines in the early 1990s.
during the campaign bush had courted the conservative wing of the republican party by promising to appoint like minded judges.
he fulfilled this pledge by nominating a conservative african american judge clarence thomas to the supreme court when thurgood marshall the courts first african american justice retired.
controversy erupted when anita hill a former colleague accused thomas of sexual harassment and thomas responded by calling the televised confirmation hearings a high tech lynching the senate ultimately confirmed thomas by a narrow majority in 1991 with workplace sexual harassment front page news an unprecedented number of women won congressional seats in the 1992 elections including the first female african american senator carol mosley braun a democrat from illinois.
while the thomas hearings exposed gender discord the 1991 los angeles riots brought simmering racial and ethnic tensions to the surface.
in march a 78 mile car chase along los angeles freeways ended with white police brutally beating rodney king an african american when he resisted arrest for speeding.
a nearby resident captured the incident on film but americans differed on what the video revealed 29 3.
most blacks and some sympathetic whites saw a poorly trained and racist police force that harassed blacks echoing complaints that had set off the watts riots in 1965 see chapter the slavery question in the territories p 342 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter 17 and dorothea lange during the depression see chapter 12 slavery and sectionalism the political crisis of 1848 1861 this surge in immigration caused antiimmigrant sentiment or nativism native born americans belief in their superiority to the foreign born to rise sharply.
as images as history the foreign menace shows americans were upset not merely by the number of immigrants arriving but also by their perceived character.
although most immigrants in previous decades had been protestants from britain many of them with money and skills a large majority of immigrants in the 1840s and 1850s were poor unskilled catholics from germany and ireland.
anti catholicism with roots in american history going back to the nations earliest european founders surged into near hysteria.
some of the best selling books in the antebellum period charged that catholicism with its emphasis on clerical authority and loyalty to the pope in rome was incompatible with democracy.
nativists those born in the united states also feared that immigrants took american jobs drank too much alcohol refused to assimilate and increased poverty disease and crime.
the ill clad and destitute irishman is repulsive to our habits and our tastes the christian examiner n y 1848 anti immigrant sentiment reached a fever pitch in 1854 with the emergence of the american party.
its core constituents were members of secret antiimmigrant societies founded in cities in the late 1840s.
because secrecy required them to answer i know nothing when asked about their organization they earned the name know nothings their political platform condemned both political parties as hopelessly corrupt and called for legislation restricting office to native born citizens barring public funds for parochial schools and raising the period of naturalization for citizenship from five to 21 years.
with the whig party in decline and the democrats closely associated with the immigrant vote know nothings achieved stunning success in 1854 winning control of the state governments in delaware pennsylvania and massachusetts.
about 75 know nothing congressmen were sent to washington.
elections one year later in 1855 saw the party what anti immigrant laws did the american party propose.
win maryland and kentucky elect scores of nativists in new york and california and post impressive tallies across the south.
after the elections of 1854 the big question was which of these two new political forces antislavery republicans or anti immigrant know nothings would replace the defunct whig party.
but the american party disintegrated almost as quickly as it arose splitting like the whig party along sectional lines over slavery.
most of its members eventually joined the republican party.
although many former members retained their dislike of foreigners they perceived the growing aggression of the slave power as a greater threat to the nations well being.
this threat seemed most menacing in the newly created territory of kansas.
ballots and blood even as opponents denounced douglass plan to allow popular sovereignty to decide the status of slavery in the territories they devised a plan to ensure the results went their way.
we will engage in competition for the virgin soil of kansas william seward warned his southern colleagues in congress just before passage of the kansas nebraska act and god give victory to the side which is stronger in numbers as in right wealthy new england abolitionists established the emigrant aid company and financed the migration of more than 2 000 antislavery settlers to kansas.
thousands more went on their own.
proslavery interests however proved equal to the task of opposing them.
to offset the soaring numbers of northern settlers in kansas they organized bands of proslavery border ruffians to cross into kansas from missouri.
although some came as settlers most were illegal voters determined to see kansas enter the union as a slave state.
in spring 1855 men from missouri cast nearly 5 000 illegal votes helping elect a proslavery territorial government that gathered in the town of lecompton and legalized slavery.
antislavery settlers rejected the legitimacy of this bogus legislature in fall 1855 they drew up a freestate constitution held elections that resulted in an antislavery legislature and governor located in the town of lawrence and asked congress to admit the territory as a free state.
kansas now had two governments bitterly opposed to each other.
kansas quickly became a divisive issue in congress.
although the senate controlled by political realignment images as history the foreign menace from the colonial period up to the present americans have held conflicted visions about immigration.
on the one hand americans proudly view their country as a nation of immigrants that has incorporated millions of newcomers while fashioning an ethos of tolerance.
on the other periods of virulent anti immigrant sentiment have punctuated american history.
in the 1840s and 1850s nativists native born americans who believed themselves superior to the foreign born mobilized to oppose immigration.
although they failed by clothing the irishman and german in whiskey and beer barrels the artist reflects the widely held view that immigrants drank too much alcohol.
to stop the mass influx of foreigners their movement revealed a vision of immigration as a serious threat to the well being of the republic.
the cartoon below reflects the belief that immigrants represented a threat to american democracy.
the drawing beneath it expresses the fear that catholic immigrants were part of a conspiracy to claim america for the pope.
what attitudes and actions might these kinds of images have inspired among native born americans.
the theft of the ballot box reveals the nativist fear of the rising political power of immigrants in the 1850s.
the brawl at the polling site suggests that immigrants threaten democracy because they use violence rather than persuasion to win elections.
immigrants as a threat to democracy c 1850 borrowed from the great seal of the united states this eagle emphasizes the importance of public schools to american democracy.
placing the bible under the popes foot played on the belief that catholic priests and bishops prohibited people from reading the bible on their own something protestants believed essential to salvation.
declaring catholicism un american the artist presents the pope as the antithesis of republican authority a royal figure seated on a throne.
alleging a papal plot to overthrow america the pope points to the public school while a priest in the schoolyard organizes an attack.
popery undermining free schools and other american institutions 1855 watch the video video lecture burn down the convent why did anti immigrant sentiment rise in the 1850s.
chapter 29 29 14 the world trade center collapses this photograph conveyed the panic that spread through lower manhattan as rubble and smoke from the collapsing world trade center towers rained down on the streets.
building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 government turned bin laden over to the united states.
pentagon officials opposed sustained bombing worried that mounting civilian casualties would inflame anti american sentiments throughout the middle east.
assassinating bin laden others argued would turn him into a martyr whose death fundamentalists would certainly avenge.
faced with these conflicting views clinton chose to rely on the cia to thwart terrorist attacks against u s targets overseas.
these covert agents uncovered several planned attacks but failed to prevent al qaeda from sending a small explosiveladen boat into the side of the uss cole a destroyer which was anchored near the middle eastern how did the nation and government respond to the 9 11 attacks.
country of yemen.
the october 12 2000 assault killed 17 sailors and injured 40 clinton left office still waiting for verification that al qaeda was behind this attack.
incoming president george w bush received that confirmation but had not settled on a response when al qaeda struck again on september 11 2001.
9 11 on the morning of september 11 2001 in an attack that became known as 9 11 19 terrorists operating from al qaeda cells inside the united states hijacked four planes.
the terrorists from saudi arabia egypt lebanon and the united arab emirates flew two planes into the world trade center towers and a third into the pentagon.
the fourth plane crashed in shanksville pennsylvania after the passengers seized control of the cockpit thwarting the terrorist plan to fly it into the capitol.
on this day of terror americans watched in horror as the world trade center towers crumbled causing rescue workers victims and onlookers to run for safety as the massive structures collapsed in a heap 29 14.
a total of 2 973 people died in the attacks.
president bush immediately announced that we will make no distinction between the terrorists who committed these acts and those who harbor them he issued an ultimatum to afghanistans taliban government turn over al qaeda members living there including bin laden or face invasion.
the taliban refused.
receiving overwhelming support from congress the american people and most foreign nations the united states attacked afghanistan on october 7 2001 u s forces first bombed al qaeda training camps and arms depots and then joined with the northern alliance an afghan rebel group to drive the taliban from power.
the two month conflict failed however to capture bin laden who had likely escaped into the mountains of neighboring pakistan with help from pakistani sympathizers.
most americans had supported the invasion but many grew uneasy about how the bush administration was conducting the war.
these critics accused bush of condoning torture by allowing cia agents to use water boarding an interrogation tactic that simulated drowning to try to extract information from captured al qaeda suspects held prisoner at the u s naval base in guantnamo bay in cuba.
the decision to incarcerate captured prisoners indefinitely at guantnamo bay denying them the right to a fair trial also aroused controversy.
read the document george bush address to congress september 20 2001 new threats in the post cold war world responding to criticism that the nations security agencies had failed to prevent the 9 11 attack the president created the department of homeland security a new umbrella organization that housed the nations intelligence gathering and law enforcement agencies.
he also secured congressional approval for the 2001 patriot act which expanded the governments investigative and police powers.
critics soon attacked the law as an unconstitutional assault on civil liberties.
this 2002 political cartoon by pulitzer prize winner clay bennett 29 15 exposed a familiar wartime dilemma how to protect the nation against enemy agents operating on american soil while simultaneously safeguarding the privacy rights of americans.
in the cartoon determined federal workers remove planks from a couples home to build a security fence exposing their personal lives to public scrutiny.
in the weeks after the 9 11 attacks the fbi arrested hundreds of arabs and muslims in an effort to destroy any remaining al qaeda cells in the united states.
acting hastily and often on flimsy evidence the fbi caught innocent people in its dragnet and some spent months in jail before being released.
scores of arab americans like japanese americans in world war ii hung american flags outside their businesses to counter suspicions that all muslims were terrorists.
in 2007 a federal court overturned the sections of the patriot act that made it easier for the government to secure search warrants as well as internet and phone records.
29 15 security versus privacy this cartoon suggests that invading the privacy of americans under the guise of increasing security worsened rather than improved their lives.
the iraq war americas war on terror soon spread to iraq.
containing saddam husseins ambition to acquire weapons of mass destruction nuclear chemical and biological weapons had been an ongoing goal since the end of the 1991 persian gulf war.
in 1998 the un halted its weapons inspection program after iraq refused to continue cooperating.
president clinton subsequently authorized operation desert fox a four day how do governmental efforts to prevent internal enemy attacks after 9 11 compare to those during world wars i and ii.
chapter review al qaeda launches 9 11 attacks iraq war begins economic downturn begins tea party emerges united states begins war on terror overseas and at home preemptive war puts u s troops in iraq indefinitely economists predict worst financial crisis since the great depression grassroots conservative movement emphasizes limited government barack obama elected president health insurance overall congress passes the patriot act americans debate whether law protects nation or violates civil liberties first african american elected president establishes universal healthcare system myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of building a new world order.
questions for analysis 1 why does wilson conclude that class matters more than race in explaining urban poverty.
read the document william julius wilson the urban underclass p 880 2 how did the president justify military action against iraq in 1991.
other resources from this chapter 13 a nation torn apart the civil war 1861 1865 envisioning evidence human resources in the armies of the civil war at the outset of the civil war the union possessed roughly two and a half times the population of the confederacy 23 million vs 9 million.
this advantage translated into an immediate and lasting military advantage as it allowed the union to field a much larger army and navy throughout the course of the war.
indeed as the data below shows this manpower advantage increased over the course of the four year conflict in part because of the lincoln administrations decision to allow african americans to serve in the military and the confederacys resistance to this idea until the last weeks of the war.
the union also enjoyed a much larger and steadily increasing population of immigrants from which to draw fresh recruits.
had the war lasted two or three years these differences in manpower might not have had played such an important role in determining its outcome.
but it lasted four years and it was in the last one that the manpower disparity became most pronounced and significant in determining the final outcome.
relative military strength 1862 1865 698 808 the unions advantage in population 2 5 times greater than the confederacy is reflected in its ability to field a much larger army throughout the war.
527 204 number of soldiers thousands because the confederacy largely fought a defensive war it did not need to match the union soldier for soldier in order to win.
253 208 620 924 611 250 the surging number of union troops in 1863 reflected the imposition of the draft and the decision to allow african americans into the army.
desertions caused much of the decline in confederate forces as many as 100 000 deserted in 1864 1865.
confederate leaders in 1864 responded by expanding the age range of men eligible for the draft to 17 to 50 from 18 to 35 in 1862.
both sides suffered huge numbers of casualties in the fierce fighting of 1864 but the union was able to replace its fallen soldiers far more easily than the confederacy.
233 586 209 852 154 910 year composition of union and confederate military african americans as a percentage of overall regional population the 198 000 african american soldiers and sailors who served the union provided a vital source of manpower to the war effort.
the confederacys reluctance to arm slaves until march 1865 by which time it was too late left untapped a huge portion of the southern population 39 percent.
african americans as a percentage of military personnel southerners claimed the union relied heavily on immigrants for its army.
but it was the confederacy that drew proportionally more soldiers from its foreign born population.
immigrants comprised 7 5 percent of the souths population but 10 percent of the confederate army.
in the union immigrants made up 31 percent of the population but comprised just 26 percent of its soldiers.
foreign born as a percentage of overall regional population percentage of foreignborn of total military personnel percent confederate sources james mcpherson ordeal by fire new york knopf 1982 james mcpherson battle cry of freedom new york oxford university press 1988 u s census historical statistics.
how did the unions 2 1 advantage over the confederacy in overall population play a role in winning the war.
union toward union victory by mid 1863 the inherent weaknesses of the confederate economy began to show.
the union blockade which had stopped only one in eight confederate ships in 1862 grew increasingly effective.
by 1864 it stopped one out of every three confederate blockade runners and half of them by 1865 the impact on the import dependent southern economy was devastating.
civilians and soldiers alike suffered shortages of food clothing and equipment.
the growing success of the union blockade also exposed a critical miscalculation made by the davis administration in 1861 the embargo on cotton exports failed because britain possessed a surplus of cotton in 1861 and later found alternative sources in egypt and india.
moreover english workers including an estimated half million who lost their jobs due to cotton shortages expressed strong sympathy for the union and thereby made british intervention on behalf of the confederacy politically controversial.
when the south finally lifted the embargo in 1862 the union blockade was much stronger.
the confederacys economic dilemma posed a serious threat to its chances for success.
it desperately needed hard currency to buy ships weapons ammunition and other supplies for the war.
but the main product it had to sell cotton was bottled up in southern ports unable to reach markets in europe.
this conundrum is captured in the image 13 15 that adorned cotton bonds authorized for sale by the confederacy in europe.
a southern version of columbia holds the confederate flag and leans on cotton bales while looking out to sea at a patrolling union ship.
in exchange for cash usually 90 percent of face value investors were promised payment in southern cotton with interest.
the plan brought in the state of despondency that now prevails among our people is producing a bad effect upon the troops.
desertions are becoming very frequent robert e lee february 24 1865 only 7 million to the confederate treasury far less than needed.
the emancipation proclamation also shook southern society as lincoln had hoped it would.
inspired by word that freedom was at hand thousands of slaves left their places of bondage and headed for the union army or to the northern states exacerbating the confederacys labor shortage and further weakening southern agriculture.
despite these hardships the confederacy remained undefeated and the longer confederates defended their independence the greater their chances of success.
for even as the union won major victories at gettysburg and vicksburg discontent and war weariness among northerners grew.
if lincoln hoped to preserve the union he needed more military victories and soon.
victory in battle and at the polls the key to winning the war lincoln realized was effective military leadership.
after suffering many disappointments and near disasters with a succession of poor generals lincoln finally found his man 13 15 cotton for sale.
a confederate version of columbia a precursor to lady liberty leans on cotton bales that cannot reach european markets due to the union blockade represented by the ship passing on the horizon.
this image was featured on cotton bonds sold in europe to raise cash for the confederacy.
read the document the working men of manchester england write to president lincoln on the question of slavery in 1862 how did the union blockade affect the confederate war effort.
chapter 15 conflict and conquest the transformation of the west 1860 1900 natives and newcomers inspired by visions of unlimited opportunity and measures of congress like the homestead act westward migration increased dramatically after the civil war.
contrary to the popular notions of a vacant landscape much of the west was home to hundreds of thousands of native americans.
their many languages lifestyles and religious practices made for a rich cultural landscape but also conflict with the rising numbers of newcomers.
congress promotes westward settlement in 1862 congress passed three major bills to facilitate settlement of the trans mississippi west the vast region of the united states west of the mississippi river.
the morrill land grant college act of 1862 created a system whereby funds raised by the sale of public land went toward establishing colleges specializing in agricultural mechanical and technological education.
far more significant however was the homestead act.
it provided 160 acres of free land to any settler willing to live on it and improve it for five years.
farmers with more capital could buy the land for 1 25 per acre after living on it for only six months.
those who took advantage of the program included immigrants landless farmers from the east single women and ex slaves.
by making available more than 600 million acres of public land to be settled and farmed the homestead act touched off the largest migration of people ever within the united states.
advertisements and promotional literature produced by land companies and railroads convinced many people to head west to acquire homesteads.
like this image 15 1 which ap peared in a czech language magazine these enticements promised rapid success.
note the year by year progression that begins with a barren farm and humble house.
by the fourth year the landscape features not only a substantial house and flourishing farm but also trees a road and more homes suggesting that the loneliness of life on the plains will be short lived.
one year later a church steeple appears further suggesting the development of a community and all the blessings of civilization.
but the actual results of the homestead act varied widely by region.
on the great plains and the lands farther west regions with a harsh climate poor soil inconsistent supplies of water and limited access to transportation farmers who participated in the homestead act often went bankrupt.
by contrast the act worked well in the northern and central portions of the midwest where the soil and the climate were favorable to farming.
some people prospered from the homestead act in ways not intended by congress.
many homesteaders were actually speculators who claimed their 160 acres with the intention of selling them for a quick profit in a few years.
larger enterprises like railroads and real estate companies accumulated vast land holdings by buying out farmers who failed or paying people to file homestead claims and then buying the land from them.
the homestead act did indeed attract farmers to the west but by 1900 only 52 percent of original homestead claimants had acquired legal title to the land.
the third major piece of legislation passed by congress in 1862 to promote western development the pacific railway act created two corporations to build the transcontinental railroad spanning the continent.
the union pacific was to build west 15 1 homesteads and the promise of success in the west the b and m railroad paid for this advertisement which appeared in a czech magazine.
its six panels showing extraordinary year by year progress of a typical homesteading family were intended to draw settlers to nebraska.
why did the homestead act have uneven results.
read the document homestead act of 1862 natives and newcomers from omaha nebraska across the plains and the rockies to meet the central pacific which was to build from california through the sierra nevada mountains.
to help the railroad corporations raise capital to pay for the road congress granted them ten square miles of land in a checkerboard pattern with the federal government retaining ownership of the remaining sections for every mile of track completed.
the law also granted the railroads cheap loans and cash subsidies for each mile of track laid.
it took six years of low paid hard and dangerous work by huge gangs of workers especially irish and chinese to complete the project.
scores were killed.
on may 10 1869 a grand ceremony marking the union of the two lines took place at promontory point utah.
at the appointed moment leland stanford president of the central pacific drove a symbolic golden spike into place joining two rails one placed by a team of chinese workers and another by an irish crew.
telegraph wires attached to the sledge hammer and spike sent a signal across the nation announcing the long anticipated news the continent had been spanned.
keenly aware of the historic nature of the event railroad officials staged this iconic photograph 15 2 showing the workers and locomotives of the union pacific and central pacific.
it soon appeared in numerous publications often as a lithograph.
conspicuously absent from the photograph however are any of the thousands of chinese workers who labored on the central pacific.
the diversity of the native american west as this map of the trans mississippi west 15 3 on page 442 shows white settlers heading west encountered native americans belonging to hundreds of different tribes that comprised some 360 000 persons.
that number was significantly lower than it had been a century earlier reflecting the impact of earlier european contact starting with the spanish french and russians that brought conflict and 15 2 the continent spanned conscious of the historic significance of the event workers and officials of the union pacific and central pacific railroads pose for a photograph while celebrating the completion of the transcontinental railroad in 1869 why did the federal government provide land and loans to the companies that built the transcontinental railroad.
chapter the emergence of big business p 470 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter 16 wonder and woe the rise of industrial america 1865 1900 ward steadily expanded his list of offerings.
by 1884 his broadsheet was now a catalog featuring some 10 000 items.
by this time a rival mail order company run by richard w sears and alvah c roebuck had begun operation.
eager to reach this new market established department stores like macys in new york jordan marsh in boston and marshall fields in chicago brought out their own mail order catalogs.
the reach of corporate retailing beyond urban centers and into rural america where most americans lived until 1920 marked the emergence of a mass market.
whereas americans had long shared a common language and republican political culture they now developed a shared consumer culture.
exposed to the same advertising images and appeals millions of americans in different parts of the country began to adopt the same fashions develop the same habits cigarette smoking for example and purchase the same newfangled contraptions including more than one million bicycles a year in the 1890s.
selling to the world as the nations industrial production soared to unprecedented heights manufacturers searched for new markets for their goods.
the united states had long been an exporter of agricultural products like cotton and wheat but the leading trend after the civil war was the export of manufactured goods.
the total value of exports rose between 1870 and 1900 from 450 million to 1 5 billion with the percentage of manufactured goods rising from 15 to 32 percent.
in addition to selling produce and goods overseas american business interests also began to invest heavily in business ventures in foreign countries.
by 1897 americans had invested 635 million in overseas mines plantations oil wells and increasingly manufacturing plants 94 million.
by the 1890s the singer sewing machine co was an international corporation 16 9.
with factories in scotland and the united states singer sold its machines throughout the world.
note how the advertisements text the singer seam unites two continents and angelic female figures suggest that the company is pursuing humanitarian as well as capitalist goals.
farm equipment giant international harvester likewise opened factories in canada and sweden.
the globalization of the american economy brought many benefits to workers consumers and investors.
but it also contributed to the growing sentiment in the 1890s that the united states needed to become an imperial power to protect overseas investments and ensure that markets in asia africa and latin america remained open see chapter 16 wonder and woe the rise of industrial america 1865 1900 poverty an influential book that addressed one of the central questions of the age must industrial and technological progress be accompanied by increased poverty.
if so he warned american democracy was doomed.
george claimed that the monopolization of resources especially of land by powerful elites was to blame for the eras growing social inequality and class conflict.
few people understood or supported georges unorthodox solution a single tax on land values but his vivid diagnosis of the rising clash between labor and capital and his vision of a more equitable social order gained him an enormous following in the 1880s and turned progress and poverty into a bestseller.
edward bellamy achieved similar fame as a critic of laissez faire capitalism with his novel looking backward 2000 1887.
published in 1887 it told the story of julian west who like rip van winkle in another era falls asleep in 1887 and awakens in 2000 to his astonishment he finds american society transformed into a socialist utopia.
the class conflict poverty and economic inequality of the late nineteenth century are gone.
the government controlled the economy eliminating destructive competition and providing a comfortable living for all citizens.
bellamys book became a bestseller and his largely middle class followers established nearly 500 clubs to spread its message.
power in numbers organized labor less famous but more influential than critics like george and bellamy were the protests of those most buffeted by the industrial revolution workers.
through the pages of labor newspapers and in speeches at worker rallies and in actions such as strikes american workers articulated a sharp critique of the new industrial order.
a few were socialists but most supported the broad ideals of a free market economy.
their protest stemmed from the growing conviction that greedy monopolists in league with unscrupulous politicians had seized control of the economy and bent it toward their own advantage.
as a result argued workers they received a shrinking portion of the wealth they created while working longer hours in increasingly inhumane conditions.
try as they might these workers claimed the upward mobility celebrated by what conditions led to rapid membership growth in the knights of labor.
andrew carnegie and horatio alger was less and less attainable.
unsettled and angered by their declining power in the face of big business american workers renewed their efforts to organize labor unions.
in 1869 philadelphia garment cutters formed the noble and holy order of the knights of labor kol an organization that called for many of the same reforms as the nlu but added a long list of radical even utopian goals.
for example it advocated replacing the existing competitive industrial system with an economy based on cooperation.
in addition unlike the nlus emphasis on craft workers the kol was an industrial union open to all workers including unskilled wage earners immigrants and eventually women and african americans.
its leaders believed that fundamental social change was impossible unless this broad spectrum of workers joined forces.
to overcome employer hostility the organization adopted a policy of strict secrecy that necessitated holding meetings in clandestine locations.
this requirement however combined with the depression of 1873 1877 hindered its growth.
by 1879 it counted just 10 000 members most in pennsylvania.
but two key developments that year propelled the kol to become the worlds largest industrial union.
first the national economy recovered providing wage earners with a measure of economic security that allowed them to form and join local unions in huge numbers.
second a young machinist named terence powderly became the kols leader or grandmaster workman.
powderly was a superb organizer and gifted orator who in 1882 abolished the kols secrecy rule a decision that made it possible to recruit thousands of new members and fend off accusations from employers politicians and religious leaders that the kol was a sinister and conspiratorial organization.
membership soared to 42 000 in 1882 on its way to an eventual peak of more than 700 000 in late 1886.
what drew many workers to the organization was the kols sharp critique of laissez faire capitalism and emphasis on economic justice and democracy.
its constitution decried the recent alarming development and aggression of aggregated wealth by industrialists bankers and stock speculators warning that it would soon lead to the pauperization and hopeless degradation of the toiling masses see images as history why fear big business read the document henry george progress and poverty conflicting visions of industrial capitalism images as history why fear big business.
people retain its legitimacy when big business exercised so much power and answered to no public officials and no voters.
other americans focused on the plight of the worker under such a system.
how could workers resist the power of large employers to slash wages increase hours and ignore safety issues.
could the united states endure as a republic if these citizens were reduced to desperate poverty while a few wealthy families reveled in luxury.
these concerns are on full display in this vivid political cartoon from puck magazine.
as large corporations emerged in the gilded age the late nineteenth century period of rapid economic growth many americans grew concerned about their power and influence.
some focused on the fact that large corporations and the immensely powerful men that ran them people like john d rockefeller and william h vanderbilt operated beyond the control of laws and democratic institutions.
did this not mean they asked that the republic was in danger.
how could a democracy a society governed by the will of the the artist represents the horse of monopoly as a huge golden locomotive.
railroads were the original big businesses and the largest corporations.
they were also at the center of the eras biggest corruption scandals and strikes.
in contrast the shoeless american worker sits on a scrawny horse labeled poverty big business and monopoly are depicted as a knight a symbol of european aristocracy and the antithesis of republicanism.
his plume carries the word arrogance note how this figure stands in sharp contrast with the much smaller humble worker.
in a section labeled reserved for capitalists sits a collection of the nations most powerful businessmen including cyrus field william h vanderbilt and jay gould.
note the joy they seem to take in seeing the american worker destroyed.
this huge seemingly endless crowd symbolizes the american people who clearly outnumber the handful of capitalists on the left.
observe how small the people are compared to the industrialists.
note too how most of the crowd looks anxious or angry at what is happening some shake their fists and how some of the children appear malnourished.
one of the most significant aspects of this image is its source.
subscribers to puck were overwhelmingly middle and upper class.
this shows that the rising fear of big business in the gilded age was not confined to low wage factory workers.
it was shared by a large cross section of the american people.
the vast disparity in power is captured in the weapons brought to the fight.
the knight holds a shield labeled corruption of the legislature suggesting corporate titans ability to bribe state and federal elected officials to ensure laws favorable to business.
in his other hand he holds a lance labeled subsidized press indicating the power of big business to buy favorable coverage in the newspapers.
the lowly worker in contrast holds only one weapon the strike.
why did so many americans come to fear big business in the gilded age.
chapter review 1883 1884 john d rockefeller creates the first trust 1889 1890 railroads establish standard time zones becomes a key feature of modern business organization and target of social critics police and workers clash in haymarket reflects power of railroads and the trend of standardization in business.
in 1886 they establish a standard track gauge leads to nationwide crackdown on labor union activism andrew carnegie publishes the gospel of wealth knights of labor wins strike against wabash railroad workers in skilled trades separate from knights of labor workers in new york city establish labor day reflects strengthening of labor movement and protest against growing inequality and exploitation the american federation of labor founded gains publicity and credibility for the kol leading to a surge in membership popularizes the belief that opportunity and upward mobility are available to all in an industrial society sherman anti trust act passed reflects popular mood that big business must be restrained weak and ineffective myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of wonder and woe.
questions for analysis 1 why did many americans come to fear large corporations like railroads.
view the image modern colossus of rail roads 1879 p 474 2 how did the introduction of new technology impact american workers.
read the document technology and the shoe industry in finchers trade review 1864 p 481 3 how did industrialists champion industrial capitalism.
read the document andrew carnegie wealth p 487 4 how did critics of industrial capitalism argue that it threatened the republic.
read the document henry george progress and poverty p 490 5 what challenges did workers face in trying to organize unions.
view the map interactive map organizing american labor in the late nineteenth century p 492 other resources from this chapter 17 17 8 the white city designed by some of the nations leading architects chicagos white city consisted of 14 main buildings designed in the beauxarts style set in landscaped grounds featuring waterways and reflecting pools.
becoming a modern society america in the gilded age 1877 1900 frederick law olmsted and architect louis sullivan developed a master plan that called for landscaped grounds featuring waterways and reflecting pools.
around the waterways 17 8 burnham placed 14 main buildings designed in the beaux arts style which emphasized logic harmony and uniformity.
the court of honor buildings shown in the image lined the grand basin that formed the centerpiece of the exposition grounds.
covered in shimmering bright white stucco the buildings of the white city astonished the estimated 27 million visitors who entered through the main gates.
yet as this image indicates burnham and his team sought not simply to wow the public with grand architecture.
they wanted to showcase the potential glory of the modern city.
all cities could be should be as impressive as the white city.
all that was needed were civic leadership and enlightened urban planning.
this grand vision never fully caught on but many of the city beautiful ideals and concepts exhibited in the white city influenced a generation of urban planners and architects committed to making american cities more beautiful healthy and efficient.
how did the white city reflect an optimistic vision of urban life in the future.
new habits roles and lifestyles new habits roles and lifestyles the development of vast working class districts was but one aspect of a broad trend that reshaped urban life in the late nineteenth century.
urban and suburban growth also led to the development of middle class and elite residential neighborhoods and urban central business districts dedicated almost exclusively to commerce.
middle class neighborhoods increasingly reflected the new values of the urban middle class including a growing interest in leisure activities.
the growth of leisure time allowed women to take on significant roles in public life through memberships in socially and politically active clubs.
the new urban landscape the evolution of mass transit systems like horse cars steam railroads and trolleys led to explosive urban growth and specialized districts dedicated to specific functions.
most cities for example developed central business districts where almost no one lived.
instead the high value real estate in downtowns from baltimore to chicago to san francisco was dedicated to commerce banks department stores see chapter 16 and the offices of corporations accountants lawyers and other professionals.
each day mass transit systems carried thousands of shoppers and workers to central business districts from sections of cities now dedicated almost exclusively to residential use or from residential neighborhoods just beyond the city limits.
soaring real estate values and new technology led to another distinct feature in central business districts skyscrapers.
before the civil war few buildings exceeded six stories but the invention of the elevator and new building materials like cast iron and steel led to ten and twelve story buildings by the early 1880s.
the big breakthrough came in 1885 with the completion of the home insurance building in chicago.
it was remarkable not for its height ten stories but for its internal steel skeleton that allowed for thin walls and large windows.
this first true skyscraper led to a boom in tall building construction in downtowns across the country.
by 1900 lower manhattan alone featured 12 buildings of 300 feet or more in height.
equally significant although less dramatic than the upward reach of city skylines was the outward sprawl of urban areas due to mass transit.
suburbs or residential communities established just beyond a citys boundary but connected to the urban center by view the closer look the bowery at night mass transit boomed in the gilded age.
this cover image 17 9 from an 1874 real estate publication renders the great commercial metropolis of chicago in the background while touting the immense tracts of surrounding land as ideal for suburban development.
note the many sets of tracks for trains and trolleys suggesting the ease with which commuters could travel to and from work in the dirty loud and crowded city.
suburbs attracted middle class 17 9 spreading outward fast and inexpensive transportation systems in cities led to the development of separate and distinct urban areas.
this image from the cover of an 1874 real estate publication shows the densely settled commercial and residential districts of chicago surrounded by vast stretches of land being developed into commuter suburbs.
note the many sets of train and trolley tracks.
how did new modes of transportation promote the development of specialized urban and suburban districts.
chapter 14 reflected not merely the rising wealth of middlebut in 1890 they reunited to form the national class families but also the increased leisure time american woman suffrage association they enjoyed and their desire to develop refined nawsa.
it helped win suffrage in states like tastes.
colorado 1893 and idaho 1896 and then after considerable struggle for all women with the ratification of the nineteenth amendment in 1920 see chapter 17 becoming a modern society america in the gilded age 1877 1900 this sensibility informs the drawing of pullmans a second image of government indifference to widespread suffering arose in chicago.
the worlds vision of the future town since it was still under construction in 1881 as a model community of neat columbian exposition had opened on may 1 houses schools churches stores open spaces and of 1893 just four days before the panic on wall street.
the fairs emphasis on american progress and course the factories that made it all possible.
so long as the company remained profitable its prosperity symbolized by the opulence and beauty of its huge complex of white neoclassical buildings employees considered themselves fortunate.
but the soon stood in stark contrast to the growing despair of depression in 1893 hit the railroad industry hard the citys tenement districts a few blocks away.
when and pullman laid off hundreds of workers and announced a wage cut of 30 the fair closed in octopercent for the rest.
on ber thousands of hometop of this devastating less people moved into the news workers learned vacant buildings that had that pullman would only recently housed elabonot reduce their rents rate displays of prosperity.
which were deducted that winter of 1893 1894 automatically from their 60 000 chicagoans per day paychecks.
some workreceived a free meal from ers soon began receiving soup kitchens and missions.
checks for less than one some of the hardest hit dollar per week to cover workers during the depresthe cost of food heat sion were employees of the and clothing.
pullman palace car comon may 11 1894 pany located just outside pullman worker pullmans hard pressed chicago.
founded by workers went out on george pullman in 1867 strike.
after a six week the company manufacstandoff during which pullman refused to negotiate tured luxury railroad cars.
pullman was an idealist who believed that workers and employers could work eugene debs the leader of the american railway union aru announced all of the unions 125 000 together in harmony for mutual benefit.
acting on members across the country as an act of solidarity this idea he established the town of pullman in 1880 with the pullman workers would refuse to handle a company town built and owned by the pullman corporation for its employees who rented homes and pullman cars.
within days the pullman strike caused the nations railroad system to slow to a patronized stores owned by the company.
as this crawl.
1881 depiction of the town demonstrates 17 19 the heads of more than two dozen railroads pullman like carnegie prided himself on being a moved to support pullman and break the aru by model capitalist who earned a vast fortune but still hiring thousands of strikebreakers and pressuring managed to provide a decent living for his workers.
we are born in a pullman house fed from the pullman shop taught in the pullman school catechized in the pullman church and when we die we shall be buried in the pullman cemetery and go to the pullman hell 17 19 capitalism and community george pullmans vision of himself as a benevolent capitalist was captured in these plans for pullman a company town of neat houses schools churches stores open spaces and factories.
source i38519.
sepia illustration showing the town and factories of pullman with index to works on lower left and index to town on lower right.
why did the pullman workers strike.
read the document address to 1894 convention of american railway union by jennie curtis the challenge from below governor richard altgeld to send in the state militia.
when he refused out of sympathy for the strikers and a desire to avoid violence the railroads asked president grover cleveland to send federal troops see choices and consequences the pullman strike.
17 20 for silver and the people the democratic party emphasized bryans commitment to workers and farmers through his advocacy of free silver and his promise to protect americans from being crucified on a cross of gold the election of 1896 and political realignment the turmoil caused by the depression and pullman strike greatly affected the 1894 off year elections.
dissatisfaction with clevelands administration hurt the democrats who lost their brief hold on both houses of congress.
the shift in power meant more stalemate for the next two years with a republican congress opposed by a democratic president.
the election of 1896 however led to a major realignment in political affiliations among the american people.
republicans nominated former congressman and governor of ohio william mckinley for president and affirmed their conservative commitment to the gold standard and a high tariff.
the democrats nominated a young and dynamic congressman from nebraska william jennings bryan.
just 36 years old bryan had earned a reputation for stirring oratory against the tariff and in support of free silver.
the latter issue held great symbolic importance in the middle of the depression.
silver was the metal of the common man argued its supporters while gold was the metal of elites.
in speeches pamphlets songs and images peoples party activists had convinced millions of americans that free coinage of silver putting more money into circulation and thus lowering the value of the dollar backed exclusively by gold would both end the depression and curb the monopolies and trusts.
recognizing the popularity of this policy delegates at the democratic party convention made free silver a key plank in the party platform.
bryan then delivered one of the most famous speeches in american history in which he argued that average americans were being crucified on a cross of gold forced upon them by wall street and big business.
capturing this theme this campaign poster 17 20 included the text of the famous speech framed by silver coins and ribbons bearing two of its most memorable read the document william jennings bryan cross of gold speech 1896 why did silver hold such political significance in the late nineteenth century.
chapter 18 18 6 chief and his staff 1904 this image of crow warriors riding away into the mist captured the prevailing sentiment that indian cultures were on the verge of disappearing.
creating a democratic paradise the progressive era 1895 1915 stress of urban life with holidays in the pristine wilderness.
his influential writings led to the 1890 establishment of yosemite as a national park and the creation in 1892 of the sierra club an environmental group dedicated to preserving wilderness.
muirs antibusiness message fit well with the progressive determination to put the social good ahead of individual self interest.
roosevelt agreed that a few unscrupulous entrepreneurs should not unfairly consume what belonged to the entire nation.
to this end roosevelt created 5 national parks 18 national monuments and bird reserves that placed millions of acres off limits to development.
the president parted company with muir however by choosing to regulate not ban public access to other federally controlled lands waterways and mineral deposits.
roosevelt embraced a conservationist vision that tried to balance two goals meeting present economic needs and conserving natural resources for future generations.
when the u s forestry service director gifford pinchot allowed timber companies to harvest trees in designated areas the new regulations enraged both preservationists who wanted all economic development to cease and western businessmen who demanded unfettered access to federally controlled forests.
taft was sympathetic to western complaints that roosevelt had overstepped his authority.
when how did americans disagree about the environment during the progressive era.
taft fired pinchot in 1910 roosevelt and his progressive followers took it as a sign that taft had abandoned conservation deepening the split between the two former colleagues.
environmentalists expressed great admiration for native americans ecologically friendly farming and hunting practices fueling mainstream curiosity about indian cultures at the turn of the century.
in 1900 photographer edward curtis began a 30 year multivolume ethnographic project entitled the north american indian which recorded images of 80 different indian civilizations.
many indians willingly participated in curtiss photography project proud of the beautiful portraits he took of them in their best festive dress.
curtis wanted to capture the variety and richness of native american cultures before they completely disappeared.
considering himself a friend to the indian curtis believed like most of his generation that to survive native americans needed to assimilate into mainstream american society.
curtis often photographed groups of indians riding off into the distance 18 6 to symbolically convey the notion that as curtis wrote the indians as a race already shorn in their tribal strength and stripped of their primitive dress are passing into the darkness of an unknown future neither preservationists nor conservationists had any interest in reversing official policies of forced assimilation that divided collective reservation lands into individual farms banned native languages and sent indian children to white run boarding schools see chapter 17 secured voters loyalty by helping families endure personal tragedies such as fires or illness.
meanwhile unions tried to negotiate better wages and shop floor rules for dues paying members but organizing the working class so it could speak with one voice proved impossible.
ethnic and racial prejudices kept the working class fragmented.
italian strikebreakers for instance had few qualms about walking across a picket line manned by slavic strikers.
the craftbased american federation of labor afl led by samuel gompers organized only skilled mostly white workers refusing to let unskilled laborers women or blacks into its unions.
only a handful of industrial unions like the umw and international longshoremans union adopted a big umbrella approach that organized all workers in one industry into the same union.
middle class progressives supported many union goals but deplored their methods.
strikes continually disrupted normal life by shutting down railroad lines street cars and coal mines.
read the document profiles samuel gompers government regulation they maintained would improve workers lives and ensure that the economy functioned smoothly.
nevertheless many unions remained skeptical about relying on the government to solve their conflicts.
the afl preferred using its collective economic power to force industrialists to negotiate.
its members had unhappy memories of what happened when state or federal officials intervened in labor conflicts as during the 1894 pullman strike.
the roosevelt administration occasionally chose to aid labor but progressive era courts nearly always favored industrialists.
in 1908 the supreme court stopped workers from launching sympathy strikes or boycotts to support fellow workers labeling them restraints of trade barred under the 1890 sherman anti trust act a law originally intended to curtail the creation of business monopolies.
another 1908 decision allowed employers to fire workers who joined unions.
reducing government interference in labor conflicts therefore remained the afls primary goal.
radical trade unionists rejected the afl vision of working within the free market system.
the industrial workers of the world iww formed in 1905 envisioned one big union that welcomed all workers regardless of sex race ethnicity or skill which would one day take over all means of production in the united states.
it is the historic mission of the working class to do away with capitalism declared the founders of the iww whose members were nicknamed wobblies the founding group included 75 year old mother mary jones a tireless white haired organizer for the umw and william d big bill haywood an organizer for the western federation of miners.
their drive to abolish private property and formal government struck many progressives as anarchy.
government harassment of the iww limited its formal membership to around 10 000 the progressives limited progress employers had traditionally held employees responsible for workplace accidents maintaining that workers knowingly accepted all job associated risks.
carelessness caused most mishaps they argued.
progressive organizations undertook detailed sociological studies to refute these self serving generalizations.
lewis hines photographic investigation into the lives of injured pittsburgh workers what conflicting visions divided working class union activists.
chapter 18 creating a democratic paradise the progressive era 1895 1915 1901 1902 1903 1904 mckinley assassinated roosevelt becomes president roosevelt and muir camp together in yosemite lochner v new york pure food and drug act and meat inspection act passed progressivism gains presidential advocate they later champion competing conservationist and preservationist visions the history of the standard oil company published chapter 19 19 3 charge up the san juan heights 1898 this painting depicted a horseback charge up the san juan heights that was glorious and heroic with flags flying and no casualties.
in reality the soldiers advanced slowly on foot to reach the crest.
imperial america the united states in the world 1890 1914 meanwhile military planners focused on defeating the spanish in cuba.
the accompanying map spanish american war 1898 19 2 illustrates how the navy immediately blockaded cuba trapping the spanish atlantic fleet in santiago.
americas small peacetime army however was woefully unprepared to train and equip the thousands of volunteers enlisting throughout the country.
theodore roosevelt resigned as assistant secretary of the navy and formed the first u s volunteer calvary by recruiting americans from wildly diverse backgrounds.
many of the recruits had personal connections to colonel roosevelt a result of his eclectic lifestyle that included attending harvard hunting expeditions in the west and a stint as police commissioner in new york city.
dubbed the rough riders this collection of cowboys ivy league athletes policemen and pawnee scouts was one of the few volunteer units that actually fought in the war.
although american forces swelled from 28 000 to 275 000 most never left the united states.
on june 22 17 000 u s troops landed in cuba to join cuban rebels on a slow march through heavy jungle to the port of santiago which sheltered the how accurate were the legends that surrounded the charge up the san juan heights.
bulk of the spanish navy and army.
hidden spanish sharpshooters harassed u s soldiers as they made their way to the san juan heights the hills that encircled santiago.
on july 1 the americans under the command of general william shafter attacked 750 spanish soldiers along the san juan heights.
i have seen many illustrations and pictures of this charge on the san juan hills but none of them seem to show it just as i remember it recalled journalist richard harding davis who watched the battle from the sidelines as the americans walked up the hill.
like most illustrations of the battle seen in newspapers at the time this painting 19 3 erroneously shows waves of eager american soldiers advancing on horseback with the flag flying suggesting an invincible overpowering weight of numbers davis noted.
yet he continued i think the thing which impressed one the most when our men started walking from cover was that they were so few.
it almost seemed as if someone had made an awful and terrible mistake.
ones instinct was to call to them to come back roosevelt led the rough riders to the top of the san juan heights a feat that garnered him and the unit acclaim.
they stood alongside african american watch the video roosevelts rough riders the spanish american war troops from the ninth and tenth calvary who had actually reached the top first which roosevelt and the mainstream media failed to mention when celebrating the victory.
the battle provided another opportunity for the yellow press to whip up war fervor on the home front.
responding to false rumors that spanish soldiers had mutilated the corpses of american servicemen killed during the clash a judge magazine cover 19 4 pictured a spaniard drenched in the blood of american soldiers who lay at his feet.
in one hand the ape like figure holds the bloody knife responsible for the atrocity.
his other hand rests on the gravestone of u s sailors whom he allegedly killed by exploding the maine.
this image of a brute that trampled on the american flag reinforced yellow press portrayals of spain as a beast that the united states needed to subdue.
the caricature also fed into racist notions of white supremacy just like african americans at home and soon the filipinos abroad the dark skinned spanish posed a threat to the civilized world.
in future conflicts american propaganda used strikingly similar images to arouse passionate hatred of the nations german and japanese enemies.
legendary accounts attributed the american success in charging up the san juan heights to heroic frontal charges in fact the americans three gatling machine guns made the decisive difference.
believing his exhausted troops could go no farther after reaching the top general shafter decided to lay siege to santiago instead of attacking the city directly.
while american troops encircled the city atop the surrounding hills u s ships blocked the port thus trapping the bulk of the spanish navy and army in santiago.
when the spanish fleet made a dash to leave on july 3 american ships sank or beached every spanish vessel.
in both manila and santiago the newly modernized u s navy outclassed the decrepit spanish fleet scoring easy one sided victories.
on july 17 the spanish surrendered the city and cuba to the americans.
after defeating the spanish in cuba u s forces landed in puerto rico also a caribbean spanish colony where they encountered only token opposition.
american troops fought one more battle to take manila on august 13 having not yet received word that the war between the united states and spain had ended the day before.
the war concluded on a sour note however.
with limited understanding of how malaria yellow fever and typhoid spread army physicians could not stop these diseases from ravaging view the image our victorious fleet in cuban waters the troops that occupied cuba during the summer of 1898 victory celebrations among u s troops soon gave way to panic when hundreds of soldiers fell ill and healthy young men became hollow eyed walking skeletons.
it was a heartbreaking sight to see her husband a yellow fever victim whose weight had dropped from 165 pounds to 89 pounds grace paulding recalled.
he needed a years nursing before he could work again.
despairing over the lack of qualified hospital attendants the surgeon general turned in desperation to the female nurses offering their services to the military.
eventually 1 500 professional and red cross female nurses worked side by side with army doctors at home and overseas.
overall the americans counted 385 officers and soldiers killed in combat excluding those killed on the maine and nearly 2 000 deaths from disease.
the peace treaty signed on december 10 1898 set the terms of the u s victory.
in the treaty of paris spain relinquished its claim to cuba and the united states received puerto rico 19 4 the spanish brute 1898 this wartime caricature portrayed the spanish as bloodthirsty beasts who murdered and mutilated american servicemen.
were americans right to characterize the spanishamerican war as the splendid little war.
chapter read the document the teller amendment 1898 p 568 the platt amendment 1901 p 572 platform for the american anti imperialist league 1899 p 574 katherine mullikin lowry on the boxer rebellion 1900 p 580 view the closer look images as history atrocity stories and public opinion p 567 competing visions annexing the philippines p 576 view the image african american troops in the spanish american war p 577 view the map activities of the united states in the caribbean 1898 1930s p 588 watch the video 4 what views do these poems offer on the benefits and drawbacks of colonization.
view the closer look competing visions the white mans burden p 575 5 what does this cartoon reveal about american dominance in the western hemisphere.
view the image his foresight 1901 p 587 burial of the maine victims p 566 roosevelts rough riders p 570 why was neutrality difficult for the united states to define and maintain.
the war at home p 602 how did the government mobilize resources and support to fight a total war.
fighting the war p 609 what was it like to serve as a soldier in world war i.
peace p 616 why did americans disagree over ratifying the versailles treaty.
chapter 20 the great war world war i 1914 1918 choices and consequences alvin c york deciding to serve alvin c york grew up poor in the tennessee appalachian mountains where he became an expert marksman hunting wild turkeys in the forests.
he spent his youth carousing gambling and drinking.
as an adult he underwent a religious conversion and joined the church of christ in christian union a pacifist christian sect.
drafted six months before his thirtieth birthday york faced an agonizing decision on whether to fight.
i believed in my bible he said.
and it distinctly said thou shalt not kill but york acknowledged i wanted to be a good christian and a good american too choices request noncombatant duty as a conscientious objector.
refuse to perform any military duty.
agree to serve and fight.
decision like many men claiming conscientious objector status york faced intense pressure to fight once he entered a training camp.
after conversations about the bible with his commanding officers york decided that the biblical injunction blessed are the peacemakers overrode the sixth commandment prohibiting killing because the war promised to be the war to end all wars york agreed to fight.
consequences york became the most celebrated american hero of the war for his feats on the battlefield in france.
on october 8 1918 york was credited with killing 24 germans silencing 35 machine guns and capturing 132 enemy soldiers during the meuse argonne offensive.
surviving combat without a scratch reaffirmed yorks faith in god but on his deathbed he still wondered whether god would punish him for killing men in battle.
continuing controversies what is the ultimate meaning of yorks experience.
some historians note that yorks transformation from pacifist to warrior demonstrated that wilsonian ideals inspired many americans to fight in world war i with americans divided in 1941 before the japanese attacked the american naval base at pearl harbor hawaii over the merits of entering world war ii the hollywood film sergeant york sent the message that fighting to defend the country was a citizens christian and patriotic duty.
others note that york personified the poorly educated and underprivileged conscript who did the bulk of the fighting along the western front.
some believe that the army exaggerated yorks feats to boost morale.
rather than a what factors influenced yorks choice to serve.
cause for celebration his experience reveals the difficulty of becoming a conscientious objector during the war an experience repeated in future conflicts especially the vietnam war.
sergeant alvin c york with his mother in front of his home in tennessee fighting the war to help the army turn this polyglot force into a functioning military force civilian psychologists administered intelligence tests to soldiers in the training camps.
quickly assessing a recruits intelligence could help the army immediately identify whether a man was officer material or better suited for unloading boxes of supplies off ships in france.
to the psychologists surprise 25 percent of the soldiers had to take the test designed for illiterates.
most native born white soldiers had completed only seven years of school.
foreignborn men averaged 4 7 years and southern black men 2 6 years of schooling.
psychologists claimed their exams measured native intelligence but the questions suggest the tests primarily assessed level of education economic background and familiarity with mainstream american culture 20 11.
tabulated results claimed that the white american soldiers had a mental age of 13 while the average for russians was 11 34 for italians 11 01 for poles 10 74 and for american born blacks 10 41 critics argued that the tests only showed that immigrants and blacks needed more comprehensive schooling.
social darwinists who used charles darwins ideas of survival of the fittest to establish a hierarchy of superior and inferior human races believed these figures validated their ideas about white northern european superiority.
after the war public schools began administering intelligence tests to determine the aptitude of their pupils a trend that continues today.
on the western front the united states entered the war at a critical moment.
the peace with russia gave germany a clear numerical advantage on the battlefield.
as u boats began sinking allied shipping indiscriminately the germans transferred over one million men from the eastern front with russia to the western front in france.
in march 1918 the germans accomplished what many had thought impossible they broke through the trench stalemate and began marching once again toward paris.
20 11 intelligence tests for soldiers these questions come from an intelligence test on logic given to literate soldiers in training camps.
the pictorial exam for illiterates and non english speakers required that soldiers draw in the missing item.
view the image soldiers taking an iq test during wwi take these intelligence tests yourself.
who would fare well on these tests and why.
chapter 20 the great war world war i 1914 1918 peace the armistice ended active fighting in western europe but the peace settlement took months to negotiate.
twenty seven nations and four british dominions sent delegates to the paris peace conference.
germany expected to join the negotiations but instead the terms of peace were determined in secret by the big four wilson french premier georges clemenceau the british prime minister lloyd george and the italian premier vittorio orlando.
the versailles peace treaty named after the palace outside paris where the treaty was signed required germany to pay reparations and disarm.
germany signed the treaty under protest on june 28 1919 the fifth anniversary of archduke franz ferdinands assassination.
in the end the flawed and controversial versailles peace treaty laid the groundwork for future conflict in europe and raised questions at home about the role america wanted to play in the world.
the paris peace conference woodrow wilson enjoyed worldwide popularity on armistice day.
throughout the united states and europe his idealistic pronouncements had raised hopes that the slaughter might pave the way for a lasting peace.
wilson broke with tradition and decided to travel overseas to negotiate the peace treaty himself rather than sending representatives to hash out the details.
as he toured paris london rome and milan newspapers greeted him as the savior of humanity british and french leaders however knew that four years of suffering had created a deep seated desire for revenge against germany within their nations.
the war had also hardened wilsons view of germany and he agreed to weaken postwar germany by eliminating its navy and colonies.
he disagreed however with the french insistence on eviscerating the german economy and military permanently.
certain that america had played a vital role in winning the war wilson felt confident asserting his right along with britain and france to shape the terms of peace.
british and french leaders however publicly downplayed americas contribution to defeating germany hoping to limit wilsons say in the peace treaty.
at the request of allied leaders the british and french press began printing disparaging reports about the american armys inexperience and leadership.
resentful over the allies apparent ingratitude for their wartime sacrifices americans postwar disillusionment grew as the treaty making process got underway.
wilsons domestic political problems weakened his negotiating position.
in november 1918 the republicans won control of congress despite wilsons plea to voters to return a democratic majority as a vote of confidence for his peace proposals.
the reasons for the republican victory were complex a result of unease with conditions at home and concern about wilsons ideals.
the democrats loss energized opponents of the league of nations a wilson supported collective security organization whose member nations agreed to mediate future international disputes to prevent wars and work together to improve global conditions.
domestic opponents of the league worried that by joining the international organization america would lose control over its own foreign policy and invite international meddling in the western hemisphere.
they also doubted that the league could maintain world peace.
league critics divided into two camps each offering conflicting visions of americas role in the postwar world.
isolationists led by republican senator william e borah from idaho preferred adopting an official policy of neutrality.
the isolationists believed that if the united states kept out of all foreign disagreements the country could avoid going to war in the future.
by contrast the faction headed by massachusetts senator henry cabot lodge the republican majority leader and chairman of the senate foreign affairs committee favored a return to the former balance of power system in europe.
lodge wanted the united states to help rebuild and perhaps join a strong alliance among democratic european nations that could contain germany indefinitely.
eager to shore up support for the league of nations at home wilson briefly sailed home to what opposition to his peace plan did wilson face overseas and at home.
peace confer with republican leaders who were still upset that he had not invited any leading republicans to join his negotiating team.
the possibility of compromise appeared slim.
lodge detested wilson whom he regarded as sanctimonious.
wilson returned the distain viewing lodge as narrow minded.
discussion soon stalled.
on the day before wilson returned to paris lodge handed the president a pledge signed by 39 senators who vowed to reject the league covenant in its present form.
hoping to appease his republican critics wilson managed to incorporate key republican demands in the final league covenant.
the covenant now stated that the league of nations would respect the monroe doctrine the 1823 american pronouncement that the western hemisphere was off limits to other world powers and allow nations to withdraw from the league.
wilson also tried outmaneuvering his domestic critics.
he opted against creating two international agreements a peace treaty and a covenant creating the league of nations that would each require a separate senate ratification.
instead wilson decided to incorporate the league covenant into the peace treaty.
the senate he gambled would never refuse to ratify the peace treaty even one that contained a controversial league of nations.
with his mouth open and his eyes shut i predict that he will make a senator when he grows up wilsons joke about his infant grandson touched upon his political troubles with republican senators allied leaders also pressured wilson to compromise.
to get them to accept the league wilson gave up his idea of peace without victory.
when supreme commander of allied armies marshal ferdinand foch read the harsh demands of the peace treaty he accurately predicted this isnt a peace its a twenty year truce the treaty required that germany pay reparations to french and belgian civilians for the mines factories and fields its troops had destroyed during the war imposed upon them by the aggression of germany this war guilt clause held germany alone responsible for starting world war i the treaty also forced germany to disarm.
the reparations committee set germanys initial bill at 33 billion in gold although commissions in the 1920s significantly reduced this amount.
the united states accepted no reparation payments and in the 1920s even loaned germany money to help it pay this debt.
the war guilt clause and the reparations bill created tremendous resentment in germany.
in the 1930s adolf hitler cultivated this anger to fuel a resurgent national fervor dedicated to restoring german economic and military strength.
other nations also left the conference feeling slighted.
italy resented the allies for denying it more austrian territory along the adriatic sea a humiliation that the fascist leader benito mussolini vowed to avenge when he took power in 1922 japan protested the failure to incorporate into the league covenant a statement protecting the rights of nonwhite nations helping breed japanese resentment against the west.
in the middle east africa and asia the peace treaty transferred colonial possessions from the losers the ottoman and german empires to the victors britain france belgium and japan under a mandate system.
in theory the mandate system named a western nation as a league of nation trustee for territories in need of political instruction before they assumed the responsibilities of self government.
in reality the mandate system simply cloaked old style imperialism in the new rhetoric of self determination.
by redrawing the map of the middle east to expand their global influence britain and france set in motion political religious and cultural conflicts in the region that created tremendous strife throughout the twentieth century and beyond.
denying arab nationalist demands for independence france took control of lebanon and syria.
britain ruled transjordan present day jordan and brought together three distinct groups the kurds and sunni and shiite arabs who had previously lived in semi autonomous regions under the ottomans to form the kingdom of iraq under a puppet monarch.
when the british took over palestine they kept wartime promises to open up part of it to jewish immigration angering its arab inhabitants.
competing claims to this territory continue to this day.
the versailles treaty settled old territorial disputes in europe but the dismemberment of the russian german and austro hungarian empires created new sources of tension.
the map of eastern europe was redrawn to reflect what complaints did critics make about the versailles peace treaty.

chapter 23 they had been in the 1920s to evocations of community generosity and the dignity of common people.
they were more open to experiments in government and business and even private lives than they had been in earlier years.
but for most americans belief in the american way of life a phrase that became widely resonant in the 1930s for the first time remained strong throughout the long years of economic despair.
key terms people places events agricultural marketing act 656 black tuesday 640 bonus army 657 clifford odets 650 dust bowl 645 erskine caldwell 650 frank capra 651 tariff act of 1930 656 hindenburg 651 hoovervilles 656 john dos passos 650 john steinbeck 650 life magazine 653 okies 645 orson welles 651 popular front 654 reconstruction finance corporation 657 richard wright 650 scottsboro case 646 soap operas 651 recall and reflect 1 was the 1929 stock market crash the cause of the depression.
why or why not.
2 how did farmers fare during the depression.
what environmental conditions contributed to their plight.
3 what particular problems faced women both black and white who worked outside the home.
4 how did radio affect both social life and the life of the family.
5 what was the popular front.
what groups did it comprise.
how did they respond to the depression.
6 what popular protests arose in response to the depression.
how successful were these protests.
7 how did hoovers political beliefs affect his attempt to deal with the economic crisis of the depression.
significant events 1929 stock market crash signals onset of great depression agricultural marketing act passed 1931 scottsboro defendants arrested communist party stages hunger march in washington d c 1933 franklin roosevelt inaugurated new deal begins see chapter 12 significant events 1817 1841 american colonization brook farm founded in society founded roxbury massachusetts 1821 1844 new york constructs first mormon leader joseph penitentiary smith killed 1825 1845 robert owen founds new frederick douglass publishes harmony community in indiana autobiography 1826 1847 james fenimore cooper mormons found salt lake city publishes the last of the 1829 mohicans 1848 a david walker publishes w american society for the women s rights convention held appeal to the colored promotion of temperance at seneca falls new york citizens founded oneida community founded in 1850 1830 new york nathaniel hawthorne publishes w american colonization society the scarlet letter helps create liberia for 1851 1831 emigrating american slaves herman melville publishes v william lloyd garrison begins w joseph smith publishes the moby dick publishing the liberator book of mormon 1852 hi 1833 harriet beecher stowe american anti slavery society publishes uncle tom s cabin founded 1854 1837 henry david thoreau horace mann becomes first w publishes walden secretary of massachusetts 1855 board of education 1840 walt whitman publishes leaves liberty party formed of grass q the impending jjj crisis squatter sovereignty vindicated.
kansas the battle over the fate of slavery in kansas was one of the most turbulent events of the 1850s.
this 1855 poster invites antislavery forces to a meeting to protest the actions of the bogus proslavery territorial legislature which had passed laws that among other things made it illegal to speak or write against slavery.
squatter sovereignty was another term for popular sovereignty the doctrine that gave residents of a prospective state the power to decide the fate of slavery there.
bettmann corbisj 1 slavery the squatters of kansas who are favora hie to freedom of speech on all subjects which interest them and an utk 4 utzlcd press who are determined to do their own thinking and voting tlndepeodent of foreign dictation ore requested to assemble in hassmeetihb t the time and jplaces following to wifi thlt following speakers will be in attendance who wll address you on the impofljmit efe m c allowing sprorci i question now before the people of icnnsa m y i wis s iw 3 m ny rt swwn fchr 4 vr h m m tf l ism twwm fuy wr.
h swos tty 0sj 51 b tsj u3j 09 sci w a x a wakefield c k holliday m f conway w k va d i speer.
w a ela jnsiah wmler o.
brown x k geodm.
doc gdpetriefc revs.
mr tuton and d e stewart c a foster x f fes if bro s a w brown a h halley and others turn out an hear them.
looking ahead 1 how did the annexation of western territories intensify the conflict over slavery and lead to deeper divisions between the north and the south.
2 what compromises attempted to resolve the conflicts over the expansion of slavery into new territories.
to what degree were these compromises successful.
why did they eventually fail to resolve the differences between the north and the south.
3 what were the major arguments for and against slavery and its expansion into new territories.
i hlhit aili n l i irteifnmvt.
n setting the stage until the 1840s the tensions between the north and the south remained relatively contained.
had no new sectional controversies arisen the united states might have avoided a civil war and the two sections might have resolved their differences peaceably over time.
but new controversies did arise all of them centered on slavery.
from the north came the powerful abolitionist movement which rejected compromise and conciliation and attempted with great success to make the elimination of slavery a moral issue that would not be open to compromise.
from the south came a belligerent defense of slavery.
slavery its proponents argued was not a necessary evil but a positive good the best possible system for white southerners who needed a labor force and the best possible system as well for black southerners whom the defenders of slavery insisted needed the paternalistic supervision of white masters.
the west brought these differences to a head most forcefully.
as the nation annexed extensive new lands texas the southwest territories california oregon country and others a single question arose again and again what would be the status of slavery in the territories.
two compromises one in 1850 and another in 1854 failed to contain the conflict.
the result was a dangerous and persistent crisis that produced such bitterness anger and despair on both sides that it could no longer be contained.
by the time abraham lincoln became president in 1860 the nation was beginning to break apart and the momentum toward civil war was becoming almost impossible to reverse.
looking westward the united states acquired more than a million square miles of new territory in the 1840s the greatest wave of expansion since the louisiana purchase nearly forty years before.
by the end of the decade the nation possessed all the territory of the present day united states except alaska hawaii and a few relatively small areas acquired later through border adjustments.
many factors accounted for this great new wave of expansion the most important of which were the hopes and ambitions of the many thousands of white americans who moved into or invested in these new territories.
advocates of expansion justified their goals with a carefully articulated set of ideas an ideology known as manifest destiny which became one of the factors driving white americans to look to the west.
manifest destiny manifest destiny reflected both the burgeoning pride that characterized american nationalism in the mid nineteenth century and the idealistic vision of social perfection that fueled so much of the reform energy of the time.
it rested on the idea that america was destined by god and by history to expand its boundaries over a vast area an area that included but was not necessarily restricted to the continent of north america.
american expansion was not selfish its advocates insisted it was an altruistic attempt to extend american liberty to new realms.
john l osullivan the influential democratic editor who gave the movement its name wrote in 1845 that the american claim to new territory is by the right of our manifest destiny to overspread and to possess the whole of the continent which providence has given us for the development of the great experiment of liberty and federative self government entrusted to us.
mdimesi uestiny represented more tnan pride in the nations political system.
running throughout many of the arguments for expansion was an explicitly racial justification.
throughout the racial 1840s many americans defended the idea of westward expansion by citing the justification superiority of the american race white people of northern european origins.
the nonwhite peoples of the territories could not be absorbed into the republican system.
the indians the mexicans and others in the western regions were racially unfit to be part of an american community manifest destiny advocates insisted.
westward expansion the impending crisis 341 expanding settlement 1810 1850 this map shows the dramatic expansion of the territorial boundaries of the united states in the decades after the louisiana purchase.
by 1850 the nation had reached its present boundaries with the exception of alaska and hawaii which it acquired later.
much of this acquisition occurred in the 1840s.
it also shows the spread of white settlement within the territories and states.
what events contributed to the annexation of new land to the united states in those years.
was therefore a movement to spread both a political system and a racially defined society.
osullivan called racial purity or whiteness the key to the triumph of the nation.
by the 1840s the idea of manifest destiny had spread throughout the nation publicized by the new penny press inexpensive newspapers aimed at a mass audience and fanned by the rhetoric of nationalist politicians.
advocates of manifest destiny disagreed however about how far and by what means the nation should expand.
some had relatively limited territorial goals others envisioned a vast new empire of liberty that would include canada mexico caribbean and pacific islands and ultimately a few dreamed much of the rest of the world.
some believed america should use force to achieve its expansionist goals while others felt that the nation should expand peacefully or not at all.
not everyone embraced the idea of manifest destiny.
henry clay and other prominent politicians feared correctly as it turned out that territorial expansion opposition to would reopen the painful controversy over further s and threaten the stability of the expansion union bm their voices were barely audible over the clamor of enthusiasm for expansion in the 1840s which began with the issues of texas and oregon.
the lone star flag almost from the moment texas won its independence from mexico in 1836 it sought admission to the united states as a state.
controversies over the status of slavery in the territories prevented its admission until 1845 and so for nine years it was an independent republic.
the tattered banner pictured here was one of the republic s original flags.
the granger collection new york 342 chapter 1 the docks of bristol england by the eighteenth century when this scene was painted bristol had become one of the principal english ports serving the so called triangular trade among the american colonies the west indies and africa.
the lucrativeness of that trade is evident in the bustle and obvious prosperity of the town.
even earlier however bristol was an important port of embarkation for the thousands of english settlers migrating to the new world.
docks and quay english school 18th century.
city of bristol museum and art gallery the bridgeman art library london would be colonists moved through ireland capturing territory and attempting to subdue the native population.
in the process they developed many of the assumptions that would guide later english colonists in america.
the most important of these assumptions was that the native population of ireland approximately 1 million people loyal to the catholic church with their own language gaelic and their own culture was a collection of wild vi subjugation of cius and ignorant savages.
the irish ireland lived in ways the english considered crude and wasteful like beasts and they fought back against the intruders with a ferocity that the english considered barbaric.
such people could not be tamed the english concluded.
they certainly could not be assimilated into english society.
they must therefore be suppressed isolated and if necessary destroyed.
eventually they might be civilized but only after they were thor oughly subordinated.
whatever barbarities the irish may have inflicted on the colonizers the english more than matched them in return.
sir humphrey gilbert who was later to establish the first british colony in the new world an unsuccessful venture in newfoundland served for a time as governor of one irish district and suppressed native rebellions with extraordinary viciousness.
gilbert was an educated and supposedly civilized man.
but he considered the natives less than human and therefore not entitled to whatever decencies civilized people reserved for their treatment of one another.
as a result he managed to justify both to himself and to others such atrocities as beheading irish soldiers after they were killed in battle.
gilbert himself sir walter raleigh sir richard grenville and others active in ireland in the mid sixteenth century derived from their experiences there an outlook they would take to america where they made similarly vicious efforts to subdue and subjugate the natives.
the collision of cultures 29 the irish experience led the english to another important and related assumption about colonization that english settlements in distant lands must retain a rigid separation from the native populations.
in ireland english colonizers estab the plantation lished what they called plantations model transplantations of english society in a foreign land.
unlike the spanish in america the english in ireland did not try simply to rule a subdued native population they tried to build a separate society peopled with emigrants from england itself.
the new society would exist within a pale of settlement an area physically separated from the natives.
that concept too they would take with them to the new world even though in ireland as later in america the separation of peoples and the preservation of pure english culture proved impossible.
the french and the dutch in america english settlers in north america unlike those in ireland would encounter not only natives but also other europeans who were like them driven by mercantilist ideas to establish economic outposts abroad.
to the south and southwest was the spanish empire.
spanish ships continued to threaten english settlements along the coast for years.
but except for mexico and scattered outposts such as those in florida and new mexico the spanish made little serious effort to colonize north america.
englands more formidable north american rivals in the early sixteenth century were the french.
france founded its first permanent settlement in america at quebec in 1608 less than a year after the english started their first colony at jamestown.
the french colonys population grew very slowly.
few french catholics felt any inclination to leave their homeland and french protestants who might have wished to emigrate were excluded from the colony.
the french however exercised an influence in the new world disproportionate to their numbers largely because of their relationships with native americans.
unlike the english who for many years hugged the coastline and traded with the indians of the interior through intermediaries the french forged close direct ties with natives deep inside the continent.
french jesuit missionaries were among the first to penetrate indian societies and they established some of the first contacts between the two peoples.
more important still were coureurs de the coureurs de bois adventurous fur bois traders and trappers who also moved far into the wilderness and developed an extensive trade that became one of the underpinnings of the french colonial economy.
the fur trade was in fact more an indian than a french enterprise.
the coureurs de bois were in many ways little more than agents for the algonquins and the hurons who were the principal fur traders among the indians of the region and from whom the french purchased their pelts.
the french traders were able to function only to the degree that they could form partnerships with the indians.
successful partnerships often resulted from their ability to become a part of native society living among the indians and at times marrying indian women.
the fur trade helped open the way the restitution of new amsterdam this is a detail from an elaborate engraving created to celebrate the restitutio or return of new amsterdam to the dutch in 1673 england had captured new amsterdam in 1664 and made claim to the entire province of new netherland.
but in 1672 war broke out between england and the netherlands and the dutch recaptured their lost province.
in celebration of that event this heroic picture of the dutch fleet in new york was created for sale in the netherlands.
early in 1674 at the conclusion of the war the dutch returned the colony to england.
gilder lehrman collection new york usa the bridgeman art library iw warns 30 chapter 1 country towns were also interested in american ventures and were sponsoring voyages of exploration farther north up to newfoundland where west country new colonial fishermen had been going for many charters years in 1606 james i issued a new looking back the lands that europeans eventually named the americas were the home of many millions of people before the arrival of columbus.
having migrated from asia thousands of years earlier the pre columbian americans spread throughout the western hemisphere and eventually created great civilizations.
among the most notable of them were the incas in peru and the mayas and aztecs in mexico.
in the regions north of what was later named the rio grande the human population was smaller and the civilizations less advanced than they were farther south.
even so north american natives created a cluster of civilizations that thrived and expanded.
there were several million people living north of mexico by the time columbus arrived.
in the century after european contact these native populations suffered a series of catastrophes that all but destroyed the civilizations they had built brutal invasions by spanish and portuguese conquistadores and even more devastating a charter which divided america between the two groups.
the london group got the exclusive right to colonize in the south and the plymouth merchants received the same right in the north.
through their efforts the first enduring english colonies were planted in america.
series of plagues inadvertently imported by europeans that decimated native populations.
by the middle of the sixteenth century the spanish and portuguese no longer faced with effective resistance from the native populations had estab lished colonial control over all of south america and much of north america creating one of the largest empires in the world.
in the parts of north america that would eventually be come the united states the european presence was for a time much less powerful.
the spanish established an import ant northern outpost in what is now new mexico a society in which europeans and indians lived together intimately if unequally.
they created a fort at st augustine elorida.
on the whole however the north american indians remained largely undisturbed by europeans until the english erench and dutch migrations began in the early seventeenth century.
key terms people places events archaic period 3 black death 8 cahokia 6 christopher columbus 9 clovis people 2 conquistadores 12 coureurs de bois 29 encomienda 17 henry hudson 30 jamestown 30 matrilineal 21 mercantilism 23 meso americans 3 mestizos 20 protestant reformation 23 puritans 25 roanoke 30 samuel de champlain 30 seigneuries 30 separatists 25 sir humphrey gilbert 28 sir walter raleigh 28 tenochtitlan 3 recall and reflect 1 how did contact between the european arrivals and the native peoples of the americas affect both groups.
2 how did spanish settlement in america differ from english dutch and french settlement.
3 what were the effects of the importation of african slaves into the americas.
4 what is mercantilism and what did it have to do with the european colonization of north america.
5 how did the english experience at colonization in ireland affect english colonization in america.
the collision of cultures 33 significant events bce 12 000 bce asians begin migrating to north america across the bering strait 1566 english conquest of ireland begins 1492 columbus sails west from spain in search of asia reaches bahama islands in the atlantic 1480s portuguese explorers travel down west coast of africa in search of sea route to asia 1587 lost colony established on roanoke island 1502 first african slaves arrive in spanish america 1519 1522 magellan expedition circumnavigates globe 1532 1538 pizarro conquers incas in peru 1565 st augustine founded in florida 1497 john cabot establishes first english claim in north america 1518 1530 smallpox epidemic ravages indian societies of central and south america 1521 cortes captures tenochtitlan and conquers aztec empire in mexico 1558 elizabeth i ascends english throne 1603 james i succeeds elizabeth i in england 1609 spanish colonists found santa fe 1680 pueblos revolt and drive spanish colonists from present day new mexico 1598 don juan de onate establishes spanish colony in present day new mexico 1608 french establish quebec their first permanent settlement in america 1624 dutch establish permanent settlements in what is now new york 1696 spanish crush last pueblo revolt in new mexico transplantations and borderlands looking ahead 1 how did the english colonies in the chesapeake new england and mid atlantic differ from one another in purpose and administration.
2 how english were the colonies in the decades after the british settlements.
3 what did the english want from the colonies in the first century of english settlement in north america.
the fort at jamestown the jamestown settlement was beset with difficulties from its first days and it was many decades before it became a stable and successful town.
in the early days the colonists suffered from the climate the lack of food and the spread of disease.
they also struggled with the growing hostility of the neighboring indians.
this painting made almost 150 years after the colony at jamestown was first settled conveys a cooperative relationship between the native americans and the europeans who are seen here engaging in trade.
mpi getty images setting the stage the first permanent english settlements in north america were mostly business enterprises small fragile communities generally unprepared for the hardships they were to face.
the europeans attempted as best they could to isolate themselves from the indians and create enclosed societies that would be wholly their own transplantations of the english world they had left behind.
this proved an impossible task.
the english immigrants to america found a world populated by native american tribes by colonists explorers and traders from spain france and the netherlands and by immigrants from other parts of europe and soon africa.
american society was from the beginning a fusion of many cultures what historians have come to call a middle ground in which disparate people and cultures coexist.
all of british north america was a middle ground during the early years of colonization.
through much of the seventeenth century european colonies both relied upon and did battle with the indian tribes and struggled with challenges from other europeans in their midst.
eventually however some areas of english settlement especially the growing communities along the eastern seaboard managed to dominate their own regions marginalizing or expelling indians and other challengers.
in these eastern colonies the english created significant towns and cities built political religious and educational institutions and created agricultural systems of great productivity.
they also developed substantial differences from one another perhaps most notably in the growth of a slave driven agricultural economy in the south.
middle grounds survived well into the nineteenth century in much of north america but mostly in the interior of the continent.
in these communities europeans had not yet established full control and both indians and europeans exercised influence and power and lived intimately if often uneasily with one another.
the early chesapeake once james i had issued his 1606 charters the london company moved quickly and decisively to launch a colonizing expedition headed for virginia.
a party of 144 men aboard three ships the godspeed the discovery and the susan constant set sail for america in 1607 early problems colonists and natives only 104 men survived the journey.
they reached the american coast in the spring of 1607 sailed into the chesapeake and up a river they named the james establishing their colony jamestown on a peninsula.
they chose this setting because they believed it would provide security from the natives.
but they chose poorly the site was low and swampy and surrounded by thick woods.
the results could hardly have been more disastrous.
the colonists were vulnerable to local diseases particularly malaria which was especially virulent along the marshes.
other problems were to a large degree of the colonists own making.
they focused less on growing food and building community than on a futile search for gold.
community building was impossible because they had brought no women with them.
thus they had no real households and no real stakes in their settlement.
that the colonies survived at all was a result of the neighboring indians teaching the colonists how to live in their new land.
the natives showed the colonists their agricultural technologies which were better adapted to the soil and climate of virginia than the agricultural traditions the english settlers had brought with them.
the natives were settled farmers whose villages were surrounded by neatly ordered fields on which they grew a variety of crops including beans pumpkins and above all maize corn which was easy to cultivate and generated large yields.
the english also learned the advantages of growing beans alongside corn to enrich the soil.
and they also began to combine foods they grew with food they hunted and fished.
from the indians the english learned how to build canoes which were good for navigating the 35 36 chapter 2 of most immediate importance was that tobacco cultivation required territorial expansion.
tobacco growers needed large areas of farmland to grow their crops and because tobacco exhausted the soil after only a few years the demand for land increased even more.
english farmers began establishing plantations deeper and deeper in the interior moving from the center of european settlement at jamestown into the territory the natives considered their own.
expansion the headright system even the discovery of tobacco cultivation was not enough to help the virginia company.
by 1616 there were still no profits only land and debts.
nevertheless the promoters continued to hope that the tobacco trade would allow them finally to turn the corner.
in 1618 they launched a last great campaign to attract settlers and make the colony profitable.
part of that campaign was an effort to recruit new settlers and workers to the colony.
the company called it the headright system.
headrights were fifty acre grants of land which new settlers could acquire in a variety of ways.
those who already lived in the colony received 100 acres apiece.
each new settler received a single headright for himself or herself.
this system encouraged family groups to migrate together since the more family members traveled to america the larger the landholding the family would receive.
in addition anyone new settler or old who paid for the passage of other immigrants to virginia would receive an additional headright for each new arrival thus the company hoped inducing the prosperous to import new laborers to america.
some colonists were able to assemble sizable plantations with the combined headrights they received for their families and their servants.
in return they contributed a small quitrent one shilling a year for each headright to the company.
the company added other incentives as well.
to diversify the colonial economy it transported ironworkers and other skilled craftsmen to virginia.
in 1619 it sent 100 englishwomen to the colony which was still overwhelmingly male to become the wives of male colonists.
the women were purchased for 120 pounds of tobacco.
their status was somewhere between indentured servants and free people depending on the good will or lack of it of their husbands.
the company promised the colonists the full rights of englishmen as provided in the original charter of 1606 an end to the strict and arbitrary rule of the communal years and even a share in self government.
on july 30 1619 in the jamestown church delegates from the various communities met as the house of burgesses.
it was the first meeting of an elected legislature within what was to become the united states.
a month later another event in virginia established a very different but no less momentous precedent.
as john rolfe recorded about the latter end of august a dutch ship brought in 20 and odd negroes the status and fate of these first africans in the english colonies remains obscure.
there is some reason to suppression of the powhatan indians believe that the colonists did not consider them slaves that they thought of them as servants to be held for a term of years and then freed like the white servants with whom the planters were already familiar.
for a time moreover the use of black labor remained limited.
although africans continued to trickle steadily into the colony planters continued to prefer european indentured servants until at least the 1670s when white servants began to become scarce and expensive.
but whether or not anyone realized it at the time the small group of black people who arrived in 1619 marked a first step toward the enslavement of africans within what was to be the american republic.
the expansion of the colony was able to proceed only because of effective suppression of local indians who resisted the expanding english presence.
for two years sir thomas dale led unrelenting assaults against the powhatan indians and in the process kidnapped the great chief powhatans daughter pocahontas.
when powhatan refused to ransom her she converted to christianity and in 1614 married john rolfe.
pocahontas accompanied her husband back to england where as a christian convert and a gracious woman she stirred interest in projects to civilize the indians.
she died while abroad.
at that point powhatan ceased his attacks on the english in the face of overwhelming odds.
but after his death several years later his brother opechancanough became head of the native confederacy.
recognizing that the position of his tribe was rapidly deteriorating he resumed the effort to defend tribal lands from european encroachments.
on a march morning in 1622 tribesmen called on the white settlements as if to offer goods for sale then suddenly attacked.
not until 347 whites of both sexes and all ages lay dead or dying were the indian warriors finally forced to retreat.
the surviving english struck back mercilessly at the indians and turned back the threat for a time.
only after opechancanough failed in another uprising in 1644 did the powhatans finally cease to challenge the eastern regions of the colony.
by then the virginia company in london was defunct.
the company had poured all its funds into its profitless jamestown demise of the venture and in the aftermath of the 1622 virginia indian uprising faced imminent bank company ruptcy.
in 1624 james i revoked the companys charter and the colony came under the control of the crown.
it would remain so until 1776 exchanges of agricultural technology the hostility of the early english settlers toward their indian neighbors was in part a result of their conviction that their own civilization was greatly superior to that of the natives and above all that they were more technologically advanced.
the english after all had great oceangoing vessels muskets and other a vanced implements of weaponry and many other tools that t e indians had not developed.
indeed when ohn smith and ot er early jamestown residents grew frustrated at their inabil y to find gold and other precious commodities they often ame t eir failure on the backwardness of the natives.
transplantations and borderlands 39 population thousands 87 5 1607 1620 1630 1640 1650 1660 1670 1680 1690 1700 year the non indian population of the chesapeake 1607 1700 this graph shows the rapid growth of the population of the chesapeake during its first century of european settlement.
note the dramatic increases in the first half of the century and the somewhat slower increase in the later decades.
if the forcibly imported slave population were not counted in the last two decades of the century the non indian population would not have grown at all.
what impact did the growth of african slavery have on the rate of immigration by europeans.
yet the survival of jamestown was in the end largely a result of agricultural technologies developed by indians and indian borrowed from them by the english.
agricultural native agriculture was far better adapted techniques to the soil and climate of virginia than were the agricultural traditions the english settlers brought with them.
the indians of virginia had built successful farms with neatly ordered fields in which grew a variety of crops some previously unknown to the english.
some of the indian farmlands stretched over hundreds of acres and supported substantial populations.
the english settlers did not adopt all the indian agricultural techniques.
natives cleared fields not as the english did by cutting down and uprooting all the trees.
instead they killed trees in place by girdling them that is making deep incisions around the base in the areas in which they planted or by setting fire to their roots and they planted crops not in long straight rows but in curving patterns around the dead tree trunks.
but in other respects the english learned a great deal from the indians about how to grow food in north america.
in particular they quickly recognized the great value of corn which proved to be easier to cultivate and to produce much greater yields than any of the european grains the english had known at home.
corn was also attractive to the settlers because its stalks could be a source of sugar and because it spoiled less easily than other grains.
the english also learned the advantages of growing beans alongside corn to enrich the soil.
maryland and the calverts maryland was founded under circumstances very different from those of virginia but it nonetheless developed in ways markedly similar to those of its neighbor to the south.
the new colony was the dream of george calvert the first lord baltimore a recent convert to catholicism and a shrewd businessman.
calvert envisioned establishing a colony both as a great speculative venture in real estate and as a retreat for english catholics many of whom felt oppressed by the anglican establishment at home.
he died before he could receive a charter from the king.
but in 1632 his son cecilius the second lord baltimore received a charter remarkable not only for the extent of the territory it granted him an area that encompassed parts of what are now pennsylvania delaware and virginia in addition to present day maryland but also for the powers it bestowed on proprietary.
an a 1s hmrs were to hold their province as true and absolute lords and proprietaries and were to acknowledge the sovereignty of the king only by paying an annual fee to the crown.
lord baltimore named one of his brothers leonard calvert governor and sent him with another brother to oversee the settlement of the province.
in march 1634 two ships the ark and the dope bearing 200 to 300 passengers entered the potomac river and turned into one of its eastern tributaries.
on a high and dry bluff these first arrivals laid out the village of st mary s named diplomatically for the queen.
the neighboring indians who were more worried about rival tribes in the region than they were about the new arrivals befriended the settlers provided them with temporary shelter sold them land and supplied them with corn.
unlike the virginians the early marylanders experienced no indian assaults no plagues no starving time.
the calverts had invested heavily in their american possessions and they needed to attract many settlers to make the effort profitable.
as a result they had to encourage the immigration of protestants as well as their fellow english catholics who were both relatively few in number about 2 percent of religious population of england and generally toleration reluctant to emigrate.
the protestant settlers mostly anglicans outnumbered the catholics from the start and the calverts quickly realized that catholics would always be a minority in the colony.
they prudently adopted a policy of religious toleration.
to appease the non catholic majority calvert appointed a protestant as governor in 1648 a year later he sent from england the draft of an act concerning religion or the toleration act which assured freedom of worship to all christians.
40 chapter 14 by far the largest source of financing for the war was loans from the american people.
in previous wars the government had sold bonds only to banks and to a few wealthy investors.
now however the treasury persuaded ordinary citizens to buy over 400 million worth of bonds the first example of mass financing of a war in american history.
still bond purchases by individuals constituted only a small part of the governments borrowing which in the end totaled 2 6 billion.
most of the loans to finance the war came from banks and large financial interests.
raising the union armies over 2 million men served in the union armed forces during the course of the civil war.
but at the beginning of 1861 the regular army of the united states consisted of only 16 000 troops many of them stationed in the west to protect white settlers from indians.
so the union like the confederacy had to raise its army mostly from scratch.
lincoln called for an increase of 23 000 in the regular army but the bulk of the fighting he knew would have to be done by volunteers in state militias.
when congress convened in july 1861 it authorized enlisting 500 000 volunteers for three year terms as opposed to the customary three month terms.
this voluntary system of recruitment produced adequate forces only briefly.
after the first flush of enthusiasm for the war enlistments declined.
by march 1863 congress was forced to pass a national draft law.
virtually all young adult males were eligible to be drafted but a man could escape service by hiring someone to go in his place or by paying the government a fee of 300.
only about 46 000 men were ever actually conscripted but the draft greatly increased voluntary enlistments.
to a people accustomed to a remote and inactive national government conscription was strange and threatening.
opposition to the law was widespread particularly among la draft riots borers immigrants and democrats opposed to the war known as peace democrats or copperheads by their opponents.
occasionally opposition to the draft erupted into violence.
demonstrators against the draft rioted in new york city for four days in july 1863 after the first names were selected for conscription.
it was among the most violent urban uprisings in american history.
more than 100 people died.
irish workers were at the center of the violence.
they were angry because black strikebreakers had been used against them in a recent longshoremens strike and they blamed african americans generally for the war which they thought was being fought for the benefit of slaves who would soon be competing with white workers for jobs.
the rioters lynched a number of african americans burned down homes and businesses mostly those of free blacks and even destroyed an orphanage for african american children.
only the arrival of federal troops subdued the rioters.
wartime politics when abraham lincoln arrived in washington early in 1861 many politicians noting his lack of national experience and his folksy unpretentious manner considered him a minor politician from the prairies a man whom the real leaders of his party would easily control.
but the new president moved quickly to establish his own authority.
he assembled a cabinet representing every faction of the republican party and every segment of northern opinion men of exceptional prestige and influence and in some cases arrogance several of whom believed that they not lincoln should be president.
lincoln moved boldly as well to use the war powers of the presidency ignoring what he considered inconvenient parts of the constitution sending the boys off to war in this painting the departure of the seventh regiment to the war by thomas nast new yorks seventh regiment parades down broadway in april 1861 to the cheers of exuberant patriotic throngs shortly before departing to fight in what most people then assumed would be a brief war.
thomas nast is better known for his famous political cartoons of the 1870s.
the granger collection new york because he said it would be foolish to lose the whole by being afraid to disregard a part.
he sent troops into battle without asking congress for a declaration of war.
lincoln insisted on calling the conflict a domestic insurrection which required no formal declaration of war to ask for a declaration would he believed constitute implicit recognition of the confederacy as an independent nation.
he increased the size of the regular army without receiving legislative authority to do so.
he unilaterally proclaimed a naval blockade of the south.
lincolns greatest political problem was the widespread popular opposition to the war mobilized by factions in the democratic party.
the peace democrats feared that the agricultural northwest was losing influence to the industrial east wartime and that republican nationalism was erod repression ing states rights.
lincoln used extraordi nary methods to suppress them.
he ordered military arrests of civilian dissenters and suspended the right of habeas corpus the right of a person to be released by a judge or court from unlawful detention as in the case of insufficient evidence.
at first lincoln used these methods only in sensitive areas such as the border states but in 1862 he hanging a u guo ii l f a hk fom sthkhf.
the new york city draft riot 1863 opposition to the civil war draft was widespread in the north and in july 1863 produced a violent four day uprising in new york city in which as many as 100 people died.
the riot began on july 13 with a march by 4 000 men mostly poor irish laborers who were protesting the provisions by which some wealthy peop e could be exempted from conscription.
rich man s war poor man s fight the demons cried just as some critics of the war chanted at times in the south.
many new yorkers a feared that the war would drive black workers north to compete for their jobs.
the turned violent when officials began drawing names for the draft.
the crowd burned t e building and then split into factions.
some rioters attacked symbols of wealth such shops and mansions.
others terrorized black neighborhoods and lynched some r contemporary engraving depicts one such lynching.
only by transferring five regiments o city from gettysburg less than two weeks after the great battle there was the go to restore order.
the granger collection new york the civil war 371 proclaimed that all persons who discouraged enlistments or engaged in disloyal practices were subject to martial law.
in all more than 13 000 persons were arrested and imprisoned for varying periods.
the most prominent copperhead in the country ohio congressman clement l vallandigham was seized by military authorities and exiled to the confederacy after he made a speech claiming that the purpose of the war was to free the blacks and enslave the whites.
lincoln defied all efforts to curb his authority to suppress opposition even those of the supreme court.
when chief justice taney issued a writ ex parte merrymari requiring him to release an imprisoned maryland secessionist leader lincoln simply ignored it.
after the war in 1866 the supreme court ruled in ex parte milligan that military trials in areas where the civil courts existed were unconstitutional.
repression was not the only tool the north used to strengthen support for the war.
in addition to arresting disloyal northerners lincolns administration used new tools of persuasion to build popular opinion in favor of the war.
in addition to pro war pamphlets posters speeches and songs the war mobilized a significant corps of photographers organized by the renowned mathew brady one of the first important photographers in american history to take pictures of the war.
the photographs that resulted from this effort new to warfare were among the grimmest ever made to that point many of them displaying the vast numbers of dead on the civil war battlefields.
for some americans the images of death contributed to a revulsion from the war.
but for most northerners they gave evidence of the level of sacrifice that had been made for the preservation of the union and thus spurred the nation on to victory.
southerners used similar propaganda in the confederacy although less effectively.
the presidential election of 1864 occurred therefore in the midst of considerable political dissension.
the republicans had suffered heavy losses in the congressional elections of 1862 and in response leaders of the party tried to create a broad coalition of all the groups that supported the war.
they called the new organization the union party but in reality it was little more than the republican party and a small faction of war democrats.
the union party nominated lincoln for another term as president and andrew johnson of tennessee a war democrat who had opposed his states decision to secede for the vice presidency.
the democrats nominated george b mcclellan a celebrated former union general who had been relieved of his command by lincoln.
the party adopted a platform denouncing the war and calling for a truce.
mcclellan repudiated that demand but the democrats were clearly the peace party in the campaign trying to profit from growing war weariness and from the unions discouraging military position in the summer of 1864 at this crucial moment however several northern military victories particularly the capture of atlanta georgia early in 1864 election september rejuvenated northern morale and boosted republican prospects.
lincoln won debating the past the causes of the civil war t wt secor d inaugural address in march 1865 abraham lincoln looked back at the beginning i ini of the civil war four years earlier.
all knew he said that slavery was somehow the cause of the war.
few historians doubt the basic truth of lincoln s statement but they have disagreed on to liberty this painting by theodore kaufmann shows a group of fugitive slaves escaping from the south in the late years of the civil war.
thousands of former slaves crossed the union lines where they were given their freedom.
many of them joined the union army.
the granger collection new york sharply about whether slavery was the only or even the principal cause of the war.
this debate began even before the war itself.
in 1858 senator william h seward of new york took note of two competing explanations of the sectional tensions that were then inflaming the nation.
on one side he claimed stood those who believed the sectional hostility to be accidental unnecessary the work of interested or fanatical agitators opposing them stood those like seward himself who believed there to be an irrepressible conflict between opposing and enduring forces.
the irrepressible conflict argument dominated historical discussion of the war from the 1860s to the 1920s.
because the north and the south had reached positions on the issue of slavery that were both irreconcilable and seemingly unalterable some historians claimed the conflict had become inevitable james rhodes in his seven volume history of the united states from the compromise of 1850 1893 1900 placed greatest emphasis on the moral conflict over slavery but he suggested as well that the struggle also reflected fundamental differences between the northern and southern economic systems.
charles and mary beard in the rise of american civilization 2 vols 1927 also viewed the war as an irrepressible economic rather than moral conflict.
ultimately however reelection comfortably with 212 electoral votes to mcclellan s 21 the president carried every state except kentucky new jersey and delaware.
but lincolns lead in the popular vote was a modest 10 percent.
had union victories not occurred when they did and had lincoln not made special arrangements to allow union troops to vote mcclellan might have won.
the politics of emancipation despite their surface unity in 1864 and their general agreement on most economic matters the republicans disagreed sharply on the issue of slavery.
radicals led in congress by such men as representative thaddeus stevens of pennsylvania and senators charles sumner of massachusetts and benjamin wade of ohio wanted to use the war to abolish slavery immediately and completely.
conservatives favored a slower more gradual and they believed less disruptive process for ending slavery.
in the beginning at least they had the support of the president.
372 despite lincolns cautious view of emancipation momentum began to gather behind it early in the war.
in 1861 congress passed the confiscation act which declared that all confiscation slaves used for insurrectionary purposes acts that is in support of the confederate mili tary effort would be considered freed.
subsequent laws in the spring of 1862 abolished slavery in washington d c and in the western territories and compensated owners.
in july 1862 the radicals pushed through congress the second confiscation act which again declared free the slaves of persons aiding and supporting the insurrection whether or not the slaves themselves were doing so and which also authorized the president to employ african americans including freed slaves as soldiers.
as the war progressed much of the north seemed slowly to accept emancipation as a central war aim nothing less would justify the enormous sacrifices of the struggle many northerners believed.
as a result the radicals increased their influence within the republican party a development that did not g of hose who believed he c v l war to have been irrepressible returned to an emphasis on social and cultural factors.
allan nevins in the ordeal of the union 8 vols 1947 1971 arqued that the problem of slavery lay at the root of the cultural differences between the north and the south but that the fundamental assumptions tastes and cultural aims of the two regions were diverging in other ways as well.
more recent proponents of the irrepressible conflict argument have taken different views of the northern and southern positions on the conflict but have been equally insistent on the role of culture and ideology in creating them.
eric foner in free soil free labor free men 1970 and other writings emphasized the importance of the free labor ideology to northern opponents of slavery.
most northerners including abraham lincoln foner claimed opposed slavery largely because they feared it might spread to the north and threaten the position of free white laborers.
eugene genovese writing of southern slaveholders in the political economy of slavery 1965 argued that just as northerners were becoming convinced of a southern threat to their economic system so southerners believed that the north had aggressive and hostile designs on the southern way of life.
like foner therefore genovese saw cultural differences as the source of an all but inevitable conflict.
other historians have argued that the civil war might have been avoided that the differences between north and south were not so fundamental as to have necessitated war.
the idea of the war as avoidable gained wide recognition among historians in the 1920s and 1930s when a group known as the revisionists began to offer new accounts of the origins of the conflict.
one of the leading revisionists was james g randall who saw in the social and economic systems of the north and the south no differences so fundamental as to require a war.
avery craven another leading revisionist argued similarly in the coming of the civil war 1942 that slave laborers were not much worse off than northern industrial workers that the institution was already on the road to ultimate extinction and that war could therefore have been averted had skillful and responsible leaders worked to produce compromise.
more recent students of the civil war have emphasized the role of political agitation and ethnocultural conflicts in the coming of the war.
michael holt in the political crisis of the 1850s 1978 emphasized the role of political parties and especially the collapse of the second party system rather than the irreconcilable differences between sections in explaining the conflict although he avoided placing blame on any one group.
along with paul kleppner joel silbey and william gienapp holt was one of the creators of an ethnocultural interpretation of the war.
these scholars argue that the civil war began in large part because the party system the most effective instrument for containing and mediating sectional differences collapsed in the 1850s and produced a new republican party that aggravated rather than calmed the divisions in the nation william gienapp in the origins of the republican party 1852 1856 1987 argued that the disintegration of the party system in the early 1850s was less a result of the debate over slavery in the territories than of such ethnocultural issues as temperance and nativism.
gienapp and the other ethnoculturalists would not entirely dispute lincolns claim that slavery was somehow the cause of the war.
but they do challenge the arguments of eric foner and others that the free labor ideal of the north and the challenge slavery and its possible expansion into the territories posed to that ideal was the principal reason for the conflict.
slavery became important they suggest less because of irreconcilable differences of attitude than because of the collapse of parties and other structures that might have contained the conflict.
understand analyze and evaluate 1 some arguments regarding the civil war as inevitable focus on economic differences between the north and the south.
what were these differences and how might they have led inevitably to war.
2 some revisionist scholars attribute the civil war to a blundering generation of political leaders.
who were these leaders and what blunders did they make.
could better decisions have avoided war.
3 according to the ethnoculturalists what was the role of political parties in the cominq of the civil war.
nnoticed by the president who decided to seize the leader lip of the rising antislavery sentiment himself.
on september 22 1862 after the union victory at the attle of antietam the president announced his intention to se his war powers to issue an executive order freeing all slaves c in the confederacy.
and on january 1 he formally signed proclamation which declared forever tree laves in all areas of the confederacy except those already un er union control tennessee western virginia and southern ouisiana.
the proclamation did not apply to the border slave tates which had never seceded from the union and therefore ere not subject to the presidents war powers.
on the ay o mancipation ralph waldo emerson wrote a boston hymn.
pay ransom to the owner and fill the bag to the brim who is the owner.
the slave is owner and ever was.
source english poetry iii from tennyson to whitman.
the harvard classics edited by charles w eliot new york p f collier son 1909 1914.
the immediate effect of the proclamation was limited since it applied only to slaves still under confederate control.
but the document was of great importance nevertheless because it clearly and irrevocably established that the war was being fought not only to preserve the union but also to eliminate slavery.
eventually as federal armies occupied much of the south the proclamation became a practical reality and led directly to the freeing of thousands of slaves.
even in areas not directly affected by the proclamation the antislavery impulse gained strength.
the u s governments tentative measures against slavery were not at first a major factor in the liberation of slaves.
instead the today unbind the captive so only are ye unbound lift up a people from the dust trump of their rescue sound.
373 consider the source ll llhllillllllhiullllliltilllllilll ihiiitl f ll tnillinb lf ihlilli il iiiihiihiiii l l lllllllllltlttt ulltlt itlflitllllll tul ll infllih llil ll i l.
the causes of wars are rather different from their meanings.
presidents often wartime oratory use wartime speeches to shape public understanding of those meanings to articulate their visions of what wars are really about.
they tend to emphasize broad principles and cherished ideals rather than more narrow economic concerns or even national security arguments.
more than four months after the pivotal battle at gettysburg president abraham lincoln traveled there to dedicate a military cemetery.
a crowd of 15 000 listened first to the famed orator edward everetts two hour account of the battle.
then came lincoln.
his speech was much shorter just over two minutes.
the president touched briefly on american history before turning to the civil war and what it meant.
the gettysburg address is reproduced here in its entirety the 1863 document.
almost a hundred and fifty years later president george w bush also appealed to the past in explaining the conflict of his time the war on terrorism of the early twenty first century.
the occasion was bushs second inaugural address delivered in january 2005 after his victory over the democratic nominee john kerry.
his speech came in the middle of the ongoing wars in iraq and afghanistan that had been prompted by the terrorist attacks of september 11 2001 though the context couldnt have been more different bush devoted part of his address to themes similar to lincolns so many years before.
that excerpt is included here as the 2005 document.
lincoln 1863 the gettysburg address november 19 1863 four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent a new nation conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.
now we are engaged in a great civil war testing whether that nation or any nation so conceived and so dedicated can long endure.
we are met on a great battle field of that war.
we have come to dedicate a portion of that field as a final resting place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might live.
it is altogether fitting and proper that we should do this.
but in a larger sense we can not dedicate we can not consecratewe can not hallow this ground.
the brave men living and dead who struggled here have consecrated it far above our poor power to add or detract.
the world will little note nor long remember what we say here but it can never forget what they did here.
it is for us the living rather to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they who fought here have thus far so nobly advanced.
it is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain that this nation under god shall have a new birth of freedom and that government of the people by the people for the people shall not perish from the earth.
7 h h source abrahamlincolnonline org understand analyze and evaluate 1 what is the meaning of the war in lincoln s address.
what has it been fought for.
2 when lincoln refers to a new birth of freedom what is he talking about.
freedom for whom.
3 what is the role of religion in lincolns understanding of the war.
what role does religion play in his understanding of the united states more broadly.
bush 2005 george w bushs second inaugural address january 20 2005 we are led by events and common sense to one conclusion the survival of liberty in our land increasingly depends on the success of liberty in other lands.
the best hope for peace in our world is the expansion of freedom in all the world.
americas vital interests and our deepest beliefs are now one.
from the day of our founding we have proclaimed that every man and woman on this earth has rights and dignity and matchless value because they bear the image of the maker of heaven and earth.
across the generations we have proclaimed the imperative of self government because no one is fit to be a master and no one deserves to be a slave.
advancing these ideals is the mission that created our nation.
it is the honorable achievement of our fathers.
now it is the urgent requirement of our nations security and the calling of our time.
so it is the policy of the united states to seek and support the growth of democratic movements and institutions in every nation and culture with the ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our world.
this is not primarily the task of arms though we will defend ourselves and our friends by force of arms when necessary.
freedom by its nature must be chosen and defended by citizens and sustained by the rule of law and the protection of minorities.
and when the soul of a nation finally speaks the institutions that arise may reflect customs and traditions very different from our own.
america will not impose our own style of government on the unwilling.
our goal instead is to help others find their own voice attain their own freedom and make their own way.
source make connections 1 what is the war on terrorism about for bush.
why has america fought.
2 how does bush s concept of freedom compare to lincolns.
how does bush use the history of freedom in lincolns era to justify america s war on terrorism.
whose freedom is bush concerned about.
3 how does bush s understanding of the role of religion in american policy compare with lincolns.
376 chapter 2 recall and reflect 1 compare patterns of settlement and expansion in the chesapeake with those in new england.
what were the major differences.
were there any similarities.
2 what were the reasons for the revolts and rebellions that occurred in the colonies of virginia maryland massachusetts and new york between 1660 and 1700.
how were these rebellions resolved.
3 how did the institution of slavery in englands atlantic seaboard colonies differ from slavery in the caribbean.
what accounted for these differences.
4 what were the middle grounds and how did conditions there differ from conditions in the colonies along the atlantic seaboard.
5 how did the glorious revolution in england affect englands north american colonies.
significant events 1607 jamestown 1619 founded first african workers arrive 1620.
q in virginia pilgrims found virginia house of burgesses plymouth colony meets for first time 1624 dutch establish settlement on 1629 manhattan island new hampshire and maine established puritans establish 1634 massachusetts bay colony at boston first english settlements founded in maryland 1635 hartford settled in connecticut 1636 roger williams founds settlement in rhode island 1637 anne hutchinson expelled from 1638 massachusetts bay colony swedes and finns establish new sweden on the delaware river 1642 1649 1649 english civil war charles i executed 1660 english restoration charles ii 1663 becomes king 1664 carolina colony chartered english capture new netherland king philips war in new jersey chartered new england 1676 1681 bacons rebellion in virginia william penn receives charter for pennsylvania 1686 1688 dominion of new england established glorious revolution in england william and mary a 1732 ascend throne georgia chartered society and culture in provincial america looking ahead hshuinnhnniiniihunhnnnuuinhhnbhhnnfhunnnnuhuhnhhhnhnhnnnhhhhhuhmhnhnhhhhhhhdhhhhiunhnhhh 1 what accounted for the rapid increase in the colonial population in the seventeenth century.
life in the american colonies this colored engraving shows the domestic life of americans during the eighteenth century.
depicted are family members at work in their cozy surroundings.
their industriousness is shown to be a singular virtue of the era.
bettmann corbis 2 why did african slavery expand so rapidly in the late seventeenth century.
3 how did religion shape and influence colonial society.
setting the stage by the early eighteenth century the british colonies were the outposts of the british world.
as the colonies grew and became more prosperous they also became more english.
the colonists adopted the tastes styles and customs of england bought goods made in england read books and pamphlets published in england and modeled most of their political cultural and educational institutions on their english equivalents.
many perhaps most colonists considered themselves englishmen and englishwomen just as much as the men and women in england itself did.
at the same time however life in the colonies was diverging in many ways from life in england.
the physical environment was very different vaster and less tamed.
the population was more diverse as well.
the area that would become the united states was a magnet for immigrants from many lands other than england scotland ireland the european continent as well as migrants from the spanish and french empires already established in america.
and beginning with the first importation of slaves into virginia english north america became the destination for thousands of forcibly transplanted africans.
in addition europeans and africans were interacting constantly with a native population.
despite the efforts of the colonists to isolate themselves from indian society and create a culture all their own the european african and native american worlds could not remain entirely separate.
the colonists emulated english society and they were becoming more and more like one another.
to the degree that they were shaped by the character of their own regions they were becoming more and more diverse.
although americans would ultimately discover that they had enough in common to join together to form a single nation these regional differences continued to affect their society well beyond the colonial period.
the colonial population and natural increase not until long after the beginning of european colonization did europeans and africans in north america outnumber the native population.
but after uncertain beginnings at jamestown and immigration plymouth the nonnative population grew rapidly and substantially through continued immigration and through natural increase until by the late seventeenth century europeans and africans became the dominant population groups along the atlantic coast.
a lew of the early english settlers were members of the upper classes usually the younger sons of the lesser gentry men who stood to inherit no land at home and aspired to establish estates for themselves in america.
for the most part however the early english population was very unaristocratic.
it included some members of the emerging middle class businessmen who migrated to america for religious or commercial reasons or like john winthrop both.
but the dominant element was english laborers.
some came to the new world independently.
the religious dissenters who formed the bulk of the population of early new england for example were men and women of modest means who arranged their own passage brought their families with them and established themselves immediately on their own land.
but in the chesapeake at least three fourths of the immigrants in the seventeenth century arrived as indentured servants.
indentured servitude the system of temporary servitude in the new world developed out of existing practices in england.
young men and women bound themselves to masters for a fixed term of servitude usually four to five years.
in return they received passage to america food and shelter.
upon completion of their origins terms of service male indentures were supposed to receive such benefits as clothing tools and occasionally land in reality however many left service without anything unprepared and unequipped to begin earning a living on their own.
roughly one ourth of the indentures in the chesapeake were women most of whom worked as domestic servants.
because men greatly outnumbered women in the region in the seventeenth century 66.
society and culture in provincial america 67 pacific ocean.
el pasd del norte 5x1659 v forests area of non indian settlement forts towns or outposts a fort st louis 1685 lafoii st e v.
supe f sauitste.
1641 fort mackinac ntdu 61700 esprit 1666 green bay s 1634 t fort st ouis 1 2 fort creveccyeur.
1680 forttadoussac 1600.
quebec trois rivieres 1634j v c p9 xr fort frontenac j 1b73 iw.
v1633 plymouth 0 io boston 1630 e 1620 i providence 1 36 c v hartford 1635j4 new haven 1636 new amsterdam fort st joseph 1680 cahokia 1698 kaskaskia 1700 y x fz fort prudhomme arkansas post memphis 1682 1686 fort maurepas 1 1699.
philadelphia 1682 new york city annapolis 1626 c 1648 f wilmington j 1 665 st marys 1634 jamestown 1607 w j j antic edenton 1658 ocean charles town charleston 1670.
port royal 1683 pensacola.
1696 gulf of mexico wilmington 1665 fort san mateo st augustine st.
lucia 5751 saltillo 1575.
y 17 0 u s north america in 1700 this map reveals how tiny a proportion of north america was settled by europeans in 1700 nearly a century after the first english settlements began there.
the largest area of settlement was the thin fringe of colonies along the northern atlantic seaboard.
there were additional scattered settlements almost all of them tiny in eastern canada along the southern atlantic coast in the mississippi valley and in the southwest.
what accounted for the isolated colonies in noncoastal areas of north america.
women could reasonably expect to marry when their terms of servitude expired.
male domestic servants however usually had no such options.
most indentured servants came to the colonies voluntarily but not all.
beginning as early as 1617 the english government occasionally dumped shiploads of convicts in america to be sold into servitude although some criminals according to captain john smith mid chuse to be hanged ere they would go thither and were the government also sent prisoners taken in battles with the scots and the irish in the 1650s as well as other groups deemed undesirable orphans vagrants paupers and those who were lewd and dangerous.
other involuntary immigrants were neither dangerous nor indigent but were simply victims of kidnapping or impressment by aggressive and unscrupulous investors and promoters.
it was not difficult to understand why the system of indentured servitude proved so appealing to colonial employers particularly once it became clear as it quickly did that the indian population could not easily be transformed into a servile workforce.
the indenture system provided a means of coping with the severe labor shortage in the new world.
in the chesapeake the headright system by which masters received additional land grants for every servant they imported offered another incentive.
for the servants themselves the attractions were not always so clear.
those who came voluntarily often did so to escape troubles in england others came in the hope of establishing themselves on land or in trades of their own when their terms of service expired.
yet the reality often differed sharply from the hope.
some former indentures managed to establish themselves successfully as farmers tradespeople or artisans.
others mostly males found themselves without land without employment without families and without prospects.
a large floating pop realffies of ulation of young single men traveled restlessly from place to place often in groups in search of work or land and were a potential and at times actual source of social unrest particularly in the chesapeake.
even free laborers who found employment or land and settled down with families often did not stay put for very long.
the phenomenon of families simply pulling up stakes and moving to another more promising location every several years was one of the most prominent characteristics of the colonial population.
indentured servitude remained an important source of population growth well into the eighteenth century but beginning indentured servitude 68 chapter 14 battle of chattanooga union forces.
grant came to the rescue.
in the battle of chattanooga november 23 25 the reinforced union army drove the confederates back into georgia.
northern troops then occupied most of eastern tennessee.
union forces had now achieved a second important objective control of the tennessee river.
four of the eleven confederate states were now effectively cut off from the southern nation.
no longer could the confederacy hope to win independence through a decisive military victory.
they could hope to win only by holding on and exhausting the northern will to fight.
the last stage 1864 1863 by the beginning of 1864 ulysses s grant had become general in chief of all the union armies.
at long last president lincoln had found a commander whom he could rely on to pursue the war doggedly and tenaciously.
grant was not a subtle strategic or tactical general he believed in using the north s overwhelming advantage in troops and material resources to overwhelm the south.
he was not afraid to absorb massive casualties as long as he was inflicting similar casualties on his opponents.
grant planned two great offensives for 1864 in virginia the army of the potomac technically under meades command but really now under grants would advance toward richmond and force lee into a decisive battle.
in georgia grant s strategy western army under william tecumseh sherman would advance east toward atlanta and destroy the remaining confederate force farther south which was now under the command of joseph e johnston.
the northern campaign began when the army of the potomac 115 000 strong plunged into the rough wooded wilderness area of northwestern virginia in pursuit of lees 75 000 man army.
after avoiding an engagement for several weeks lee turned grant back in the battle of the wilderness may 5 7.
but grant was undeterred.
without stopping to rest or reorganize he resumed his march toward richmond.
he met lee again in the bloody five day battle of spotsylvania court lee surrenders to grant appomattox court house april 9 1865 april 1 1865 railroad union forces confederate forces rt n confederate defense line confederate victory union victory ml 4 0 1 l virginia campaigns 1864 1865 from the confederate defeat and retreat from gettysburg until the end of the war f u s grant was commander of all union forces and had taken over the army of the potomac.
although confederate forces won h t.
63 9h n9 k p ace vir9 nia by grew steadily stronger and the southern forces steadily weaker.
grant believed that the union strategy should reflect the north mprtant ba tles durin9 the vir9inia campal9n lhe un on ar y s 9reatest advantage its superiority in men and equipment.
effect did this decision have on the level of casualties.
the civil war 395 mobile bay 1864 this image by currier and ives portrays a famous naval battle at the entrance to mobile bay between a union sloop of war the uss richmond part of a fleet commanded by admiral david farragut and a confederate ironclad the css tennessee.
although confederate mines were scattered across the entrance to the harbor farragut ordered his ships into battle with the memorable command damn the torpedoes.
full speed ahead.
the union forces defeated the confederate flotilla and three weeks later captured the forts defending the harbor thus removing from confederate control the last port on the gulf coast available to the blockade runners who were attempting to supply the south s war needs.
archive photos getty images gulf o f mexico mobile mobile bay august w4 troop movements union confederate victories extent of union control 1862 1864 1863 1865 arinq lee down in virginia general william tecumseh sherman was moving east across georgia.
after a series of sherman s march to the sea 1864 1865 while rant nw archecj unimpeded to savannah on the georgia coast deliberately devastating the towns and plantations through battles in tennessee and northwest georgia sherman captured atlanta an t en movinq north through the carolinas.
a few days after lee surrendered to grant at appomattox which his troops marched.
note that after capturing savannah by christmas 1864 sherman g confederate forces farther south surrendered to sherman.
what did sherman believe his devastating march to the sea weald accomplish.
396 chapter 3 white assumptions about the inferiority of people of color contributed to the growing rigidity of the system.
such assumptions came naturally to the english settlers.
they had already defined themselves as a superior race in their relations with the native indian population and earlier in their relations with the irish.
the idea of subordinating a supposedly inferior race was therefore already established in the english imagination by the time substantial numbers of africans appeared in america.
in the early eighteenth century colonial assemblies began to pass slave codes limiting the rights of blacks in law and ensuring almost absolute authority to white masters.
one factor and slave codes one actor on y determined whether a person was subject to the slave codes color.
in contrast to the colonial societies of spanish america where people of mixed race had a different and higher status than pure africans english america recognized no such distinctions.
any african ancestry was enough to classify a person as black.
changing sources of european immigration by the early eighteenth century the flow of immigrants from england itself began to decline substantiallya result of better economic conditions there and of new government restrictions on emigration in the face of massive depopulation in some regions of the country.
but as english immigration declined french german swiss irish welsh scottish and scandinavian immigration continued and increased.
the earliest although not the most numerous of these non english european immigrants were the french calvinists ar rican slave trade this image is from a plate from british author amelia opie s poem blnru c l opie s poem depicts the life of an african who was captured by slave traders and h f u p b k s ves hld fthe slave ship or how to m t were narked like remn fnr 4 i y e traders and chronicles his journey to the west indies nn i w sugar published in london packed hke cargo for the long ocean voyage.
history archive uig the bridgentan art ubrary n sh p his ed work on the sugar plantations the society and culture in provincial america 75 pennsylvania dutch or huguenots.
a royal proclamation the edict of nantes of 1598 had allowed them to become practically a state within the state in roman catholic france.
in 1685 however the french government revoked the edict.
soon after that huguenots and husuenots besan leaving the country.
about 300 000 left france in the following decades.
a small proportion of them traveled to the english colonies in north america.
many german protestants suffered similarly from the arbitrary religious policies of their rulers and all germans catholics as well as protestants suffered from the devastating wars with king louis xiv of france the sun king.
the rhineland of southwestern germany the area known as the palatinate experienced particular hardships.
because it was close to france its people were particularly exposed to slaughter and ruin at the hands of invaders.
the unusually cold winter of 1708 1709 dealt a final blow to the precarious economy of the region.
more than 12 000 palatinate germans sought refuge in england and approximately 3 000 of them soon found their way to america.
they arrived in new york and tried at first to make homes in the mohawk valley only to be ousted by the powerful landlords of the region.
some of the germans moved farther up the mohawk out of reach of the patroons but most made their way to pennsylvania where they received a warm welcome and where they ultimately became known to english settlers as the pennsylvania dutch a corruption of their own word for german deutsch.
the quaker colony became the most common destination for germans who came to america in growing numbers.
among them were moravians and mennonites with religious views similar in many ways to those of the quakers.
many german protestants went to north carolina as well especially after the founding of new bern in 1710 by a company of 600 german speaking swiss.
the most numerous of the newcomers were the scots irish scottish presbyterians who had settled in northern ireland in the province of ulster in the early seventeenth century.
the ulster colonists had prospered for a time despite the barren soil and the constant never wholly successful struggle to suppress the catholic natives.
but in the first years of the eighteenth century parliament prohibited ulster from exporting to england the woolens and other products that had become the basis of the northern irish economy at the same time the english government virtually outlawed the practice of the presbyterian religion the slave ship spookes the british slave ship brookes provided this plan of its stowage of slaves to conform to 1798 legislation from parliament.
it illustrates vividly the terrible conditions under which slaves were shipped from africa to the americas human beings squeezed into every available space like cargo for the long dangerous passage during which many africans died.
library of congress 76.
chapter 15 a monument to the lost cause this monument in the town square of monroe georgia was typical of many such memorials erected all across the south after the civil war.
they served both to commemorate the confederate dead and to remind white southerners of what was by the 1870s already widely known and romanticized as the lost cause lee snider photo images corbis could advance successfully in american society.
but whatever their particular demands virtually all former slaves were united in their desire for independence from white control.
freed from slavery blacks throughout the south began almost immediately to create autonomous african american communities.
they pulled out of white controlled churches and established their own.
they created fraternal benevolent and mutual aid societies.
when they could they began their own schools.
for most white southerners freedom meant something very different.
it meant the ability to control their own destinies without interference from the north or the federal government.
and in the immediate aftermath of the war they attempted to exercise this version of freedom by trying to restore their society to its antebellum form.
slavery had been abolished in the former confederacy by the emancipation proclamation and everywhere else as of december 1865 by a freedmens bureau school african american students and teachers stand outside a school for former slaves one of many run by the freedmens bureau throughout the defeated confederacy in the first years after the war.
corbis the thirteenth amendment.
but many white planters continued a kind of slavery in an altered form by keeping black workers legally tied to the plantations.
when many white southerners fought for what they considered freedom they were fighting above all to preserve local and regional autonomy and white supremacy.
the federal government kept troops in the south after the war to preserve order and protect the freedmen.
in march 1865 congress established the freedmens bureau an agency of the army directed by general oliver o howard.
the freedmens bureau distributed food to millions of former slaves.
it established schools staffed by missionaries and teachers who had been sent to the south by freedmens aid societies and other private and church groups in the north.
it made modest efforts to settle blacks on lands of their own.
the bureau also offered considerable assistance to poor whites many of whom were similarly destitute and homeless after the war.
but the freedmens bureau was not a permanent solution.
it had authority to operate for only one year and in any case it was far too small to deal effectively with the enormous problems facing southern society.
by the time the war ended other proposals for reconstructing the defeated south were emerging.
the freedmens bureau issues of reconstruction reconstruction was determined not just by social realities or ideals.
it was also determined by partisan politics.
the terms by which the southern states rejoined the union had important implications for both major political parties.
the republican victories in 1860 and 1864 had been a result in large part of the division of the democratic party and later the removal of the south from the electorate.
readmitting the south leaders of both parties believed would reunite the democrats and weaken the republicans.
in addition the republican party had taken advantage of the souths absence from congress to pass a program of nationalistic economic legislation railroad subsidies protective tariffs banking and currency reforms and other measures to benefit northern business leaders and industrialists.
should the democratic reconstruction and the new south 403 party regain power with heavy southern support these programs would be in jeopardy.
complicating these practical questions were emotional concerns.
many northerners believed the south should be punished in some way for the suffering and sacrifice its rebellion had caused.
many northerners believed too that the south should be transformed made over in the norths urbanized image its supposedly backward feudal undemocratic society civilized and modernized.
even among the republicans in congress there was considerable disagreement about the proper approach to reconstruction disagreement that reflected the same fac conservative tional divisions that had created disputes and radical over emancipation during the war.
republicans conservatives insisted that the south accept the abolition of slavery but proposed few other conditions for the readmission of the seceded states.
the radicals led by representative thaddeus stevens of pennsylvania and senator charles sumner of massachusetts urged that the civil and military leaders of the confederacy be punished that large numbers of southern whites be disenfranchised that the legal rights of former slaves be protected and that the property of wealthy white southerners who had aided the confederacy be confiscated and distributed among the freedmen.
some radicals favored granting suffrage to the former slaves.
others hesitated since few northern states permitted blacks to vote.
between the radicals and the conservatives stood a faction of uncommitted republicans the moderates who rejected the punitive goals of the radicals but supported extracting at least some concessions from the south on african american rights.
plans for reconstruction president lincolns sympathies lay with the moderates and conservatives of his party.
he believed that a lenient reconstruction policy would encourage southern unionists and other former whigs to join the republican party and would thus prevent the readmission of the south from strengthening the democrats.
more immediately the southern unionists could become the nucleus of new loyal state governments in the south.
lincoln was not uninterested in the fate of the freedmen but he was willing to defer questions about their future for the sake of rapid reunification.
lincolns reconstruction plan which he announced in december 1863 offered a general amnesty to white southerners other than high officials of the confederacy who would pledge loyalty to the gov lincolns 10 ernment and accept the elimination of ptan slavery.
whenever 10 percent of the number of voters in i860 took the ath in any state those loyal voters could set up a state government.
lincoln also hoped to extend su rage to african americans who were educated owned prope y wade davis bill and had served in the union army.
three southern states louisiana arkansas and tennessee all under union occupation reestablished loyal governments under the lincoln formula in 1864 the radical republicans were astonished at the mildness of lincolns program.
they persuaded congress to deny seats to representatives from the three reconstructed states and refused to count the electoral vote of those states in the election of 1864 but for the moment the radicals were uncertain about what form their own reconstruction plan should take.
their first effort to resolve that question was the wade davis bill passed by congress in july 1864 it authorized the president to appoint a provisional governor for each conquered state.
when a majority not lincolns 10 percent of the white males of the state pledged their allegiance to the union the governor could summon a state constitutional convention whose delegates were to be elected by those who would swear through the so called ironclad oath that they had never borne arms against the united states another departure from lincolns plan.
the new state constitutions would have to abolish slavery disenfranchise confederate civil and military leaders and repudiate debts accumulated by the state governments during the war.
after a state had met these conditions congress would readmit it to the union.
like the presidents proposal the wade davis bill left up to the states the question of political rights for blacks.
congress passed the bill a few days before it adjourned in 1864 and lincoln disposed of it with a pocket veto.
his action enraged the radical leaders and the pragmatic lincoln became convinced he would have to accept at least some of the radical demands.
he began to move toward a new approach to reconstruction.
the death of lincoln what plan lincoln might have produced no one can say.
on the night of april 14 1865 the president and his wife attended a play at fords theater in washington.
as they sat in the presidential box john wilkes booth a member of a distinguished family of actors and a zealous advocate of the southern cause entered the box from the rear and shot lincoln in the head.
the president was carried unconscious to a house across the street where early the next morning surrounded by family friends and political associates among them a tearful charles sumner he died.
the circumstances of lincolns death earned him immediate martyrdom.
it also produced something close to hysteria throughout the north.
there were accusations that booth had acted as part of a great conspiracy accusations that contained some truth.
booth did indeed have associates one of whom stabbed and wounded secretary of state seward the night of the assassination another of whom abandoned at the last moment a plan to murder vice president johnson.
booth himself escaped on horseback into the virginia countryside where on april 26 he was cornered by union troops and shot to abraham lincoln this haunting photograph of abraham lincoln showing clearly the weariness and aging that four years as a war president had created was taken in washington only four days before his assassination in 1865.
the library of congress death in a blazing bam.
a military tribunal convicted eight other people of participating in the conspiracy at least two of them on the basis of virtually no evidence.
four were hanged.
to many northerners however the murder of the president seemed evidence of an even greater conspiracy one masterminded and directed by the unrepentant leaders of the defeated south.
militant republicans exploited such suspicions relentlessly for months ensuring that lincolns death would help doom his plans for a relatively easy peace.
johnson and restoration leadership of the moderates and conservatives fell to lincolns successor andrew johnson who was not well suited by either circumstance or personality for the task.
a democrat until he had joined the union ticket with lincoln in 1864 he became andrew a repu ican president at a moment when johnsons partisan passions were growing.
johnson personality himself was an intemperate and tactless man filled with resentments and insecurities.
he was also openly hostile to the freed slaves and unwilling to support any plans that guaranteed them civil equality or enfranchisement.
he once declared white men alone must manage the south johnson revealed his plan for reconstruction or restoration as he preferred to call it soon after he took office and he implemented it during the summer of 1865 when congress was in recess.
like lincoln he offered amnesty to those southerners who would take an oath of allegiance.
high ranking confederate officials and any white southerner with land worth 20 000 or more would have to apply to the president for individual pardons.
johnson a self made man apparently liked the thought of the great planter aristocrats humbling themselves before him.
in most other respects however his plan resembled that of the wade davis bill.
for each state the president appointed a provisional governor who was to invite qualified voters to elect delegates to a constitutional convention.
johnson did not specify how many qualified voters were necessary but he implied that he would require a majority as had the wade davis bill.
in order to win readmission to congress a state had to revoke its ordinance of secession abolish slavery ratify the thirteenth amendment and repudiate the confederate and state war debts.
the final procedure before restoration was for a state to elect a state government and send representatives to congress.
whereas johnson helped white southerners to return to their land he did little in support of the former slaves.
although freedmen had been given their liberty holding on to it proved difficult.
many freedmen who returned to work for white planters found themselves almost like slaves again.
johnson offered no help.
are not our rights as a free people and good citizens of the united states to be considered asked a petition against the president.
it was a long time before freedmen truly found liberty.
by the end of 1865 all the seceded states had formed new governments some under lincolns plan some under johnsons and were prepared to rejoin the union as soon as northern congress recognized them.
but radical attitudes republicans vowed not to recognize the harden johnson governments just as they had previously refused to recognize the lincoln regimes for by now northern opinion had hardened and become more hostile toward the south than it had been a year earlier when congress passed the wade davis bill.
many northerners were disturbed by the apparent reluctance of some delegates to the southern conventions to abolish slavery and by the refusal of all the conventions to grant suffrage to any blacks.
they were astounded that states claiming to be loyal should elect prominent leaders of the recent confederacy as state officials and representatives to congress.
particularly hard to accept was georgias choice of alexander h stephens former confederate vice president as a united states senator.
radical reconstruction reconstruction under johnsons plan often known as presf dential reconstruction continued only until congress reconvened in december 1865 at that point congress refused to seat the representatives of the restored states and created a reconstruction and the new south 405 new joint committee on reconstruction to frame a reconstruction policy of its own.
the period of congressional or radical reconstruction had begun.
the black codes meanwhile events in the south were driving northern opinion in more radical directions.
throughout the south in 1865 and early 1866 state legislatures were enacting sets of laws known as the black codes designed to give whites substantial control over former slaves.
the codes authorized local officials to apprehend unemployed african americans fine them for vagrancy and hire them out to private employers to satisfy the fine.
some of the codes forbade blacks to own or lease farms or to take any jobs other than as plantation workers or domestic servants.
congress first responded to the black codes by passing an act extending the life of the freedmens bureau and widening its powers so that it could nullify work agreements forced on freedmen under the black codes.
then in johnson s.
l q vetoes april 1866 congress passed the first civil rights act which declared african americans to be citizens of the united states and gave the federal government power to intervene in state affairs to protect the rights of citizens.
johnson vetoed both bills but congress overrode him on each of them.
the fourteenth amendment in april 1866 the joint committee on reconstruction proposed a new amendment to the constitution which congress approved in early summer and sent to the states for ratification.
eventually it became one of the most important provisions in the constitution.
the fourteenth amendment offered the first constitutional definition of american citizenship everyone born in the united states and everyone naturalized was automatically a citizen and entitled to all the privileges and immunities guaranteed by the constitution including equal protection of the laws by c both the state and national governments.
forbwcis there c0uld be n ther recluirements fr example being white for citizenship.
the amendment also imposed penalties reduction of representation in congress and in the electoral college on states that denied suffrage to any adult male inhabitants.
the wording reflected the prevailing view in congress and elsewhere that the fran chise was properly restricted to men.
finally it prohibited for mer members of congress or other former federal officials who had aided the confederacy from holding any state or federal o fice unless two thirds of congress voted to pardon them.
congressional radicals offered to readmit to the union any state whose legislature ratified the fourteenth amendment.
only tennessee did so.
all the other former confederate states along with delaware and kentucky refused leaving t e amendment temporarily without the necessary approva three fourths of the states.
fourteenth amendment among its provisions the fourteenth amendment provided the first constitutional definition of u s citizenship.
everyone born in the united states and everyone naturalized was automatically a citizen and entitled to all the privileges and immunities guaranteed by the constitution including equal protection of the laws by both the state and national governments.
this amendment also imposed penalties on states that did not extend the right to vote to all male citizens including african american men.
african american women like all women had to wait until 1920 and the ratification of the nineteenth amendment before legally entitled to vote.
north wind picture archives alamy but by now the radicals were growing more confident and determined.
bloody race riots in new orleans and other southern cities riots in which african americans were the principal victims were among the events that strengthened their hand.
in the 1866 congressional elections johnson actively campaigned for conservative candidates but he did his own cause more harm than good with his intemperate speeches.
the voters returned an overwhelming majority of republicans most of them radicals to congress.
in the senate there were now 42 republicans to 11 democrats in the house 143 republicans to 49 democrats.
the south remained largely unrepresented in both chambers.
congressional republicans were now strong enough to enact a plan of their own even over the presidents objections.
the congressional plan the radicals passed three reconstruction bills early in 1867 and overrode johnsons vetoes of all of them.
these bills 406 chapter 15 family portrait this photograph of an african american family of four generations was taken in the late nineteenth century.
every member of this family was born on the plantation of j j smith of beaufort south carolina.
the youngest members while certainly touched by slavery were not born into that institution.
corbis insurance companies to serve the black community.
one of those was maggie lena a black woman who became the first female bank president in the united states when she founded the st luke penny savings bank in richmond in 1903 most middle class blacks experienced more modest gains by becoming doctors lawyers nurses or teachers serving african american communities.
a cardinal tenet of this rising group of african americans was that education was vital to the future of their race.
with the support of northern missionary societies and to a far lesser extent a few southern state governments they expanded the network of black colleges and institutes that had taken root during reconstruction into an important educational system.
the chief spokesman for this commitment to education and booker t for a time tlae maior spokesman for african washington americans in the south and beyond was booker t washington founder and president of the tuskegee institute in alabama.
born into slavery washington had worked his way out of poverty after acquiring an education at virginias famous hampton institute.
he urged other blacks to follow the same road to self improvement.
washingtons message was both cautious and hopeful.
african americans should attend school learn skills and establish a solid footing in agriculture and the trades.
industrial not classical education should be their goal.
they should moreover refine their speech improve their dress and adopt habits of thrift and personal cleanliness they should in short adopt the standards of the white middle class.
only thus he claimed could they win the respect of the white population the prerequisite for any larger social gains.
african americans should forgo agitating for political rights he said and concentrate on self improvement and preparation for equality.
in a famous speech the atlanta in geor ia in 1895 washington outlined a compromise philosophy of race relations that became widely known as the atlanta compromise.
the wisest among my race understand he said that the agitation of questions of social equality is the extremest folly rather blacks should engage in severe and constant struggle for economic gains for as he explained no race that has anything to contribute to the markets of the world is long in any degree ostracized if african americans were ever to win the rights and privileges of citizenship they must first show that they were prepared for the exercise of these privileges washington offered a powerful challenge to those whites who wanted to discourage african americans from acquiring an education or winning any economic gains.
he helped awaken the interest of a new generation to the possibilities for selfadvancement through self improvement.
but his message was also an implicit promise that african americans would not overtly challenge the system of segregation that whites were then in the process of erecting.
the birth of jim crow few white southerners had ever accepted the idea of racial equality.
that the former slaves acquired any legal and political rights at all after emancipation was in large part the result of federal support.
that support all but vanished after 1877 federal troops withdrew.
congress lost interest.
and the supreme court effectively stripped the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments of much of their significance.
in the so called civil rights cases of 1883 the court ruled that the fourteenth amendment prohibited state governments from discriminating against people because of race but did not restrict private organizations or individuals from doing so.
thus railroads hotels theaters and workplaces could legally practice segregation.
eventually the court also validated state legislation that institutionalized the separation of the races.
in plessy v ferguson 1896 a case involving a louisiana law that required separate plessy v seating arrangements for the races on rail ferguson roads the court held that separate accom modations did not deprive blacks of equal rights if the accommodations were equal a decision that survived for years as part of the legal basis for segregated schools.
in cumming v county board of education 1899 the court ruled that laws establishing separate schools for whites were valid even if there were no comparable schools for african americans.
before these decisions white southerners were working to strengthen white supremacy and to separate the races to the greatest extent possible.
one illustration of this movement reconstruction and the new south 423 the crop lien system in 1880 in the years after the civil war more and more southern farmers white and black became tenants or sharecroppers on land owned by others.
this map shows the percentage of farms that were within the so called crop lien system the system by which people worked their lands for someone else who had a claim or lien on a part of the farmers crops.
note the high density of sharecropping and tenant farming in the most fertile areas of the deep south the same areas where slaveholding had been most dominant before the civil war.
how did the crop lien system contribute to the shift in southern agriculture toward one crop farming.
from subordination to segregation was black voting rights.
in some states disenfranchisement had begun almost as soon as reconstruction ended.
but in other areas black voting continued for some time after reconstruction largely because conservative whites believed they could control the black electorate and use it to beat back the attempts of poor white farmers to take control of the democratic party.
in the 1890s however franchise restrictions became much more rigid.
during those years some small white farmers began to demand complete black disenfranchisement both because of ra eial prejudice and because they objected to the black vote being used against them by the conservative planters known as bourbons see p 418.
at the same time many members of the conservative elite began to fear that poor whites might unite politically with poor african americans to challenge them.
they too began to support further franchise restrictions.
in devising laws to disenfranchise black males the southern states had to find ways to evade the fifteenth amendment which prohibited states from denying anyone the right to vote because of race.
two devices emerged before 1900 to accomplish this goal.
one was the poll tax or some form of property restricting qualification few african americans were the franchise prosperous enough to meet such requirements.
another was the literacy or understanding test which required voters to demonstrate an ability to read and interpret the constitution.
even those african americans who could read had trouble passing the difficult test white officials gave them.
such restrictions were often applied unequally.
literacy tests for whites for example were sometimes much easier than those for blacks.
even so the laws affected poor white voters as well as african americans.
by the late 1890s the black vote had decreased by 62 percent the white vote by 26 percent.
one result was that some states passed so called grandfather laws permitting men who could not meet the literacy and property qualifications to be enfranchised if their ancestors had voted before reconstruction began thus barring the descendants of slaves from the polls while allowing poor whites access to them.
in many areas however ruling elites were quite content to see poor whites a potential source of opposition to their power barred from voting.
the supreme court proved as compliant in ruling on the disenfranchising laws as it was in dealing with the civil rights 424.
chapter 15 tuskegee institute 1881 from these modest beginnings booker t washington s tuskegee institute in alabama became the preeminent academy offering technical and industrial training to black men.
it deliberately de emphasized the traditional liberal arts curricula of most colleges.
washington considered such training an unnecessary frill and encouraged his students to work o developing practical skills.
corbis cases.
the court eventually voided the grandfather laws but it validated the literacy test in the 1898 case of williams v mississippi and displayed a general willingness to let the southern states define their own suffrage standards as long as evasions of the fifteenth amendment were not too glaring.
laws restricting the franchise and segregating schools were only part of a network of state statutes known as the jim crow laws that by the first years of the twentieth century had institutionalized an elaborate system of segregation reaching into almost every area of southern life.
blacks and whites could not ride in the same railroad cars sit in the same waiting rooms use the same washrooms eat in the same restaurants or white sit in same t ieaters blacks had no ac control cess t0 many public parks beaches and perpetuated picnic areas they could not be patients in many hospitals.
much of the new legal structure did no more than confirm what had already been widespread social practice in the south since well before the end of reconstruction.
but the jim crow laws also stripped african americans of many of the modest social economic and political gains they had made in the more fluid atmosphere of the late nineteenth century.
the laws served too as a means for whites to retain control of social relations between the races in the newly growing cities and towns of the south where traditional patterns of deference and subjugation were more difficult to preserve than in the countryside.
what had been maintained by custom in the rural south was to be maintained by law in the urbanizing south.
more than legal efforts were involved in this process.
the 1890s witnessed a dramatic increase in white violence against blacks which along with the jim crow laws served to inhibit black agitation for equal rights.
the worst such violence lynching of blacks by white mobs either because the victims were accused of crimes or because they had seemed somehow to violate their expected station reached appalling levels.
in the nation as a whole in the 1890s there was an average of 187 lynchings each year more than 80 percent of them in the south.
the vast lynchings majority of victims were black.
one african american woman lucy mcmillan said john hunter s wife came to my house on saturday morning and reconstruction and the new south 425 a lynch mob 1893 a large almost festive crowd gathers to watch the lynching of a black man accused of the murder of a three year o d white girl.
lynch ngs remained frequent n the south un il as late as the 1930s but they reached their peak in the 1890s and the firs years of the twentieth century.
lynchings such as this one pubhshed well n advance and attracting whole families who traveled great distances to see them were infrequent.
most lynchings were the work of smaller groups operating with less visibility.
the library of congress told they were going to whip me.
i was afraid of them.
there was so much talk of ku klux drowning people and killing them.
the most celebrated lynchings occurred in cities and towns where large well organized mobs occasionally with the tacit cooperation of local authorities seized black prisoners from the jails and hanged them in great public rituals.
such public lynch tags were often planned well in advance and elaborately orga nized.
they attracted large audiences from surrounding regions.
entire families traveled many miles to witness the spectacles.
but such great public lynchings were relatively rare.
muc more frequent and more dangerous to african americans because less visible or predictable were lynchings performe by small vigilante mobs often composed of friends or relative of the victim or supposed victim of a crime.
those invo ve lynchings often saw their actions as a legitimate enforcement and indeed some victims of lynchings a in ac committed crimes.
but lynchings were also a means y w ic whites controlled the black population through terror an intimidation.
thus some lynch mobs killed african arne whose only crime had been presumptuousness chose as victims outsiders in the community w ose p threatened to disturb the normal pattern of race relations.
black men who had made any sexual advances toward white women or who white men thought had done so were particularly vulnerable to lynchings the fear of black sexuality and the unspoken fear among many men that white women might be attracted to that sexuality was always an important part of the belief system that supported segregation.
whatever the reasons or circumstances the victims of lynch mobs were denied the protection of the laws and the opportunity to prove their innocence.
the rise of lynchings shocked the conscience of many white americans in a way that other forms of racial injustice did not.
almost from the start there was a substantial anti lynching movement.
in 1892 ida b wells a committed black journalist launched what became an international anti lynching movement with a series of impassioned articles after the lynching of three of her friends in memphis tennessee her home.
the movement gradually gathered strength in the first years of the twentieth century attracting substantial support from whites particularly white women in both the north and the south.
its goal was a federal anti lynching law which would allow the national government to do what how we remember the past can tell us a great deal about remembering black history our vajues and priorities as a nation.
when these memories take official form as in a public monument erected in a culturally significant setting they offer a view into how americans understood history in a particular time.
what is revealed however is rarely a popular consensus about what individuals or events were worthy of being celebrated.
rather the final construction and placement of any public monument typically reflects a series of tough debates between people with different views of the meaning of the past.
the two monuments pictured on the following page are among the most famous in american history in general and african american history in particular.
the first is a bronze relief by augustus saint gaudens commemorating the fifty fourth massachusetts volunteer infantry regiment the first military unit composed of black soldiers raised in the north during the civil war.
at full fighting strength with over 1000 african american men led by an all white officer corps the 54th became a national symbol of african american freedom.
leading the assault on july 18 1863 against the confederate stronghold fort wagner on morris island south carolina it sustained heavy losses including that of its commanding officer colonel robert shaw.
despite failing to take the fort the black troops fought passionately and with discipline thereby silencing critics who doubted the very ability of african americans to stand strong in battle.
saint gaudens unveiled his memorial in may 1897 eleven feet high and 14 feet long it depicts the 54th marching through boston in the first leg of its journey to the battle front.
leading the unit is colonel shaw on horseback.
it still sits in its original locale at the edge of the boston common in the shadow of the massachusetts state house.
the second monument is a white granite statue by lie yixin a sculptor from the people s republic of china honoring the life of civil rights pioneer martin luther king jr king a baptist minister born in atlanta georgia who led the fight to end segregation in the south in the 1950s and 1960s.
he spearheaded the drive to pass the civil rights act of 1964 and the voting rights act of 1965 he was assassinated in 1968 the king statue is actually part of a larger four acre park dedicated to his life that sits in the southwest corner of the national mall in washington d c the 30 foot high statue has a clear view of the lincoln memorial and the jefferson memorial and is accompanied by a 450 foot long inscription wall that bears quotes from kings most famous speeches.
the king memorial is the first dedicated to a black american on the national mall.
memorializing black history in 1897 memorial to robert gould shaw and the fifty fourth regiment.
egg images alamy understand analyze and evaluate 1 what does the monument tell us about the public role of black history in the late 19th century.
2 how do you interpret the relationship between the black foot soldiers and the white officer on the horse.
3 what does the memorial suggest about liberty and progress for african americans.
memorializing black history in 2011 the martin luther king jr national memorial.
evan golub demotix corbis make connections 1 how would you describe the memory of black history in this monument.
2 what is the relationship between king and the surrounding environment.
3 what connections can you draw between how the public remembered black history in the late nineteenth century and the early twenty first century.
427 428 chapter 16 sodbusters as farmers moved onto the great plains in nebraska and other states on the agrarian frontier their first task was to cut through the sod that covered the land to get to soil in which they could plant crops.
the sod itself was so thick and solid that some settlers including the summers family of west custer county nebraska pictured here in 1888 used it to build their houses.
the removal of the sod made cultivation of the plains possible it also removed the soils protective covering and contributed to the great dust storms that plagued the region in times of drought.
nebraska state historical society had made many of their calculations on the basis of eastern agricultural experiences that were inappropriate for the region west of the mississippi.
a unit of 160 acres was too small for the grazing and grain farming of much of the great plains.
although more than 400 000 homesteaders stayed on homestead act claims long enough to gain title to their land a much larger number abandoned the region before the end of the required five years unable to cope with the bleak life on the windswept plains and the economic realities that were making it difficult for families without considerable resources to thrive.
not for the last time beleaguered westerners looked to the federal government for solutions to their problems.
in response to their demands congress increased the homestead allotments.
the timber culture act 1873 permitted homesteaders to receive grants of 160 additional acres if they planted 40 acres of trees on them.
the desert land act 1877 provided that claimants could buy 640 acres at 1 25 an acre provided they irrigated part of their holdings within three years.
the timber and stone act 1878 which presumably applied to nonarable land authorized sales at 2 50 an acre.
these laws ultimately made it possible for individuals to acquire as much as 1 280 acres of land at little cost.
some enterprising settlers got much more.
fraud ran rampant in the administration of the acts.
lumber mining and cattle companies by employing dummy registrants and using other illegal devices seized millions of acres of the public domain.
political organization followed on the heels of settlement.
after the admission of kansas as a state in 1861 the remaining government assistance territories of washington new mexico utah and nebraska were divided into smaller units that would presumably be easier to organize.
by the close of the 1860s territorial governments were in operation in the new provinces of nevada colorado dakota arizona idaho montana and wyoming.
statehood soon followed.
nevada became a state in 1864 nebraska in 1867 and colorado in 1876 in 1889 north and south dakota montana and washington won admission wyoming and idaho entered the next year.
congress denied utah statehood until its mormon leaders convinced the government in 1896 that polygamy the practice of a man having more than one wife at a time had been abandoned.
at the turn of the century only three territories remained outside the union.
arizona and new mexico were excluded because their scanty white populations remained minorities in the territories because their politics were predominantly democratic in a republican era and because they were unwilling to accept admission as a single state.
oklahoma formerly indian territory was opened to white settlement and granted territorial status in 1889 1890 the changing western economy among the many effects of the new wave of anglo american settlement in the far west was a transformation of the regions economy.
the new american settlers tied the west firmly to the conquest of the far west 439 the growing industrial economy of the east and of much of the rest of the world.
mining cutting and selling timber ranching commercial farming and many other economic activities relied on the east for markets and for capital.
some of the most powerful economic institutions in the west were great eastern corporations that controlled mines ranches and farms.
labor in the west as commercial activity increased many farmers ranchers and miners found it necessary to recruit a paid labor force not an easy task for those far away from major population centers and unable or unwilling to hire indian workers.
the labor shortage of the region led to higher wages for workers than were typical in most areas of the east.
but working conditions were often arduous and job security was almost nonexistent.
once a railroad was built a crop harvested a herd sent to market a mine played out hundreds and even thousands of workers could find themselves suddenly unemployed.
competition from chinese immigrants whom employers could usually hire for considerably lower wages than they had to pay whites also forced some anglo americans out of work.
communities of the jobless gathered in the regions few cities in mining camps and elsewhere other unemployed people moved restlessly from place to place in search of work.
those who owned no land were highly mobile mostly male and seldom married.
indeed the west had the highest percentage of single adults 10 percent of any region in the country one reason why single women found working in dance halls and as prostitutes among the most readily available forms of employment.
despite the enormous geographic mobility in western society actual social mobility was limited.
many limited social a f mobility americans thought of the west as a land of limitless opportunity but as in the rest of the country advancement was easiest and most rapid for those who were economically advantaged to begin with.
studies of western communities suggest that social mobility in most of them was no greater than it was in the east.
and the distribution of wealth in the region was little different from that in the older states as well.
even more than in many parts of the east the western working class was highly multiracial.
english speaking whites worked alongside african americans and immigrants from southern and eastern europe as they did in the east.
even more they worked with chinese filipinos mexicans and indians.
but the workforce was highly stratified along racial lines.
in almost every area of the western economy white workers whatever their ethnicity occupied the upper tiers of employment management and skilled labor.
the lower tiers people who did unskilled and often arduous work in the mines on the railroads or in agriculture consisted overwhelmingly of nonwhites.
reinforcing this dual labor system was a set of racial assumptions developed and sustained largely by white employers.
chinese mexicans and filipinos they argued were genetically racially stratified working class or culturally suited to manual labor.
because they were smaller than many anglo americans those who promoted these racist stereotypes argued they could work better in deep mines than whites.
because they were accustomed to heat they could withstand arduous work in the fields better than whites.
because they were unambitious and unconcerned about material comfort they would accept low wages and live in conditions that white people would not tolerate.
these racial myths served the interests of employers above all but white workers tended to embrace them too.
that was in part because the myths supported a system that reserved whatever mobility there was largely for whites.
an irish common laborer might hope in the course of a lifetime to move several rungs up the occupational ladder.
a chinese or mexican worker in the same job had no realistic prospects of doing the same.
the arrival of the miners life cycle of a mining boom one of the great economic boons in the far west after the gold rush was a result of the mineral rich region of mountains and plateaus where settlers hoped to make quick fortunes by finding precious metals.
the life span of this mining boom was relatively brief.
it began in earnest around 1860 and flourished until the 1890s.
then it abruptly declined.
news of a gold or silver strike in an area usually began with a stampede reminiscent of the california gold rush of 1849 individual prospectors would exploit the first shallow deposits of ore largely by hand with pan and placer mining.
after these surface deposits dwindled corpora tions moved in to engage in lode or quartz mining which dug deeper beneath the surface.
then as those deposits dwindled commercial mining either disappeared or continued on a restricted basis and ranchers and farmers moved in and established a more permanent economy.
the first great mineral strikes since the california gold rush occurred just before the civil war.
in 1858 gold was discovered in the pikes peak district of what would soon be the territory of colorado the following year 50 000 prospectors stormed in from california the mississippi valley and the east.
denver and other mining camps blossomed into cities overnight.
almost as rapidly as it had developed the boom ended.
after the mining frenzy died down corporations notably the guggenheim interests revived some of the profits of the gold boom and the discovery of silver near leadville supplied a ew source of mineral wealth.
while the colorado rush of 1859 was still in progress news of another strike drew miners to nevada.
gold lodeck had een fund in e washoe district but the most valuable ore in the great comstock ode first discovered in 1858 by henry comstock and other eins was silver.
the first prospectors to reach the washoe fields ame from california and from the beginning californians domi ated the settlement and development of nevada.
in a remote esert without railroad transportation the territory produced no upplies of its own and everything from food and machinery to 440 chapter 16 colorado boomtown the colorado silver boom began in 1879 bringing many people into the newly admitted state in search of opportunity.
by the 1890s with dwindling silver deposits many recently wealthy communities went bust.
time life pictures getty images whiskey had to be shipped from california to virginia city carson city and other gold rush settlements and towns.
when the first placer or surface deposits ran out california and eastern capitalists bought the claims of the pioneer prospectors and began to use the more difficult process of quartz mining which enabled them to retrieve silver from deeper veins.
for a few years these outside owners reaped tremendous profits from 1860 to 1880 the nevada lodes yielded bullion worth 306 million.
after that the mines quickly played out.
the next important mineral discoveries came in 1874 when gold was found in the black hills of southwestern dakota territory.
prospectors swarmed into the area until surface resources faded and corporations took over.
one enormous company the homestake came to dominate the fields.
in the long run other less glamorous natural resources proved more important to the development of the west than gold and silver.
the great anaconda copper mine launched by william clark in 1881 marked the beginning of an industry that would remain important to montana for many decades.
in other areas mining operations had significant success with lead tin quartz and zinc.
mining towns 1848 1883 these three maps illustrate the rapid movement from boom to bust in the western mining industry in the mid nineteenth century.
note how quickly the boont zer eas and no thlnz tn h h yt.
ha nte t0 mini 9 bth metals motad omia and nevada in the 1860s to areas farther east and north the 1870s and beyond.
the map also shows the areas in which ghost towns mining communities abandoned by their residents once production ceased proliferated.
what impact did mining have on the population of the west.
the conquest of the far west 441 gender imbalance the conditions of mine life in the boom period the presence of precious minerals the vagueness of claim boundaries the cargoes of gold being shipped out attracted outlaws and bad men operating as individuals or gangs.
when the situation became intolerable in a community those members interested in order began enforcing their own laws through vigilante committees an unofficial system of social control used earlier in california.
vigilantes were unconstrained by the legal system.
some vigilantes continued to operate as private law enforcers after the creation of regular governments.
men greatly outnumbered women in the mining towns and younger men in particular had difficulty finding female companions of comparable age.
those women who did gravitate to the new communities often came with their husbands and their activities were generally although not always confined to the same kinds of domestic tasks that eastern women performed.
single women or women whose husbands were earning no money did choose or find it necessary to work for wages at times as cooks laundresses and tavernkeepers.
and in the sexually imbalanced mining communities there was always a ready market for prostitutes.
the thousands of people who flocked to the mining towns in search of quick wealth and who failed to find it often remained as wage laborers in corporate mines after the boom period.
working conditions were almost uniformly terrible.
the corporate mines were deep and extremely hot with temperatures often exceeding 100 degrees fahrenheit.
some workers died of heatstroke or of pneumonia a result of experiencing sudden changes of temperature when emerging from the mines.
poor ventilation meant large accumulations of poisonous carbon dioxide which caused dizziness nausea and headaches.
lethal dusts stayed in the stagnant air to be inhaled over and over by the miners many of whom developed silicosis a disabling disease of the lungs as a result.
there were frequent explosions cave ins and fires and there were many accidents with the heavy machinery the workers used to bore into the earth.
in the 1870s before technological advances eliminated some of the dangers one worker in every thirty was disabled in the mines and one in every eighty was killed.
that rate fell later in the nineteenth century but mining remained one of the most dangerous and arduous working environments in the united states.
the cattle kingdom another important element of the changing economy of the far west was cattle ranching.
the open range the vast grasslands of the public domain provided a huge area on the great plains where cattle raisers could graze their herds free of charge and unrestricted by the boundaries of private farms.
the western cattle industry was mexican and texan by ancestry.
long before citizens of the united states invaded the southwest mexican ranchers had devel mexican oped the techniques and equipment that rig1ns cattlemen and cowboys of the great plains later employed branding a device known in all frontier areas where stock was common roundups roping and the gear of the herders their lariats saddles leather chaps and spurs.
americans in texas adopted these methods and carried them to the northernmost ranges of the cattle kingdom.
texas also had the largest herds of cattle in the country the animals were descended from imported spanish stock wiry hardy longhorns and allowed to run wild or semiwild.
from texas too came small muscular broncos or mustangs well suited to the requirements of cattle country.
at the end of the civil war an estimated 5 million cattle roamed the texas ranges.
early in 1866 some texas cattle ranchers began driving their combined herds as many as 260 000 cattle north to sedalia missouri on the missouri pacific railroad.
traveling over rough country and beset by outlaws indians and property conscious farmers the caravan suffered heavy losses.
only a fraction of the animals arrived the cattle kingdom c 1866 1887 cattle ranching and cattle drives are among the most romanticized features of the nineteenth century west.
but they were also hardheaded businesses made possible by the growing eastern market for beef and the availability of inexpensive transportation to take cattle to urban markets.
what brought an end to the open range.
442 chapter 4 in controlling the fur trade but on the crucial point of the line of settlement it was ineffective.
white settlers continued to white swarm across the boundary and to claim encroachment lands farther and farther into the ohio valley.
the british authorities tried repeatedly to establish limits to the expansion but continually failed to prevent the white colonists from pushing the line of settlement still farther west.
the colonial response the grenville ministry soon moved to increase its authority in the colonies in more direct ways.
regular british troops london announced would now be stationed permanently in america and under the mutiny act of 1765 the colonists were required to assist in provisioning and maintaining the army.
ships of the british navy were assigned to patrol american waters and search for smugglers.
the customs service was reorganized and enlarged.
royal officials were ordered to take up their colonial posts in person instead of sending substitutes.
colonial manufacturing was to be restricted so that it would not compete with the rapidly expanding industry of great britain.
the sugar act of 1764 designed in part to eliminate the illegal sugar trade between the continental colonies and the french and spanish west indies strengthened enforce sugar rnent of the duty on sugar while low currency ering the duty on molasses further and stamp damaging the market for sugar grown acts in the colonies.
it also established new vice admiralty courts in america to try accused smugglers thus depriving them of the benefit of sympathetic local juries.
the currency act of 1764 required the colonial assemblies to stop issuing paper money a widespread practice during the war and to retire on schedule all the paper money already in circulation.
most momentous of all the stamp act of 1765 imposed a tax on most printed documents in the colonies newspapers almanacs pamphlets deeds wills licenses.
the new imperial program was an effort to reapply to the colonies the old principles of mercantilism.
and in some ways it proved highly effective.
british officials were soon collecting more than ten times as much annual revenue from america as before 1763 but the new policies created many more problems than they solved.
the colonists may have resented the new imperial regulations but at first they found it difficult to resist them effectively.
americans continued to harbor as many grievances against one another as against the authorities in london.
often the conflicts centered around tensions between the paxton boys established societies of the atlantic coast and the backcountry farther west whose residents often felt isolated from and underrepresented in the colonial governments.
these western settlers sometimes felt resentful because they lived closer to the worlds of the indian tribes than the societies of the east.
in regulator movement 1763 for example a band of people from western pennsylvania known as the paxton boys descended on philadelphia with demands for relief from colonial not british taxes and for money to help them defend themselves against indians the colonial government averted bloodshed only by making con cessions to them.
in 1771 a small scale civil war broke out as a result of the so called regulator movement in north carolina.
the regulators were farmers of the carolina upcountry who organized in opposition to the high taxes that local sheriffs appointed by the colonial governor collected.
the western counties were badly underrepresented in the colonial assembly and the regulators failed to win redress of their grievances there.
finally they armed themselves and began resisting tax collections by force.
to suppress the revolt governor william tryon raised an army of militiamen mostly from the eastern counties who defeated a band of 2 000 regulators in the battle of alamance.
nine on each side were killed and many others were wounded.
afterward six regulators were hanged for treason.
the bloodshed was exceptional but bitter conflicts within the colonies were not.
after 1763 however the new policies of the british government began to create common grievances among virtually all colonists that to some degree counterbalanced these internal divisions.
indeed there was something in the grenville program to antagonize everyone.
northern merchants believed they would suffer from restraints on commerce closing opportunities for manufacturing and increased taxes.
settlers in the northern backcountry resented the closing of the west to land speculation and fur trading.
southern planters in debt to english merchants feared having to pay additional taxes and losing their ability to ease their debts by speculating in western land.
professionals ministers lawyers professors and oth ers depended on merchants and planters for their livelihood and thus shared their concerns about the effects of english law.
small farmers the largest group in the colonies believed they would suffer from increased taxes and from the abolition of paper money which had enabled them to pay their loans.
workers in towns opposed the restraints on manufacturing.
the new restrictions came moreover at the beginning of an economic depression.
the british government by pouring postwar money into the colonies to finance the depression fighting had stimulated a wartime boom.
when the flow of funds stopped after the peace in 1763 an economic bust followed.
the imperial policies would many colonists feared doom them to permanent economic stagnation and a declining standard of living.
in reality most americans soon found ways to live with or circumvent the new british policies.
the american economy was not in fact being destroyed.
but economic anxieties were rising in the colonies nevertheless and they created a growing sense of unease.
whatever the economic consequences of the british government s programs the political consequences were in the the empire in transition 111 arctic ocean greenland bering sea as a c i c pacif1c ocean fc 0 hudson bay if r french fishing a rights 11 r yj nezc r hudsons bay spanish florida st pierre and miquelon.
a nova ivir a sc0tia mass.
atlantic ocean io yf gulf of mexico belize jcuba.
st dominigue jamaica c a r i b b e a n s e a santo domingo puerto rico mosquito coast iorth america in 1763 the victory of the english over the french in the seven years war or as it was known in america the french and indian war reshaped the map of colonial north merica.
britain gained a vast new territory formerly controlled by france canada and a large area west of the mississippi river thus more than doubling the size of the british empire in america rench possessions in the new world dwindled to a few islands in the caribbean.
spain continued to control a substantial empire in the north american interior.
the red line along the western borders f the english colonies represents the line of settlement established by britain in 1763 white settlers were not permitted to move beyond that line.
why did the british wish to restrict settlement of the western lands.
eyes of the colonists far worse.
perhaps nowhere else in the late eighteenth century world did so large a proportion of the people take an active interest in public affairs.
that was partly because anglo americans were deeply attached to broad powers of self government and the colonists were determined to protect those powers.
the keys to self government they believed were the provincial assemblies and the key to the power of the provincial assemblies was their long established political consequences of the grenville program right to give or withhold appropriations for the colonial governments a right the british were now challenging.
home rule therefore was not something new and different that the colonists were striving to attain but something old and familiar that they desired to keep.
the movement to resist the new imperial policies a movement for which many would ultimately 112 chapter 28 significant events 1947 jackie robinson becomes first african american to play in major leagues construction begins on levittown new york 1948 united nations votes to partition palestine and create state of israel 1956 eisenhower reelected president suez crisis soviets crush hungarian revolution federal highway act passed 1952 eisenhower elected president 1959 castro seizes power in cuba 1957 soviet union launches sputnik little rock school desegregation crisis civil rights act passed 1953 truce ends korean war 1960 u 2 incident precipitates collapse of paris summit 1954 supreme court rules in brown v board of education army mccarthy hearings senate censures mccarthy 1955 labor organizations reconcile and form afl cio supreme court announces brown decision montgomery bus boycott begins 1961 yuri gagarin of soviet union becomes first man in space alan shepard becomes first american in space united states breaks diplomatic relations with cuba 1962 michael harrington publishes the other america 1969 americans land on moon civil rights vietnam and the ordeal of liberalism khe sanh vietnam 1968 a beleaguered american soldier shows his exhaustion during the 76 day siege of the american marine base at khe sanh which began shortly before the 1968 tet offensive in vietnam.
american forces sustained record casualties in the fierce fighting at khe sanh the vietnamese communist forces suffered far more.
robert ellison black star looking ahead 1 what was the domestic reform agenda of kennedy s new frontier and how did johnson s great society programs continue and expand on that agenda.
2 why did the civil rights movement become increasingly assertive and militant over the course of the 1960s.
3 how did u s involvement in vietnam escalate through the 1960s.
what were the political and social consequences of that escalation in both vietnam and the united states.
setting the stage by the late 1950s a growing restlessness was bubbling beneath the apparently placid surface of american society.
anxiety about americas position in the world growing pressures from african americans and other minorities the increasing visibility of poverty the rising frustrations of women and other long suppressed discontents were beginning to shake the nation s public life.
ultimately that restlessness would make the 1960s one of the most turbulent eras of the twentieth century.
but at first it contributed to a bold and confident effort by political leaders and popular movements to attack social and international problems within the framework of conventional liberal politics.
at the same time challenges to liberalism emerged from both the left and the right.
the civil rights movement grew rapidly in the early 1960s and quickly evolved into a diverse set of movements some of which adopted radical and even revolutionary goals.
student disenchantment also grew dramatically in the 1960s becoming a powerful and increasingly disruptive force on campuses and beyond.
finally u s involvement in the war in vietnam led eventually to a commitment of over half a million american troops and resulted in over 55 000 american deaths.
it also produced an unprecedentedly large opposition movement in the united states.
by the end of the 1960s the united states had entered what was in many ways a fundamentally new period in its history.
the 1960s produced a searing critique of american life which greatly transformed both the politics and culture of the nation.
the moderate center had dominated american life for decades before the 1960s.
in the aftermath of the decade american society became increasingly fragmented and at times polarized.
expanding the liberal state those who yearned for a more active government in the late 1950s and who accused the eisenhower administration of allowing the nation to drift looked above all to the presidency for leadership.
the two men who served in the white house through most of the 1960s john kennedy and lyndon johnson seemed for a time to be the embodiment of these liberal hopes.
john kennedy the presidential campaign of 1960 produced two young candidates who claimed to offer the nation active leadership.
the republican nomination went almost uncontested to vice president richard nixon who promised moderate reform.
the democrats in the meantime emerged from a spirited primary campaign united somewhat uneasily behind john fitzgerald kennedy an attractive and articulate senator from massachusetts who had narrowly missed being the partys vice presidential candidate in 1956 john kennedy was the son of the wealthy powerful and highly controversial joseph p kennedy former american ambassador to britain.
but while he had grown up in a world of ease election privilege he became a spokesman for personal sacrifice and energetic of 1960 progress.
his appealing public image was at least as important as his political positions in attracting popular support.
he overcame doubts about his youth he turned forty three in 1960 and religion he was catholic to win with a tiny plurality of the popular vote 49 7 percent to nixons 49 6 percent and only a slightly more comfortable electoral majority 303 to 219.
kennedy had campaigned promising a set of domestic reforms more ambitious than any since the new deal a program he described as the new frontier but his thin popular mandate and a congress dominated by a coalition of republicans and conservative democrats frustrated many of his hopes.
kennedy did manage to win approval of tariff reductions his administration had negotiated and he began to build an ambitious legislative agenda that he hoped he might eventually see enacted including a call for a significant tax cut to promote economic growth more than any other president of the century except perhaps the two roosevelts and later ronald reagan kennedy made his own personality an integral part of his presidency and a central civil rights vietnam and the ordeal of liberalism 783 candidate party electoral vote popular vote john f kennedy democratic 34 227 096 49 7 richard m nixon 71q 34 108 546 republican 49 6 harry f byrd dixiecrat 15 501 643 0 7 other candidates 197 029 prohibition socialist labor constitution socialist workers states rights 64 of electorate voting the election of 1960 the election of 1960 was in the popular vote at least one of the closest in american history.
john kennedys margin over richard nixon was less than one third of 1 percent of the total national vote but greater in the electoral college.
note the distribution of electoral strength of the two candidates.
kennedy was strong in the industrial northeast and the largest industrial states of the midwest and he retained at least a portion of his party s traditional strength in the south and southwest.
but nixon made significant inroads into the upper south carried florida and swept most of the plains and mountain states.
l vhof was the significance of this distribution of strength to the future of the two parties.
kennedy focus of national attention.
nothing illus assassinated trated that more clearly than the popular reaction to the tragedy of november 22 1963 kennedy had traveled to texas with his wife and vice president lyndon johnson for a series of political appearances.
while the presidential motorcade rode slowly through the streets of dallas shots rang out.
two bullets struck the president one in the throat the other in the head.
he was sped to a nearby hospital where minutes after arriving he was pronounced dead.
lee harvey oswald who appeared to be a confused and embittered marxist was arrested for the crime later that day and then mysteriously murdered by a dallas nightclub owner jack ruby two days later.
most americans at the time accepted the conclusions of a federal commission appointed president johnson and chaired by chief justice earl warren which found that both oswald and ruby had acted alone that there was no conspiracy.
in later years however many americans came to believe that the warren commission report had ignored evidence of a broad conspiracy behind the murders.
even after fifty years some people still believe in the conspiracies associated with the president s assassination.
and fifty years after his death kennedy s popularity remains high.
lyndon johnson the kennedy assassination was a national trauma a defining event for almost everyone old enough to be aware of it.
at the time however much of the nation took comfort in the personality and performance of kennedy s successor in the white house lyndon baines johnson.
johnson was a native of the poor hill country of west texas and had risen to become majority leader of the u s senate by dint of extraordinary even obsessive effort and ambition.
having failed to win the democratic nomination for president in 1960 he surprised many who knew him by agreeing to accept the second position on the ticket with kennedy.
the events in dallas thrust him into the white house.
johnsons rough edged even crude personality could hardly have been more different from kennedys.
but like kennedy pictures getty images i 784 chapter 29 democratic antiwar plank in the party platform that national both kennedy and mccarthy supporters convention favored.
miles away in a downtown park thousands of antiwar protesters were staging demonstrations.
on the third night of the convention as the delegates were beginning their balloting on the now inevitable nomination of hubert humphrey demonstrators and police clashed in a bloody riot in the streets of chicago.
hundreds of protesters were injured as police attempted to disperse them with tear gas and billy clubs.
aware that the violence was being televised the demonstrators taunted the authorities with the chant the whole world is watching and hubert humphrey who had spent years dreaming of becoming his partys candidate for president received a nomi nation that appeared at the time to be almost worthless.
the conservative response the turbulent events of 1968 persuaded many observers that american society was in the throes of revolutionary change.
in chicago 1968 demonstrators climb on a statue in a chicago park during the 1968 democratic national convention protesting both the vietnam war and the harsh treatment they had received from mayor richard daley s chicago police.
dennis brack black star fact however the response of most americans to the turmoil was a conservative one.
the most visible sign of the conservative backlash was the surprising success of the campaign of the segregationist alabama governor george wallace for the presidency.
in 1964 he had run in a few democratic presidential primaries and had done surprisingly well even in several states outside the south.
in 1968 he became a third party candidate for president basing his campaign on a host of conservative grievances not all of them connected to race.
he denounced the forced busing of students the proliferation of government regulations and social programs and the permissiveness of authorities toward race riots and antiwar demonstrations.
there was never any serious chance that wallace would win the election but his standing in the polls at times rose to over 20 percent.
a more effective effort to mobilize the silent majority in favor of order and stability was under way within the republican party.
richard nixon whose political career had seemed at an end after his losses in the presidential race of 1960 and a california gubernatorial campaign two years later george wallace candidate party electoral vote popular vote richard m nixon republican hubert h humphrey democratic george c wallace american independence 301 191 46 other candidates prohibition socialist labor d gregory socialist workers peace and freedom mccarthy 60 6 of electorate voting 31 770 237 43 4 31 270 533 42 3 9 906 141 12 9 218 347 the election of 1968 the 1968 presidential election which richard nixon won was almost as close as the election of 1960 which he had lost.
nixon might have won a more su stantia victory had it not been for the independent candidacy of governor george c a ace w o attracted many of the same conservative voters to whom nixon appealed.
how does the distribution of democratic and republicanltrenqth7n this election compare to that in 1960.
civil rights vietnam and the ordeal of liberalism 805 reemerged as the preeminent spokesman for what he called middle america nixon recognized that many americans were tired of hearing about their obligations to the poor tired of hearing about the sacrifices necessary to achieve racial jus tice tired of judicial reforms that seemed designed to help criminals.
by offering a vision of stability law and order government retrenchment and peace with honor in vietnam he easily captured the republican presidential nomination.
and after the spectacle of the democratic national convention he enjoyed a commanding lead in the polls as the november election approached.
that lead diminished greatly in the last weeks before the voting.
old doubts about nixons character continued to haunt the republican candidate.
a skillful last minute surge by hubert humphrey who managed to restore a tenuous unity to the democratic party narrowed the gap further.
and the wallace campaign appeared to be hurting the republicans more than the democrats.
in the end however nixon eked out a victory almost as narrow as his defeat in 1960 he received 43 4 percent of the popular vote to humphreys 42 3 percent a margin of only about 800 000 votes and 301 electoral votes to humphreys 191 george wallace who like most third party xt candidates faded in the last weeks of the nixon victorious campaign still managed to poll 12 9 percent of the popular vote and to carry five southern states with a total of 46 electoral ballots the best showing by a third party candidate since the 1920s.
nixon had not won a decisive personal mandate.
but the election made clear that a majority of the american electorate was more inter ested in restoring stability than in promoting social change.
looking back no decade of the twentieth century created more powerful and enduring images than the 1960s.
it began with the election and then the traumatic assassination of an attractive and energetic young president john kennedy who captured the imagination of millions and seemed to symbolize the rising idealism of the time.
it produced a dramatic period of political innovation christened the great society by president lyndon johnson which greatly expanded the size and functions of the federal government and its responsibility for the welfare of the nations citizens.
it saw the emergence of a sustained and enormously powerful civil rights movement that won a series of important legal victories including two civil rights acts that dismantled the jim crow system constructed in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
the very spirit of dynamism and optimism that shaped the early 1960s also helped bring to the surface problems and grievances that had no easy solutions.
the civil rights movement ended legalized segregation and disenfranchisement but it also awakened expectations of social and economic equality that laws alone could not provide.
the peaceful interracial crusade of the early 1960s gradually turned into a much more militant confrontational and increasingly separatist movement toward the decades end.
the idealism among white youths that began the 1960s and played an important role in the political success of john kennedy evolved into an angry rebellion against many aspects of american culture and politics.
it produced a large upsurge of student protest that rocked the nation at the decades end.
perhaps most of all a small and largely unnoticed cold war commitment to defend south vietnam against communist aggression from the north led to a large and disastrous american military commitment that destroyed the presidency of lyndon johnson shook the faith of millions in their leaders and their political system sent thousands of young american men to their deaths and showed no signs of producing a victory.
a decade that began with high hopes and soaring ideals ended with ugly and at times violent division and deep disillusionment.
key terms people places events bay of pigs 792 black power 790 community action program 784 congress of racial equality core 786 cuban missile crisis 793 dien bien phu 795 freedom rides 786 freedom summer 787 george wallace 787 great society 784 gulf of tonkin resolution 796 ho chi minh 794 ho chi minh trail 798 immigration act of 1965 785 john kennedy 782 malcolm x 791 march on washington 787 medicaid 784 medicare 784 new frontier 782 ngo dinh diem 796 richard nixon 804 robert kennedy 802 student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc 786 tet offensive 801 viet cong 796 806 chapter 5 the creation of state governments at the same time that americans were struggling to win their independence on the battlefield they were also struggling to create new institutions of government to replace the british system they had repudiated.
that struggle continued for more than fifteen years but its most important phase occurred during the war itself at the state level.
the assumptions of republicanism if americans agreed on nothing else when they began to build new governments for themselves they agreed that those governments would be republican.
to them that meant a political system in which all power came from the people rather than from some supreme authority such as a king.
the success of such a government depended on the nature of its citizenry j if the population consisted of sturdy inde civic virtue pendent property owners imbued with civic virtue then the republic could survive.
if it consisted of a few powerful aristocrats and a great mass of dependent workers then it would be in danger.
from the beginning therefore the ideal of the small freeholder the independent landowner was basic to american political ideology.
another crucial part of that ideology was the concept of equality.
the declaration of independence had given voice to that idea in its most ringing phrase all men are created equal it was a belief that stood in direct contrast to the old european assumption of an inherited aristocracy.
the innate talents and energies of individuals not their positions at birth would determine their roles in society.
some people would inevitably be wealthier and more powerful than others.
but all people would have to earn their success.
there would be no equality of condition but there would be equality of opportunity.
in reality of course the united states was never a nation in which all citizens were independent property holders.
from the beginning there was a sizable dependent labor force.
white laborers enjoyed some of the privileges of citizenship.
persistent black workers were allowed virtually none.
inequality american women remained both politically and economically subordinate.
native americans were systematically exploited and displaced.
nor was there ever full equality of opportunity.
american society was more open and more fluid than the societies of most european nations but the condition of a persons birth was almost always a crucial determinant of success.
nevertheless in embracing the assumptions of republicanism americans were adopting a powerful even revolutionary ideology and their experiment in statecraft became a model for many other countries.
it made the united states for a time the most admired and studied nation on earth.
the first state constitutions the first and perhaps most basic decision about the character of government was that the constitutions were to be written down because americans believed the written vagueness of englands unwritten constitu candtstrongs tion had produced corruption.
the second legislatures decision was that the power of the executive which americans believed had grown too great in england must be limited.
pennsylvania eliminated the executive altogether.
most other states inserted provisions that limited the power of governors to make appointments and veto legislation.
most states also prevented governors from dismissing the legislature.
most important every state forbade the governor or any other executive officer from holding a seat in the legislature thus ensuring that unlike in england the executive and legislative branches of government would remain wholly separate.
but the new constitutions did not embrace direct popular rule.
in georgia and pennsylvania the legislature consisted of one popularly elected house.
but in every other state there was an upper and a lower chamber and in most cases the upper chamber was designed to represent the higher orders of society.
there were property requirements for voters some modest some substantial in all states.
revising state governments by the late 1770s many americans were growing concerned about the apparent divisiveness and instability of their new state governments.
most states were having trouble accomplishing anything.
many believed the problem was one of too much democracy.
as a result most of the states began to revise their constitutions to limit popular power.
massachusetts which waited until 1780 to ratify its first constitution was the first to act on the new concerns.
two changes in particular differentiated the massachusetts and later constitutions from the earlier ones.
the first was a change in the process of constitution writing itself.
most of the first documents had been written by state legislatures and thus could easily be amended or violated by them.
massachusetts and later other states sought a way to protect the constitutions from ordinary politics and created the constitutional convention a special assembly of the people that would meet only for the purpose of writing the constitution and that would never except under extraordinary circumstances meet again.
the second change was a significant strengthening of the executive a reaction to what many americans believed was the instability of the original state governments that had weak governors.
the 1780 massachusetts constitution made the governor one of the strongest in any strom state.
he was to be elected directly by the executives people he was to have a fixed salary in ther words he would not be dependent the american revolution.
151 on the goodwill of the legislature each year for his wages he would have significant appointment powers and a veto over legislation.
other states followed.
those with weak or nonexistent upper houses strengthened or created them.
most increased the powers of the governor.
pennsylvania which had no executive at first now produced a strong one.
by the late 1780s almost every state had either revised its constitution or drawn up a new one in an effort to produce stability in government.
toleration and slavery the states moved far in the direction of complete religious freedom.
most americans continued to believe that religion statute of should play some role in government but religious rhey did not wish to give special powers to liberty any particular denomination.
the privileges that churches had once enjoyed were now largely stripped away.
in 1786 virginia enacted the statute a free black man john singleton copley the great american portraitist of the revolutionary age painted this picture of a young african american in 1777 1978 he was probably a worker on new england fishing boats who appeared in another copley painting watson and the shark.
it is one of a small number of portrayals of the free blacks in the north in this era and one of even a smaller number that portrays them realistically and seriously.
head of a negro.
1777 1778 by john singleton copley.
oil on canvas 53 3 x 41 3 cm.
founders society purchase gibbs williams fund.
photograph detroit institute of arts usa the bridgeman art lib y of religious liberty written by thomas jefferson which called for the complete separation of church and state.
more difficult to resolve was the question of slavery.
in areas where slavery was already weak in new england where there had never been many slaves and in pennsylvania where the quakers opposed slavery it was abolished relatively early.
even in the south there were some pressures to amend or even eliminate the institution every state but south carolina and georgia prohibited further importation of slaves from abroad and south carolina banned the slave trade during the war.
virginia passed a law encouraging manumission the freeing of slaves.
nevertheless slavery survived in all the southern and border states.
there were several reasons racist assumptions among whites about the inferiority of blacks the enormous economic investments many white southerners had in their slaves and the inability of even such men as washington and jefferson who had moral misgivings about slavery to envision any alternative to it.
if slavery were abolished what would happen to the black people in america.
few whites believed blacks could be integrated into american society as equals.
in maintaining slavery jefferson once remarked americans were holding a wolf by the ears however unappealing it was to hold on to it letting go would be even worse.
the search for a national government americans were much quicker to agree on state institutions than they were on the structure of their national government.
at first most believed that the central government should remain a relatively weak and unimportant force and that each state would be virtually a sovereign nation.
it was in response to such ideas that the articles of confederation emerged.
the confederation the articles of confederation which the continental congress had adopted in 1777 provided for a national government much like the one already in place.
congress wrote for ratification of the articles permit us then earnestly to recommend these articles to the immediate and dispassionate attention of the legislatures of the respective states.
let them be candidly reviewed under a sense of the difficulty of combining in one system the various sentiments and interests of a continent divided into so many sovereign and independent communities under a conviction of the absolute necessity of uniting all our councils and all our strengths to maintain and defend our common liberties under the articles congress remained the central indeed the only institution of national authority.
its powers expanded to give it authority to conduct wars and foreign relations 152.
chapter 5 daniel shays and job shattuck shays and shattuck were the principal leaders of the 1786 uprising by poor farmers in massachusetts demanding relief from their indebtedness.
shattuck led an insurrection in the east which collapsed when he was captured on november 30 shays organized the rebellion in the west which continued until the state militia dispersed the rebels in late february 1787 the following year state authorities pardoned shays even before that the legislature responded to the rebellion by providing some relief to the impoverished farmers.
these drawings are part of a hostile account of the rebellion published in 1787 in a boston almanac.
the granger collection new york republic for several decades.
committed nationalists they sought ways to increase the powers of the central government and to meet its financial obligations.
robert morris the head of the confederations treasury alexander hamilton his young protege james madison of virginia and others called for a continental impost a 5 percent duty on imported goods to be levied by congress and used to fund the debt.
many americans however feared that the impost plan would concentrate too much financial power in the hands of morris and his allies in philadelphia.
congress failed to approve the impost in 1781 and again in 1783 angry and discouraged the nationalists largely withdrew from any active involvement in the confederation.
political disputes over economic issues the states had war debts too and they generally relied on increased taxation to pay them.
but poor farmers already burdened by debt and now burdened again by new taxes considered such policies unfair even tyrannical.
they demanded that the state governments issue paper currency to increase the money supply and make it easier for them to meet their obligations.
resentment was especially high among farmers in new england who felt that the states were squeezing them to enrich already wealthy bondholders in boston and other towns.
throughout the late 1780s therefore mobs of distressed farmers rioted periodically in various parts of new england.
dissidents in the connecticut valley and the berkshire hills of massachusetts many of them revolutionary veterans ral shayss hed behind daniel shays a former captain rebellion in the continental army.
shays issued a set of demands that included paper money tax relief a moratorium on debts the relocation of the state capital from boston to the interior and the abolition of imprisonment for debt.
during the summer of 1786 the shaysites concentrated on preventing the collection of debts private or public and used force to keep courts from sitting and sheriffs from selling confiscated property.
in boston members of the legislature including samuel adams denounced shays and his men as rebels and traitors.
when winter came the rebels advanced on springfield hoping to seize weapons from the arsenal there.
an army of state militiamen financed by a loan from wealthy merchants set out from boston to confront them.
in january 1787 this army met shayss band and dispersed his ragged troops.
as a military enterprise shayss rebellion was a failure although it produced some concessions to the aggrieved farmers.
shays and his lieutenants at first sentenced to death were later pardoned and massachusetts offered the protesters some tax relief and a postponement of debt payments.
the rebellion had more important consequences for the future of the united states however for it added urgency to a movement already gathering support throughout the new nation the movement to produce a new national constitution.
looking back between a small inconclusive battle on a village green in new england in 1775 and a momentous surrender at yorktown in 1781 the american people fought a great and terrible war against the mightiest military nation in the world.
no one outside america and few within it would have predicted in 1775 that the makeshift armies of the colonies could withstand the armies and navies of the british empire.
but a combination of luck brilliance determination and timely aid from abroad allowed the patriots as they began to call themselves to make full use of the advantages of fighting on their home soil and to frustrate british designs time and again.
the war was not just a historic military event.
it was also a great political one for it propelled the colonies to unite to organize and in july 1776 to declare their independence.
having done so they fought with even greater determination defending now not just a set of principles but an actual fledgling nation.
by the end of the war they had created new governments at both the state and national level and had begun experimenting with new political forms that would distinguish the united states from any previous nation in history.
the war was also important for its effects on american society for the way it shook although never overturned the the american revolution 157 existing social order for the way it caused women to question although seldom openly to challenge their place in society and for the way it spread notions of liberty and freedom throughout a society that in the past had often been rigidly hierarchical and highly deferential.
even african american slaves absorbed some of the ideas of the revolution although it would be many years before they would be in any position to make much use of them.
victory in the american revolution solved many of the problems of the new nation but it also produced others.
what should the united states do about its relations with the indians and with its neighbors to the north and south.
what should it do about the distribution of western lands.
what should it do about slavery.
how should it balance its commitment to liberty with its need for order.
these questions bedeviled the new national government in its first years of existence and ultimately led americans to create a new political order.
people places events american patriots 131 articles of confederation 131 benedict arnold 134 common sense 130 daniel shays 156 george washington 132 hessians 136 john burgoyne 136 john locke 131 joseph and mary brant 138 lord cornwallis 141 loyalists tories 143 nathanael greene 141 olive branch petition 129 prohibitory act 130 saratoga 137 second continental congress 129 thomas jefferson 130 thomas paine 130 valley forge 132 william howe 135 yorktown 142 recall and reflect 1 what questions did the second continental congress debate and how did it answer them.
2 what was the impact of thomas paine s common sense on americans view of the war with britain.
3 how and why were the americans able to prevail in their war for independence.
4 what were the ideological ideals of the new state and national governments and how did those ideals compare with the realities of american society.
5 what was the purpose of the articles of confederation.
6 how did the revolution affect the role of religion and the position of churches in american society.
158 chapter 31 signing the camp david accords jimmy carter experienced many frustrations during his presidency but his successful efforts in 1978 to negotiate a peace treaty between israel and egypt was his finest hour.
egyptian president anwar sadat and israeli prime minister menachem begin join carter here in the east room of the white house in march 1979 to sign the accords.
owen black star in the summer of 1979 instability in the middle east produced a second major fuel shortage in the united states.
opec announced another major price increase.
faced with increasing pressure to act and with a dismal approval rating of 26 percent carter retreated to camp david the presidential retreat in the maryland mountains.
ten days later he emerged to deliver a remarkable television address.
it included a series of proposals for resolving the energy crisis.
but it was most notable for carters bleak assessment of the national condition.
speaking with unusual fervor he complained of a crisis of confidence that had struck at the very heart and soul of our national will the address became known as the malaise speech although carter himself had never used that word and it helped fuel charges that the president was trying to blame his inability to deal with the nations problems on the american people.
human rights and national interests among carters most frequent campaign promises was a pledge to build a new basis for american foreign policy one in which the defense of human rights would replace the pursuit of selfish interests carter spoke out sharply and often about violations of human rights in many countries including most prominently the soviet union.
beyond that general commitment the carter administration focused on several more traditional concerns.
carter completed negotiations begun several years earlier on a pair of treaties to turn over control of the panama canal to the government of panama.
after an acrimonious debate the senate ratified the treaties by 68 to 32 only one vote more than the necessary two thirds majority.
carters greatest achievement was his success in arranging a peace treaty between egypt and israel.
middle east negotia tions between egyptian president anwar sadat and israeli prime minister menachem begin had begun in 1977 when those talks stalled carter invited sadat and begin to a summit conference at camp david in september 1978 and persuaded them to remain there for two weeks while he and others helped camp david mediate the disputes between them.
on accords september 17 carter announced agreement on a framework for an egyptian israeli peace treaty.
on march 26 1979 begin and sadat returned together to the white house to sign a formal peace treaty known as the camp david accords between their two nations.
in the meantime carter tried to improve relations with china and the soviet union and to complete a new arms agreement.
he responded eagerly to the overtures of deng xiaoping the new chinese leader who was attempting to open his nation to the outside world.
on december 15 1978 washington and beijing announced the resumption of formal diplomatic relations.
a few months later carter traveled to vienna to meet with the aging brezhnev to finish drafting the new salt ii arms control agreement.
the treaty set limits on the number of long range missiles bombers and nuclear warheads for both the united states and the ussr.
almost immediately however salt ii met with fierce conservative opposition in the united states.
the year of the hostages ever since the early 1950s the united states had provided political support and military assistance to the government of the shah of iran hoping to make his nation a bulwark against soviet expansion in the middle east.
by 1979 however many iranians iranian come to resent his autocratic rule.
at the revolution same time islamic clergies and much of the fiercely religious populace opposed his efforts to modernize and westernize a fundamentalist society.
that produced a powerful revolutionary movement.
in january 1979 the shah fled the country.
from the age of limits to the age of reagan 841 waiting for khomeini iranian women dressed in traditional islamic garb stand in a crowd in teheran waiting for a glimpse of the ayatollah khomeini the spiritual and eventually also political leader of the iranian revolution.
alain dejean sygma corbis the united states made cautious efforts in the first months after the shahs abdication to establish cordial relations with the militant regimes that followed.
by late 1979 however revolutionary chaos in iran was making any normal relations impossible.
what power there was resided with a zealous religious leader the ayatollah ruhollah khomeini.
in late october 1979 the deposed shah arrived in new york to be treated for cancer.
days later on november 4 an armed group of militants invaded the american embassy in teheran seized the diplomats and military personnel inside and demanded the return of the shah to iran in exchange for their freedom.
fifty three americans remained hostages in the embassy for over a year.
only weeks after the hostage seizure on december 27 1979 soviet troops invaded afghanistan the mountainous islamic nation lying between the ussr and iran.
the soviet union had in fact been a power in afghanistan for years and the dominant force since april 1978 when a coup had established a marxist government there with close ties to the kremlin.
carter called it the gravest threat to world peace since world war ii and angrily imposed a series of economic sanctions on the russians canceled american participation in the 1980 summer olympic games in moscow and announced the withdrawal of salt ii from senate consideration.
the soviet invasion of afghanistan became a military quagmire and seriously weakened the soviet regime.
the combination of domestic economic troubles and inter carters national crises created widespread anxiety falling frustration and anger in the united states popularity damaging president carters already low standing with the public and giving added strength to an alternative political force that had already made great strides.
the rise of the new american right much of the anxiety in the 1970s was a result of public events that left many men and women shaken and uncertain about their leaders and their government.
but much of it was also a result of significant changes in americas economy society and culture.
together these changes provided the right with its most important opportunity in generations to seize a posi tion of authority in american life.
the mall 0h1lj id mdern mall is the direct descendant of an earlier retail innovation the automobile 1 oe oriented shopping center which strove to combine a number of different shops in a single structure with parking for customers.
the first modern shopping center the country club plaza opened in kansas city in 1924 by the mid 1950s shopping centers ranging from small strips to large integrated complexes had proliferated throughout the country and were challenging traditional downtown shopping districts which suffered from lack of parking and from the movement of middle class residents to the suburbs in 1956 the first enclosed climate controlled shopping mall the southdale shopping center opened in minneapolis followed quickly by similar ventures in new york new jersey illinois north carolina and tennessee as the malls spread they grew larger and more elaborate.
by the 1970s vast regional malls were emerging tyson s corner in fairfax virginia roosevelt field on long island the galleria in houston and many others that drew customers from great distances and dazzled them not only with acres of varied retail space but also with restaurants movie theaters skating rinks bowling alleys hotels video arcades and large public spaces with fountains benches trees gardens and concert spaces.
the more needs you fulfill the longer people stay one developer observed.
malls had become self contained imitations of cities but in a setting from which many of the troubling and abrasive features of downtowns had been eliminated.
malls were insulated from the elements.
they were policed by private security forces who unlike real police could and usually did keep undesirable customers off the premises.
they were purged of bars pornography shops and unsavory businesses.
they were off limits to beggars vagrants the homeless and anyone else the managers considered unattractive to their customers malls set out to perfect urban space recasting the city as a protected controlled and socially homogeneous site attractive to and in many cases dominated by white middle class people.
some malls also sought to become community centers in sprawling suburban areas that had few real community spaces of their own.
a few malls built explicitly civic spaces meeting halls and conference shopping center northern virginia this small shopping center near washington d c was characteristic of the new strip malls that were emerging in the 1950s to serve suburban customers who traveled almost entirely by automobile.
photo by charles fenno jacobs time life pictures getty images centers where community groups could gather.
some published their own newspapers.
many staged concerts plays and dances.
but civic activities had a difficult time competing with the principal attraction of the malls consumption.
malls were designed with women the principal consumers in most families mainly in mind.
i wouldn t know how to design a center for a man one architect said of the the sunbelt and its politics the most widely discussed demographic phenomenon of the 1970s was the rise of what became known as the sunbelt a term coined by the political analyst sunbel kevin phillips.
the sunbelt included the southeast including florida the southwest particularly texas and above all california which became the nation s most populous state surpassing new york in 1964 by 1980 the population of the sunbelt had risen to exceed that of the older industrial regions of the north and the east.
the rise of the sunbelt helped produce a change in the political climate.
the strong populist traditions in the south and the west were capable of producing progressive politics.
but more often in the late twentieth century they produced a strong opposition to the growth of government and a resentment of the proliferating regulations and restrictions that the liberal state was producing.
many of those regulations and restrictions environmental laws land use restrictions even the 55 mile per hour speed limit created during the energy crisis to force motorists to conserve fuel affected the west more than any other region.
the so called sagebrush rebellion which emerged in parts of the west in the late 1970s mobilized conservative opposition to environmental laws and restrictions on development.
it sought to portray the west which had probably benefited more than any other region from federal investment as sagebrush rebellion a victim of government control.
its members complained about the large amounts of land the federal government owned in many western states and demanded that the land be opened for development.
some of the most conservative communities in america among them orange county in southern california were in suburban suburbs.
many suburbs insulated their res conservatism idents from contact with diverse groups through the relative homogeneity of the population through the transferring of retail and even work space into suburban office parks and shopping malls.
the politics of religion in the 1960s many social critics had predicted the extinction of religious influence in american life.
time magazine had reported such assumptions in 1966 with a celebrated and con troversial cover emblazoned with the question is god dead.
842 early malls in the 1960s most malls such as bullock s fashion square in sherman oaks ca were outdoor collections of stores focused largely on shopping.
ap images todays malls contemporary malls such as the grove shopping mall in los angeles ca combine shopping with entertainment.
by 2014 business in many malls began to decrease owing to online purchasing.
sunnyphotography.
com alamy unde sta vx zvi l ze and eval ja fe 1 how did the shopping mall change suburban life.
2 are malls a unifying influence on social life.
in what ways are malls divisive.
3 originally malls were designed to cater largely to women especially mothers.
has the target audience for malls changed.
if so to whom do malls principally cater today.
complexes he built.
they catered to the concerns of mothers about their own and their children s safety and they offered products of particular interest to them.
male oriented stores mens clothing sporting goods hardware stores were much less visible in most malls than shops marketing women s and children s clothing jewelry lingerie and household goods.
malls also became important to teenagers who flocked to them in the way that earlier generations had flocked to street corners and squares in traditional downtowns.
the malls were places for teenagers to meet friends go to movies avoid parents hang out.
they were places to buy records clothes or personal items.
and they were places to work.
low paying retail jobs plentiful in malls were typical first working experiences for many teens.
the proliferation of malls has dismayed many people who see in them a threat to the sense of community in america.
by insulating people from the diversity and conflict of urban life critics argue malls divide groups from one another and erode the bonds that make it possible for those groups to understand one another.
but malls like the suburbs they usually serve also create a kind of community.
they are homogeneous and protected to be sure but they are also social gathering places in many areas where the alternative is not the rich diverse life of the downtown but the even more isolated experience of shopping in distant strips or through catalogs telephone and the internet.
evangelical christianity had been the but religion in america was far from dead.
indeed in the 1970s the united states experienced the beginning of a major religious revival perhaps the most powerful since the second great awakening of the early nineteenth century.
it continued in various forms into the early twenty first century.
some of the new religious enthusiasm found expression in the rise of various cults and pseudo faiths the church of scientology the unification church of the reverend sun myung moon even the tragic peoples temple whose members committed mass suicide in their jungle retreat in guyana in 1978 but the most important impulse of the religious revival was the growth of evangelical christianity.
evangelicalism is the basis of many forms of christian faith but evangelicals have in common a belief in personal conversion being wborn again through direct communication with god.
evangelical religion dominant form of christianity in america through much of its history and a substantial subculture since the late nineteenth century.
in its modern form it became increasingly visible during the early 1950s when evangelicals such as billy graham and pentecostals such as oral roberts began to attract huge national and international followings for their energetic revivalism.
by the 1970s more than 70 million americans described themselves as born again christians men and women who had established a direct personal relationship with jesus christian evangelicals owned their own newspapers magazines radio stations television networks and later internet based forms of communication.
they operated their own schools and universities.
for some evangelicals christianity formed the basis for a commitment to racial and economic justice and to world peace.
for many other evangelicals the message of the new religion was very different but no less political.
they were alarmed by what they considered the spread of immorality and disorder in american life.
they feared the growth of feminism and the threat they believed it posed to the traditional family.
particularly alarming to them were supreme court decisions eliminating religious observance from schools and later the decision guaranteeing women the right to an abortion.
despite the historic antagonism between many evangelical protestants and the catholic church the growing politicization of religion in the 1970s and beyond brought some former rivals together.
catholics were the first major opponents of the supreme courts decision legalizing abortion in roe v wade 843 844.
chapter 18 looking back the extraordinary growth of american cities in the last decades of the nineteenth century led to both great achievements and enormous problems.
cities became centers of learning art and commerce.
they produced great advances in technology transportation architecture and communications.
they provided their residents and their many visitors with varied and dazzling experiences so much so that many rural people left the countryside to move to the city and many more dreamed of doing so.
but cities were also places of congestion filth disease and corruption.
with populations expanding too rapidly for services to keep up most american cities in this era struggled with makeshift governments and makeshift techniques to solve the basic problems of providing water disposing of sewage building roads providing public transportation fighting fire stopping crime and preventing or curing disease.
city governments many of them dominated by political machines and ruled by party bosses were often models of inefficiency and corruption although in their informal way they also provided substantial services to the working class and immigrant constituencies who needed them most.
they also managed despite the administrative limitations of most municipal governments to oversee great public projects the building of parks museums opera houses and theaters usually in partnership with private developers.
the city brought together races ethnic groups and classes of extraordinary variety from the families of great wealth that the new industrial age was creating to the vast working class much of it consisting of immigrants that crowded into densely packed neighborhoods sharply divided by ethnicity.
the city also produced new forms of popular culture.
it produced new opportunities and risks for women.
it created temples of consumerism shops boutiques and above all the great department stores.
and it created forums for public recreation and entertainment parks theaters athletic fields amusement parks and later movie palaces.
urban life created such great anxiety among those who lived within the cities and among those who observed them from afar that in some cities middle class people armed themselves to prepare for the insurrections they expected from the poor.
but in fact american cities adapted reasonably successfully over time to the great demands their growth made of them and learned to govern themselves if not entirely honestly and efficiently at least adequately to allow them to survive and grow.
key terms people places events alice hamilton 498 armory show 509 ashcan school 509 city beautiful movement 494 darwinism 509 d w griffith 507 henry james 508 jacob riis 495 kate chopin 508 national consumers league 502 stephen crane 508 tammany hall 500 theodore dreiser 508 upton sinclair 508 william james 510 william m tweed 500 yellow journalism 508 recall and reflect 1 what groups of people were most likely to move to the cities of late nineteenth century america and why.
2 what was the relationship between immigration and urbanization in the late nineteenth century.
3 in what way did the serious art and literature of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries function as social criticism.
what were these artists and writers criticizing.
4 how did the new consumer economy affect roles and expectations for women.
5 what was darwinism and what was its impact on american intellectual life.
the age of the city 513 significant events new york city s central park opened 1894 immigration restriction league founded 1869 1895 a princeton and rutgers play first intercollegiate football game 1899 first coney island amusement park opens stephen crane publishes the new york city opens elevated railroads 1871 kate chopin publishes the awakening red badge of courage boston opens first subway in america great fires destroy much of 1900 1872 tammany s boss tweed chicago and boston 1901 a theodore dreiser publishes sister carrie convicted of corruption 1876 baseball s american league founded baseball s national league 1903 1882 congress restricts chinese founded 1906 boston red sox win first world series immigration 1883 upton sinclair publishes the jungle brooklyn bridge opened earthquake and fire destroy much of san francisco 1910 1884 first steel girder skyscraper built in chicago 1913 national college athletic association founded to regulate college football 1890 ashcan school artists stage jacob riis publishes how the other half lives armory show in new york city 1915 1891 james naismith invents basketball 1893 columbian exposition opens in chicago d w griffith s the birth of a nation debuts i from crisis to empire party of patches judge magazine june 6 1891 this political cartoon suggests the contempt and fear with which many easterners in particular viewed the emergence of the people s party in 1891 kansas state historical society.
looking ahead 1 what were the major social and economic problems that beset the united states in the late nineteenth century and how did the two major political parties respond to these problems.
2 what was populism what were its goals and to what degree were these goals achieved.
how did the united states become an imperial power.
setting the stage the united states approached the end of the nineteenth century as a fundamentally different nation from what it had been at the beginning of the civil war with rapid change came cascading social and political problems problems that the weak and conservative governments of the time showed little inclination or ability to address.
a catastrophic depression began in 1893 rapidly intensified and created devastating hardship for millions of americans.
farmers particularly hard hit by the depression responded by creating an agrarian political movement known as populism.
american workers facing massive unemployment staged large and occasionally violent strikes.
not since the civil war had american politics been so polarized and impassioned.
the presidential election of 1896 pitted the agrarian hero william jennings bryan against the solid conservative william mckinley.
supported by the mighty republican party and many eastern groups that looked with suspicion and unease at the agricultural demands coming from the west mckinley won an easy victory.
although mckinley did little in his first term in office to resolve the problems and grievances of the time the economy revived nevertheless.
having largely ignored the depression however mckinley took a great interest in another great national cause the plight of cuba in its war with spain.
in the spring of 1898 the united states declared war on spain and entered the conflict in cuba a brief but bloody war that ended with an american victory four months later.
the conflict had begun as a way to support cuban independence from the spanish.
but a group of fervent and influential imperialists worked to convert the war into an occasion for acquiring overseas possessions.
despite a powerful anti imperialist movement the acquisition of the former spanish colonies proceeded only to draw americans into yet another imperial war this one in the philippines where the americans not the spanish were the targets of local enmity.
the politics of equilibrium electoral stability the most striking feature of late nineteenth century politics was the remarkable stability of the party system.
from the end of reconstruction until the late 1890s the electorate was divided almost precisely evenly between the republicans and the democrats.
sixteen states were solidly and consistently republican and fourteen states most in the south were solidly and consistently democratic.
only five states most importantly new york and ohio were usually in doubt and their voters generally decided the results of national elections.
the republican party captured the presidency in all but two of the elections of the era but in the five presidential elections beginning in 1876 the average popular vote margin separating the democratic and republican candidates was 1 5 percent.
the congressional balance was similarly stable with the republicans generally controlling the senate and the democrats generally controlling the house.
as striking as the balance between the parties was the intensity of public loyalty to them.
in most of the country americans viewed their party affiliations with a passion and enthusiasm that is difficult for later generations to understand.
voter turnout in presidential elections between 1860 and 1900 averaged over 78 percent of all eligible voters as compared with only about 50 percent in most recent elections.
even in nonpresidential years from 60 to 80 percent of the voters turned out to cast ballots for con gressional and local candidates.
large groups of potential voters were disenfranchised in these years women in most states almost all blacks and many poor whites in the south.
but for adult white males there were few franchise restrictions.
what explains this extraordinary loyalty to the two political parties.
it was not certainly that the parties took distinct positions on important public issues.
they did so rarely.
party loyalties reflected other factors.
region was perhaps the most important.
to white southerners loyalty to the democratic party was a matter of unquestioned faith.
it was the vehicle by which they had triumphed over reconstruction and preserved white supremacy.
to many northerners white high turnout.
515 516 chapter in the nations public history.
it also brought to a close at least temporarily savage political conflicts that had seemed to threaten the nations future.
key terms people places events alexander hamilton 161 alien and sedition acts 176 antifederalists 167 bill of rights 168 checks and balances 166 citizen genet affair 173 federalists 167 federal structure 166 great compromise 164 james madison 164 jays treaty 174 john adams 175 new jersey plan 162 pinckneys treaty 174 quasi war 176 republicans 169 revolution of 1800 177 separation of powers 166 sovereignty 165 the federalist papers 167 virginia and kentucky resolutions 177 virginia plan 162 whiskey rebellion 172 xyz affair 176 the constitution and the new republic 179 recall and reflect significant events 1 how did the constitution of 1787 attempt to resolve the weaknesses of the articles of confederation.
2 what role did the federalist papers play in the battle over ratification of the constitution.
3 what were the main tenets of alexander hamiltons financial program.
4 what diplomatic crises did the united states face in the first decade of its existence and how did the new government respond to these crises.
5 what was the revolution of 1800 and in what way was it a revolution.
1786 annapolis conference meets 1787 1788 states ratify constitution 1791 hamilton issues report on manufactures first bank of the united states chartered 1787 constitution adopted september 17 constitutional convention in philadelphia meets 1789 washington becomes first president bill of rights adopted by congress judiciary act of 1789 passed french revolution begins 1792 washington reelected without opposition 1793 citizen genet affair challenges american neutrality 1795 pinckney s treaty signed 1794 whiskey rebellion quelled in pennsylvania jay s treaty signed 1796 john adams elected president 1798 xyz affair precipitates state of quasi war with france alien and sedition acts passed virginia and kentucky resolutions passed 1801 jefferson becomes president after congress confirms election judiciary act of 1801 passed 1800 jefferson and burr tie vote in electoral college 7 the jeffersonian era the burning of washington this dramatic engraving somewhat exaggerates the extent of the blazes in looking ahead washington when the british occupied the city in august 1814 but the invaders did set fire to the capitol the white house and other.
u c public buildings in retaliation for the american burning and looting 1 how successful was jefferson s effort to create a republican society of the canadian capital at york the grange collection.
new yrok i dominated by sturdy independent farmers.
2 how did the napoleonic wars affect the united states.
3 what events and issues led to the war of 1812.
the jeffersonian vision setting the stage.
upiri thomas jefferson and his followers assumed control of the national government in 1801 as the champions of a distinctive vision of america a vision sharply different from that of andrew hamilton and other federalists.
they envisioned a society of sturdy independent farmers happily free from the workshops industrial towns and city mobs of europe.
they promoted a cultural outlook that emphasized localism and republican simplicity.
and they proposed a federal government of sharply limited power with most authority remaining at the state level.
almost nothing worked out as they planned.
for during their years in power the young republic was developing in ways that made much of their vision obsolete.
the american economy became steadily more diversified and complex.
growing cities surging commerce and expanding industrialism made the ideal of a simple agrarian society impossible to maintain.
american cultural life far from reflecting localism and simplicity reflected a vigorous and ambitious nationalism.
the republicans did manage to translate some of their political ideals into reality.
jefferson dismantled much of the bureaucratic power structure the federalists had erected in the 1790s and he helped ensure for a time that in many respects the federal government would remain a relatively unimportant force in american life.
yet he also frequently encountered situations that required him to exercise strong national authority as for example when he arranged the greatest single increase in the size of the united states in its history.
the republicans did not always like these nationalizing and modernizing trends but for the most part they adjusted to them and in doing so became agents of the transformation of american life they had once resisted.
the rise of cultural nationalism in many respects american cultural life in the early nineteenth century seemed to reflect the republican vision of the nation s future.
opportunities for education increased the nation s literary and artistic life began to free itself from european influences and american religion began to confront and adjust to the spread of enlightenment rationalism.
in other respects however the new culture was posing a serious challenge to republican ideals.
patterns of education central to the republican vision of america was the concept of a virtuous and enlightened citizenry.
jefferson himself called emphatically for a national crusade against ignorance republicans believed therefore in the establishment of a nationwide system of public importance of sch00js to create the educated electorate they believed a republic required.
acitizenrys a11 white male citizens the nation s prospective voters should they argued receive free education.
some states endorsed the principle of public education for all in the early years of the republic but none actually created a working system of free schools.
a massachusetts law of 1789 reaffirmed the colonial laws by which each town was obligated to support a school but there was little enforcement.
in virginia the state legislature ignored jeffersons call for universal elementary education and for advanced education for the gifted.
as late as 1815 not a single state had a comprehensive public school system.
instead schooling became primarily the responsibility of private institutions most of which were open only to those who could afford to pay for them.
in the south and in the mid atlantic states religious groups ran most of the schools.
in new england and elsewhere private private academies were usually secular many of them modeled on schools schooling founcjecj by the phillips family at andover massachusetts in 1778 and at exeter new hampshire three years later.
by 1815 there were thirty such private secondary schools in massachusetts thirty seven in new york and several dozen more scattered throughout 181 182 chapter 7 african americans and the revivals associated with the churches charitable societies ministering to orphans and the poor missionary organizations and others in which women came to play important roles.
although revivalism was most widespread within white society it penetrated other cultures as well.
in some areas of the country revivals were open to people of all races and many african americans not only attended but eagerly embraced the new religious fervor as well.
out of these revivals in fact emerged a substan tial group of black preachers who became important figures within the slave community.
some of them translated the apparently egalitarian religious message of the second great awakening that salvation was available to all into a similarly egalitarian message for blacks in the present world.
out of black revival meetings in virginia arose an elaborate plan in 1800 devised by gabriel prosser the brother of an african american preacher for a slave rebellion and attack on richmond.
the plan was discovered and the rebellion forestalled by whites but revivalism continued to stir racial unrest in the south.
the spirit of revivalism was also particularly strong in these years among native americans although very different from revivalism in white or black society.
it drew heavily from earlier tribal experiences.
in the 1760s the delaware prophet neolin had sparked a widespread revival in the old northwest with a message combining christian and indian imagery and bringing to native american religion a vision of a personal god intimately involved in the affairs of man.
neolin had also called for indians to rise up in defense of their lands and had denounced the growth of trade and other relationships with white civilization.
his vehement statements had helped stimulate the indian military efforts of 1763 and beyond.
the dislocations and military defeats indians suffered in the aftermath of the american revolution created a sense of crisis among many of the eastern tribes in particular as a result the 1790s and early 1800s became another era of indian religious fervor and prophecy.
presbyterian and baptist missionaries were active among the south ern tribes and sparked a great wave of conversions.
the most important revivalism came from the efforts of another great prophet handsome lake a seneca whose seemingly miraculous rebirth after years of alcoholism helped give him a special stature within his tribe.
handsome lake like neolin before him called for a revival of traditional indian ways.
he claimed to have met jesus who instructed him to tell your people they will become lost when they follow the ways of the white man handsome lakes message spread through the scattered iroquois communities and inspired many indians to give up whiskey gambling and other destructive customs derived from white society.
but the revival did not in fact lead to a true restoration of traditional iroquois culture.
instead handsome lake encouraged christian missionaries to become active within the tribes indians and the second great awakening and he urged iroquois men to abandon their roles as hunters partly because so much of their hunting land had been seized by whites and become sedentary farmers instead.
iroquois women who had traditionally done the farming were to move into more domestic roles.
when some women resisted the change handsome lake denounced them as witches.
he demanded confessions from them and killed some of those who refused.
the second great awakening also had important effects on those americans who did not accept its teachings.
the rational freethinkers whose skeptical philosophies freethinkers helped produce the revivals were in many ways victims of the new religious fervor.
they did not disappear after 1800 but their influence rapidly declined and for many years they remained a small and defensive minority within american christianity.
instead the dominant religious characteristic of the new nation became a fervent evangelicalism which would survive into the mid nineteenth century and beyond.
stirrings of industrialism despite the hopes of jefferson and his followers that the united states would remain a simple agrarian republic the nation took its first tentative steps in these years toward its transformation into an urban industrial society.
technology in america americans imported some of these technological advances from england.
see america in the world pp.
the british government attempted to protect the nations manufacturing preeminence by preventing the export of textile machinery or the emigration of skilled mechanics.
despite such efforts immigrants arrived in the united states with advanced knowledge of english technology eager to introduce the new machines to america.
samuel slater for example used the knowledge he had acquired before leaving england to build a spinning mill for the quaker merchant moses brown in pawtucket rhode island in 1790 it was the first modern factory in america.
america in the early nineteenth century also produced several important inventors of its own.
among them was oliver evans of delaware who devised a number of ingenious new machines an automated flour mill a card making machine and others.
he made several important improvements in the steam engine and in 1795 he published americas first textbook of mechanical engineering the young mill wrights and millers guide.
his own hour milt which began operations in 1787 required only two men to operate one of them emptying a bag of wheat into the ma c inery another putting the lid on the barrels of flour and rolling them away.
the jeffersonian era 189 the cotton gin eli whitneys cotton gin revolutionized the cotton economy of the south by making the processing of short staple cotton simple and economical.
with the device a single operator could clean as much cotton in a few hours as a group of workers had once needed a whole day to do.
private collection j t vintage the bridgeman art library even more influential for the future of the nation were the inventions of the massachusetts born yale educated eli whitney who revolutionized both cotton production and weapons manufacturing.
the growth of the textile industry in england had created an enormous demand for cotton a demand that planters in the american south were finding impossible to meet.
their greatest obstacle was separating the seeds from cotton fiber a difficult and time consuming process that was essential before cotton could be sold.
long staple or sea island cotton with its smooth black seeds and long fibers was easy to clean but it grew successfully only along the atlantic coast or on the offshore islands of georgia and south carolina.
there was not nearly enough of it to satisfy the demand.
short staple cotton by contrast could grow inland through vast areas of the south.
but its sticky green seeds were extremely difficult to remove.
a skilled worker could clean no more than a few pounds a day by hand.
then in 1793 whitney who was working at the time as a tutor on r the georgia plantation of general nathanael cotton gin greenes widow invented a machine that performed the arduous task quickly and efficiently.
it was dubbed the cotton gin cgin was an abbrevia tion for engine and it transformed the life of the south.
mechanically the gin was very simple.
a toothed roller caught the fibers of the cotton boll and pulled them between the wires of a grating.
the grating caught the seeds while a revolving brush removed the lint from the rollers teeth.
with the device a single operator could clean as much cotton in a few hours as a group of workers had once needed a whole day to do.
the results were profound.
soon cotton growing spread into the upland south and beyond and within a decade total crop production increased eightfold.
african american slavery which with the decline of tobacco production some had considered a dwindling institution the cotton gins impact on the north regained its importance expanded and became more firmly fixed upon the south.
the cotton gin not only changed the economy of the south it also helped transform the north.
the large supply of domestically produced fiber was a strong incentive to entrepreneurs in new england and elsewhere to develop an american textile industry.
few northern states could hope to thrive on the basis of agriculture alone by learning to turn cotton into yarn and thread plantation owners could become industrially prosperous instead.
the manufacturing preeminence of the north which emerged with the development of the textile industry in the 1820s and 1830s helped drive a wedge between the nations two most populous regions one becoming increasingly industrial the other more firmly bound to agriculture.
whitney also made a major contribution to the development of modern warfare and in the process made a contribution to other industrial techniques.
during the two years of undeclared war with france 1798 and 1799 americans were deeply troubled by their lack of sufficient armaments for the expected hostilities.
production of muskets each carefully handcrafted by a skilled gunsmith was discouragingly slow.
whitney devised a machine to make each part of a gun according to an exact pattern.
tasks could thus be divided among several workers and one laborer could quickly assemble a weapon out of parts made by several others.
before long manufacturers of sewing machines clocks and many other complicated products were using the same system.
the new technological advances were relatively isolated phenomena during the early years of the nineteenth century.
not until at least the 1840s did the nation begin to develop a true manufacturing economy.
but the inventions of this period were crucial in making the eventual transformation possible.
transportation innovations one of the prerequisites for industrialization is an efficient system for transporting raw materials to factories and finished goods to markets.
the united states had no such system in the early years of the republic.
but work was under way that would ultimately remove the transportation obstacle.
there were several ways to solve the problem of the small american market.
one was to look for customers overseas and american merchants continued their efforts to do that.
among the first acts of the new congress when it met in 1789 were two tariff bills giving preference to american ships in american ports helping to stimulate an expansion of domestic shipping.
more important indeed the principal reason for the growth of american trade in this period was the outbreak of war in europe in the 1790s allowing yankee merchant vessels to take over most of the carrying trade rapid growth of american between europe and the western shipping hemisphere.
as early as 1793 the young republic had a merchant marine and a 190 chapter 7 thomas jefferson this 1805 portrait by the noted american painter rembrandt peale shows jefferson at the beginning of his second term as president.
it also conveys through the simplicity of dress and the slightly unkempt hair the image of democratic simplicity that jefferson liked to project.
collection of the new york historical society usa the bridgeman art library jefferson the architect among his many accomplishments thomas jefferson was a gifted architect.
this rotunda is the centerpiece of the central campus of the university of virginia which jefferson designed near the end of his life.
earlier he designed his own home near charlottesville monticello and his proposal for a president s mansion in washington d c placed second in a blind competition.
the granger collection new york.
had ceded to great britain in 1763 was now mostly part of the united states and lost to france forever.
but napoleon wanted to regain the lands west of the mississippi which now belonged to spain over which napoleon now exercised strong influence.
under the secret treaty of san udefonso of 1800 between the french and the spanish france regained title to louisiana which included almost the whole of the mississippi valley to the west of the river plus new orleans near its mouth.
the louisiana territory would napoleon hoped become the heart of a great french empire in america.
also part of napoleon s empire in the new world were the sugar rich and strategically valuable west indian islands that still belonged to france guadeloupe martinique and above all santo domingo.
but unrest among the caribbean slaves posed a threat to napoleons hopes for the islands.
africans in santo domingo inspired by the french revolution revolted and created a republic of their own under the re toussaint markable black leader toussaint louverture.
louverture taking advantage of a truce in his war with england napoleon sent an army to the west indies.
it temporarily crushed the insurrection and restored french authority but the incident was an early sign of the problems napoleon would have in realizing his ambitions in america.
jefferson was unaware at first of napoleons imperial ambitions in america and for a time he pursued a foreign policy that reflected his well known admiration for france.
he appointed as american minister to paris the ardently pro french robert r livingston.
he worked to secure ratification of the franco american settlement of 1800 and began observing the terms of the treaty even before it was ratified.
the adams administration had joined with the british in recognizing and supporting the rebel regime of toussaint louverture in santo domingo jefferson assured the french minister in washington that the american people especially those of the slaveholding states did not approve of the black revolutionary who they thought was setting a bad example for their own slaves.
he even implied that the united states might join with france in putting down the rebellion although nothing ever came of the suggestion.
jefferson began to reconsider his position toward france however when he heard rumors of the secret transfer of louisiana.
jefferson was even more alarmed when in the fall of 1802 he learned that the spanish intendant at new orleans who still governed the city since the french had not yet taken formal possession of the region had announced a disturbing new regulation.
american ships sailing the mississippi river had for many years been accustomed to depositing their cargoes in new orleans for transfer to oceangoing vessels.
the intendant now forbade the practice even though spain had guaranteed americans that right in the pinckney treaty of 1795 thus effectively closing the lower mississippi to american shippers.
westerners demanded that the federal government do something to reopen the river.
the president faced a dilemma.
if he yielded to the frontier clamor and tried to change the po icy by force he would run the risk of a major war the jeffersonian era 199 west point creating a professional military was an important task for the leaders of the early republic.
without an army they realized it would be diffi cult for the united states to win respect in the world.
the establishment in 1802 of the united states military academy at west point whose parade ground is pictured here was therefore an important event in the early history of the republic.
west point museum collections united states military academy with france.
if he ignored the westerners demands he might lose political support.
but jefferson saw another solution.
he instructed robert livingston the american ambassador in paris to negotiate the purchase of new orleans.
livingston on his own authority proposed that the french sell the united states the vast western part of louisiana as well.
in the meantime jefferson persuaded congress to appropriate funds for an expansion of the army and the construction of a river fleet and he deliberately gave the impression that american forces might soon descend on new orleans and that the united states might form an alliance with great britain if the problems napoleons rance were not reslved.
perhaps that offer was why napoleon suddenly decided to ac cept livingston s proposal and offer the united states the entire louisiana territory.
napoleon had good reasons for the decision.
his plans for an american empire had already gone seriously awry.
that was partly because a yellow fever epidemic had wiped out much of the french army in the new world.
but it was also because the expeditionary force napoleon sent to take possession of louisiana had been frozen into a dutch harbor through the winter of 1802 1803 by the time the harbor thawed in the spring of 1803 napoleon was preparing for a renewed war in europe.
he would not he realized have the resources now to secure an american empire.
the louisiana purchase faced with napoleons startling proposal livingston and james monroe whom jefferson had sent to paris to assist in the negotiations had to decide first whether they should even consider making a treaty for the purchase of the entire louisiana territory since they had not been authorized by their government to do so.
but fearful that napoleon might withdraw the offer they decided to proceed without further instructions from home.
after some haggling over the price livingston and monroe signed the agreement on april 30 1803 by the terms of the treaty the united states was to pay a total of 80 million francs 15 million to the french government.
the united states was also to grant certain exclusive commercial privileges to france in the port of new orleans and was to incorporate the residents of louisiana into the union with the same rights and privileges as other citizens.
the boundaries of the purchase were not clearly defined the treaty simply specified that louisiana would occupy the same extent as it had when france and spain had owned it.
200 chapter 20 african americans faced greater obstacles than any other group in challenging their own oppressed status and seeking reform.
thus it was not surprising perhaps that so many embraced the message of booker t washington in the late nineteenth century to put down your bucket where you are to work for immediate self improvement rather than long range social change.
not all african americans however were content with this approach.
and by the turn of the century a powerful challenge was emerging a challenge to the philosophy of washington but more important to the entire structure of race relations.
the chief spokesman for this new approach was w e b du bois.
du bois unlike washington had never known slavery.
born in massachusetts educated at fisk university in nashville and at harvard he grew to maturity with a more expansive view than washington of the goals of his race and the responsibilities of white society to eliminate prejudice and injustice.
in the souls of black folk 1903 he launched an open attack on the philosophy of washington accusing him of encouraging white efforts to impose segregation and of limiting the aspirations of his race.
is it possible and probable he asked that nine millions of men can make effective progress in economic lines if they are deprived of political rights made a servile caste and allowed only the most meager chance for developing their exceptional men.
if history and reason give any distinct answer to these questions it is an emphatic no rather than content themselves with education at the trade and agricultural schools du bois advocated talented blacks should accept nothing less than a full university education.
they should aspire to the professions.
they should above all fight for their civil rights not simply wait for them to be granted as a reward for patient striving.
in 1905 du bois and a group of his supporters met at niagara falls on the canadian side of the border because no hotel on the american side of the falls would naacp have them and launched what became founded known as the niagara movement.
four years later after a race riot in springfield illinois they joined with white progressives sympathetic to their cause to form the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp.
whites held most of the offices at first but du bois its director of publicity and research was the guiding spirit.
in the ensuing years the new organization led the drive for equal rights using as its principal weapon lawsuits in the federal courts.
within less than a decade the naacp had begun to win some important victories.
in guinn v united states 1915 the supreme court supported its position that the grandfather clause in an oklahoma law was unconstitutional.
the statute denied the vote to any citizen whose ancestors had not been enfranchised in 1860.
in buchanan v worley 1917 the court struck down a louisville kentucky law requiring residential segregation.
the naacp established itself particularly after booker t washington s death in 1915 as one of the nations leading black organizations a position it would maintain for many years.
among the many issues that engaged the naacp and other african american organizations was the phenomenon of lynch ing in the south.
du bois was an outspoken critic of lynching and an advocate of a federal law making it illegal since state courts the young w e b du bois this formal photograph of w e b du bois was taken in 1899 when he was thirty one years old and a professor at atlanta university.
he had just published the philadelphia negro a classic sociological study of an urban community which startled many readers with its description of the complex class system among african americans in the city.
hulton archive getty images in the south routinely refused to prosecute lynchers.
but the most determined opponents of lynching were southern women.
they included white women such as jessie daniel ames.
the most effective crusader was a black woman ida wells barnett who worked both on her own at great personal risk and with such organizations as the national association of colored women and the womens convention of the national baptist church to try to discredit lynching and challenge segregation.
crusade for social order and reform formers directed many of their energies at the political process.
but they also crusaded on behalf of what they consid ere moral issues.
there were campaigns to eliminate alcohol the progressives 567 from national life to curb prostitution to limit divorce and to restrict immigration.
proponents of each of those reforms be lieved that success would help regenerate society as a whole.
the temperance crusade many progressives considered the elimination of alcohol from american life a necessary step in restoring order to society.
scarce wages vanished as workers spent hours in the saloons.
drunkenness spawned violence and occasionally murder within urban families.
working class wives and mothers hoped through temperance to reform male behavior and thus improve womens lives.
employers too regarded alcohol as an impediment to industrial efficiency workers often missed time on the job because of drunkenness or came to the factory intoxicated.
critics of economic privilege denounced the liquor industry as one of the nations most sinister trusts.
and political reformers who correctly looked on the saloon as one of the central institutions of the urban machine saw an attack on drinking as part of an attack on the bosses.
out of such sentiments emerged the temperance movement.
temperance had been a major reform movement before the civil war mobilizing large numbers of people in a cru wctu sa e witd stron evangelical overtones.
in 1873 the movement developed new strength.
temperance advocates formed the womens christian temperance union wctu led after 1879 by frances willard.
by 1911 it had 245 000 members and had become the single largest womens organization in american history to that point.
in 1893 the anti saloon league joined the temperance movement and along with the wctu began to press for a specific legislative solution the legal abolition of saloons.
gradually that demand grew to include the complete prohibition of the sale and manufacture of alcoholic beverages.
despite substantial opposition from immigrant and working class voters pressure for prohibition grew steadily through the first decades of the new century.
by 1916 nine eighteenth teen states had passed prohibition laws.
amendment but since the consumption of alcohol was actually increasing in many unregulated areas temperance advocates were beginning to advocate a national prohibition law.
americas entry into world war i and the moral fervor it unleashed provided the last push to the advocates of prohibition.
in 1917 with the support of rural fundamentalists who opposed alcohol on moral and religious grounds progressive advocates of prohibition steered through congress a constitutional amendment embodying their demands.
two years later after ratification by every state in the nation except connecticut and rhode island bastions of catholic immigrants the eighteenth amendment became law to take effect in january 1920 total immigration during 4 96 five year periods in millions 1901 1906 1911 1916 1905 1910 1915 1920 total immigration 1900 1920 emigration to the united states reached the highest level in the nation s history to that point in the first fifteen years of the twentieth century.
in the nineteenth century there was no five year period when as many as 3 million immigrants arrived in america.
in the first fifteen years of the twentieth century more than 3 million newcomers arrived in every five year period and in one of them as this chart reveals the number reached almost 5 million.
the library of congress 3a38144u why did the flow of immigrants drop so sharply in the period 1916 1920.
568 chapter 9 in the fur trading posts of the pacific northwest in parts of texas and california settlers from mexico canada and the united states had created societies in which indians and whites were in intimate contact with each other.
even during the famous lewis and clark expedition white explorers had lived with western indians on terms of such intimacy that many of them contracted venereal disease from indian sexual partners.
sometimes these close contacts between whites and indians were beneficial to both sides even reasonably equal.
sometimes they were cruel and exploitive.
but the early multiracial societies of the west did not separate whites and indians.
they demonstrated ways in which the two cultures could interact each shaping the other.
by the mid nineteenth century however white americans had adopted a different model as they contemplated westward expansion.
much as the early british settlers along the atlantic coast had established plantations from which natives were in theory to be excluded so the westward moving whites of later years came to imagine the territories they were entering as virgin land with no preexisting civilization.
native americans they believed could not be partners either equal or subordinate in the creation of new societies in the west.
they were obstacles to be removed and as far as possible isolated.
indians andrew jackson once said had neither the intelligence the industry the moral habits nor the desire of improvement to be fit partners in the project of extending white civilization westward.
by dismissing native american cultures in that way white americans justified to themselves a series of harsh policies that they believed incorrectly would make the west theirs alone.
jackson and the bank war jacksons opposition to concentrated power jackson was quite willing to use federal power against rebellious states and indian tribes.
on economic issues however he was consistently opposed to concentrating power either in the federal government or in powerful and in his view aristocratic institutions associated with it.
an early example of his skeptical view of federal power was his 1830 veto of a congressional measure providing a subsidy to the proposed maysville road in kentucky.
the bill was unconstitutional jackson argued because the road in question lay entirely within kentucky and was not therefore a part of interstate commerce but the bill was also unwise he believed because it committed the government to what jackson considered extravagant expenditures.
jackson s opposition to federal power and aristocratic privilege lay behind the most celebrated episode of his presidency the war against the bank of the united states.
biddle s institution the bank of the united states in the 1830s was a mighty institution and it is not surprising that it would attract jacksons wrath.
its stately headquarters in philadelphia seemed to hard and soft money nicholas symbolize its haughty image of itself it biddle had branches in twenty nine other cities making it the most powerful and far flung financial institution in the nation.
by law the bank was the only place that the federal government could deposit its own funds the government in turn owned one fifth of the banks stock.
the bank did a tremendous business in general banking.
it provided credit to growing enterprises it issued bank notes which served as a dependable medium of exchange throughout the country and it exercised a restraining effect on the less well managed state banks.
nicholas biddle who served as president of the bank from 1823 on had done much to put the institution on a sound and prosperous basis.
nevertheless andrew jackson was determined to destroy it.
opposition to the bank came from two very different groups the soft money faction and the hard money faction.
advocates of soft money people who wanted more currency in circulation and believed that issuing bank notes unsupported by gold and silver was the best way to circulate more currency consisted largely of state bankers and their allies.
they objected to the bank of the united states because it restrained the state banks from issuing notes freely.
the hard money people believed that gold and silver were the only basis for money.
they condemned all banks that issued bank notes including the bank of the united states.
the soft money advocates were believers in rapid economic growth and speculation the hard money forces embraced older ideas of public virtue and looked with suspicion on expansion and speculation.
jackson supported the hard money position.
many years before he had been involved in some grandiose land and commercial speculations based on paper credit.
his business had failed in the panic of 1797 and he had fallen deeply into debt.
after that he was suspicious of all banks and all paper currency.
but as president he was also sensitive to the complaints of his many soft money supporters in the west and the south.
he made it clear that he would not favor renewing the charter of the bank of the united states which was due to expire in 1836 a philadelphia aristocrat unaccustomed to politics biddle nevertheless began granting financial favors to influential men who he thought might help him preserve the bank.
in particular he turned to daniel webster and cultivated a close personal friendship with him.
he named webster the banks legal counsel and director of its boston branch webster was also a frequent heavy borrower from the bank.
he helped biddle win the support of other important figures among them henry clay.
clay webster and other advisers persuaded biddle to apply to congress in 1832 for a bill to renew the banks charter.
that was four years ahead of the date the original charter was scheduled to expire.
but forcing a vote now would allow the bank to become a major issue in the 1832 national elections.
congress jacksons veto passed the recharter bill jackson prediet ably vetoed it and the banks supporters in jacksonian america 243 candidate party electoral vote popular vote andrew jackson democrat 219 687 502 55 a henry clay 49 national republican 530 189 42 william wirt anti mason 7 33 108 3 john floyd independent democrat not voted 11 2 the election of 1832 jacksons reelection victory in 1832 was almost as decisive as his earlier victory in 1828 what changes are visible in party loyalties since the previous election.
congress failed to override the veto.
just as clay had hoped the 1832 campaign now centered on the future of the bank.
clay ran for president that year as the unanimous choice of the national republicans who held a nominating convention in baltimore late in 1831 but the bank war failed to provide him with the winning issue for which he had hoped.
jackson with van buren as his running mate overwhelmingly defeated clay and several minor party candidates with 55 percent of the popular vote and 219 electoral votes more than four times as many as clay received.
these results were a defeat not only for clay but also for biddle.
appointed a new one.
when the new secretary similarly balked jackson fired him too and named a third more compliant secretary attorney general roger b taney his close friend and loyal ally.
taney began placing the governments deposits not in the bank of the united states as it had in the past but in a number of state banks which jacksons enemies called pet banks.
nicholas biddle whom jacksonians derisively called czar nicholas did not give in without a fight.
this worthy president he wrote sarcastically thinks that because he has scalped indians and imprisoned judges he is to have his way with the bank.
he is mistaken when the administration began to transfer funds directly from the bank of the united states to the pet banks as opposed to the initial practice of simply depositing new funds in those banks biddle called in loans and raised interest rates explaining that without the government deposits the banks resources were stretched too thin.
he realized his actions were likely to cause financial distress.
he hoped a short recession would persuade congress to recharter the bank.
nothing but the evidence of suffering he told a colleague would produce any effect in congress by now the struggle had become not just a conflict over policy and principle but also a bitter personal battle between two proud men both of them acting recklessly in an effort to humiliate and defeat the other.
as financial conditions worsened in the winter of 1833 1834 supporters of the bank blamed jacksons policies for the recession.
they organized meetings around the country and sent petitions to washington urging a rechartering of the bank.
but the jacksonians blamed the recession on biddle and refused to budge.
when distressed citizens appealed to the president for help he dismissively answered go to biddle finally biddle contracted credit too far even for his own allies in the business community who began to fear that in his effort to save his own bank he was threatening their interests.
some of them did go to biddle a group of new york and boston merchants protested.
to appease the business community biddle at last reversed himself and began to grant credit in abundance and on reasonable terms.
his vacillating and unpopular tactics ended his chances of winning a recharter of the bank.
jackson had won a considerable political victory.
but when the bank of the united states died in 1836 the country lost a jackson valuable albeit flawed financial institution victorious and was left with a fragmented and chronically unstable banking system that would plague the economy for more than a century.
the monster destroyed ackson was now more determined than ever to destroy the monster bank as quickly as possible.
he could not legally abolish the institution before the expiration of its charter.
instead he tried to weaken it.
he decided to remove the government s deposits from the bank.
his secretary of the trea sury believed that such an action would destabilize the financial system and refused to give the order.
jackson fired him an removal of government deposits the taney court in the aftermath of the bank war jackson moved against the most powerful institution of economic nationalism of all the supreme court.
in 1835 when john marshall died the president appointed as the new chief justice his trusted ally roger b taney.
taney did not bring a sharp break in constitutional interpretation but he gradually helped modify marshalls vigorous nationalism.
perhaps the clearest indication of the new judicial mood was the celebrated case of charles river bridge v warren bridge 244 chapter 10 1620 1650 1680 1710 1740 1770 1800 1830 1860 year population growth 1620 1860 from its tiny beginnings in the seventeenth century the american population grew rapidly and dramatically so that by 1860 with more than 31 million people the united states was one of the most populous countries in the world.
how did this growing population contribute to the nation s economic transformation.
total immigration during 347 five year periods in thousands 41 1821 1825 1826 1830 1831 1835 1836 1840 year immigration 1821 1840 among the sources of the nations growing population in the nineteenth century was rapidly increasing immigration.
this graph shows how rapidly immigration to the united states increased in the 1820s and 1830s.
the 347 000 immigrants in the second half of the 1830s were almost nine times the number in the first half of the 1820s.
where did most of these new immigrants settle.
immigration choked off by wars in europe and economic crises in america contributed little to the american population in the first three decades of the nineteenth century but rapidly revived beginning in the 1830s.
of the total 1830 population of nearly 13 million the foreign born numbered fewer than 500 000 but the number of immigrants climbed by 60 000 in 1832 and nearly 80 000 in 1837 reduced transportation costs and increasing economic opportunities helped stimulate the immigration boom as did deteriorating economic conditions in some areas of europe.
the migrations introduced new groups to the united states.
in particular the number of immigrants arriving from the southern counties of ireland began to grow marking the beginning of a tremendous influx of irish catholics that would continue through the three decades before the civil war.
much of this new european immigration flowed into the rapidly growing cities of the northeast.
but urban growth was a result of substantial internal migration as well.
as the agricultural regions of new england and other areas grew less profitable more and more people picked up stakes and moved some to more promising agricultural regions in the west but many to eastern cities.
in 1790 one person in thirty had lived in a city defined as a community of 8 000 or more in 1820 one in twenty and in 1840 one in twelve.
the rise of new york city was particularly dramatic.
by 1810 it was the largest city in the united states.
that was partly a result of its superior natural harbor.
it was also a result of the erie canal completed in 1825 which gave the city unrivaled access to the interior and of liberal state laws that made the city attractive for both foreign and domestic commerce.
immigration and urban growth 1840 1860 the growth of cities accelerated even more dramatically between 1840 and 1860 the population of new york for exam rapid ple rose from 312 000 to 805 000.
new urbanization yorks population would have numbered 1 2 million in 1860 if brooklyn which was then a separate municipality had been included in the total.
philadelphia s population grew over the same twenty year pe riod from 220 000 to 565 000 bostons from 93 000 to 177 000 by 1860 26 percent of the population of the free states was living in towns places of 2 500 people or more or cities 8 000 people or more up from 14 percent in 1840 that percentage was even higher for the industrializing states americas economic revolution 257 1 all others sources of immigration 1820 1840 this pie chart shows where the large numbers of immigrants portrayed in the previous chart came from.
note the very large number of irish immigrants.
why were the irish among the most likely immigrant groups to become part of the industrial workforce.
of the northeast.
in the south by contrast the increase of urban residents was only from 6 percent in 1840 to 10 percent in 1860.
the booming agricultural economy of the western regions of the nation produced significant urban growth as well.
between 1820 and 1840 communities that had once been small western villages or trading posts became major cities st louis pittsburgh cincinnati louisville.
all of them benefited from strategic positions on the mississippi river or one of its major tributaries.
all of them became centers of the growing carrying trade that connected the farmers of the midwest with new orleans and through it the cities of the northeast.
after 1830 however substantial shipping began from the mississippi river to the great lakes creating major new urban centers that gradually superseded the river ports.
among them were buffalo detroit milwaukee cleveland and most important chicago.
the enlarged urban population was in part a reflection of the growth of the national population as a whole which rose by more than a third from 23 million to over 31 million in the decade of the 1850s alone.
by 1860 the american population was larger than britains and quickly approaching that of france and germany.
urban growth was also a result of the increasing flow of people into cities from the farms of the northeast.
american population density 1820 the population of the united states in 1820 populated really densely states although settlement was growing in the ohio river valley to the west.
note how few areas of the country populated really densely.
around new york city and the area in maryland adjoining baltimore.
what accounts for the density in these areas.
still overwhelmingly rural and agrarian and was still concentrated largely in the original thirteen small area in northeastern massachusetts the area 258 chapter 21 for victory was an energetic even coercive effort to unite public opinion behind the military effort.
the most conspicuous government effort to rally public support was a vast propaganda campaign orchestrated by the cp new committee on public information cpi.
it was directed by the denver journalist george creel who spoke openly of the importance of achieving social unity.
the cpi supervised the distribution of tons of pro war literature 75 million pieces of printed material.
war posters plastered the walls of offices shops theaters schools churches and homes.
newspapers dutifully printed official government accounts of the reasons for the war and the prospects for quick victory.
creel encouraged reporters to exercise self censorship when reporting news about the conflict.
as the war continued the cpis tactics became increasingly crude.
government promoted posters and films became lurid portrayals of the savagery of the germans bearing such titles as the prussian cur and the kaiser beast of berlin encouraging americans to think of the german people as something close to savages.
the government soon began more coercive efforts to suppress dissent.
the cpi ran full page advertisements in popular magazines like the saturday evening post urging citizens to espionage act notify justice department when they encountered the man who spreads the pessimistic stories.
cries for peace or belittles our efforts to win the war the espionage act of 1917 gave the government new tools with which to respond to such reports.
it created stiff penalties for spying sabotage or obstruction of the war effort crimes that were often broadly defined and it empowered the post office department to ban seditious material from the mails.
sedition postmaster general albert sidney burleson said included statements that might impugn the motives of the government and thus encourage insubordination anything that suggested that the government is controlled by wall street or munitions manufacturers or any other special interests he included in that category all publi cations of the socialist party.
more repressive were two measures of 1918 the sabotage act of april 20 and the sedition act of may 16 these bills sedition act expanded the meaning of the espionage act to make illegal any public expression of opposition to the war in practice it allowed officials to prose cute anyone who criticized the president or the government.
the most frequent targets of the new legislation and one of the reasons for its enactment in the first place were such anticapitalist groups and antiwar groups as the socialist party and the industrial workers of the world iww.
many americans had favored the repression of socialists and radicals even before the war the wartime policies now made it possible to move against them legally.
eugene v debs the humane leader of the socialist party and an opponent of the war was sentenced to ten years in prison in 1918 only a pardon by president warren g harding ultimately won his release in 1921 big bill haywood and members of the iww were especially energetically prosecuted.
only by fleeing to the soviet repressing dissent union did haywood avoid long imprisonment.
more than 1 500 people were arrested in 1918 for the crime of criticizing the government.
state and local governments corporations universities and private citizens contributed as well to the climate of repression.
vigilante mobs sprang up to discipline those who dared challenge the war.
a dissident protestant clergyman in cincinnati was pulled from his bed one night by a mob dragged to a nearby hillside and whipped in the name of the women and children of belgium an iww organizer in montana was seized by a mob and hanged from a railroad bridge.
a cluster of citizens groups emerged to mobilize respectable members of their communities to root out disloyalty.
the american protective league probably the largest of such groups enlisted the services of 250 000 people who served as agents prying into the activities and thoughts of their neighbors opening mail tapping telephones and in general attempting to impose unity of opinion on their communities.
it received government funds to support its work.
attorney general thomas w gregory a particularly avid supporter of repressing dissent described the league and similar organizations approvingly as patriotic organizations other vigilante organizations the national security league the boy spies of america the american defense society performed much the same function.
there were many victims of such activities socialists labor activists female pacifists.
but the most frequent targets of repression were immigrants irish americans because of their historic 100 percent animsity toward the british jews because americanism many had expressed opposition to the anti semitic policies of the russian government and others.
loyalist citizens groups policed immigrant neighborhoods.
they monitored meetings and even conversations for signs of disloyalty.
even some settlement house workers many of whom had once championed ethnic diversity contributed to such efforts.
the director of the national security league described the origins of the anti immigrant sentiment which was producing growing support for what many citizens were now calling 100 percent americanism the melting pot has not melted.
there are vast communities in the nation thinking today not in terms of america but in terms of old world prejudices theories and animosities.
the greatest target of abuse was the german american community.
most german americans supported the american war effort once it began.
still public opinion turned bitterly hostile.
a campaign to purge society of all things german quickly gathered speed at times assuming ludicrous forms.
sauerkraut was renamed liberty cabbage frankfurters became liberty sausage performances of german music were frequently banned.
german books were removed from the shelves of libraries.
courses in the german language were removed from school curricula the california board of education called it a language that disseminates the ideals of autocracy rutality and hatred germans were routinely fired from jobs america and the great war 603 in war industries lest they sabotage important tasks.
some were fired from positions entirely unrelated to the war for example karl muck the german born conductor of the boston symphony orchestra.
vigilante groups routinely subjected germans to harassment and beatings including a lynching in southern illinois in 1918 relatively few americans favored such extremes but many came to agree with the belief of the eminent psychologist g stanley hall that there is something fundamentally wrong with the teutonic soul the search for a new world order woodrow wilson had led the nation into war promising a more just and stable peace at its conclusion.
well before the armistice he was preparing to lead the fight for what he considered a democratic postwar settlement.
the fourteen points wilsons idealistic vision on january 8 1918 wilson appeared before congress to present the principles for which he claimed the nation was fighting.
the war aims had fourteen distinct provisions widely known as the fourteen points but they fell into three broad categories.
first wilsons proposals contained eight specific recommendations for adjusting postwar boundaries and for establishing new nations to replace the defunct austro hungarian and ottoman empires.
those recommenda tions reflected his belief in the right of all peoples to self determination.
second there were five general principles to govern international conduct in the future freedom of the seas open covenants instead of secret treaties reductions in armaments free trade and impartial mediation of colonial claims.
finally there was a proposal for a league of nations that would help implement these new principles and territorial adjustments and resolve future controversies.
there were serious flaws in wilsons proposals.
he provided no formula for deciding how to implement the national self determination he promised for subjugated peoples.
he said little about economic rivalries and their effect on international relations even though such economic tensions had been in large part responsible for the war.
nevertheless wilsons international vision quickly came to enchant not only much of his own generation in both america and europe but also members of generations to come.
it reflected his belief strongly rooted in the ideas of progressivism that the world was as capable of just and efficient government as were individual nations that once the international community accepted certain basic principles f conduct and once it constructed modern institutions to implement them the human race could live in peace.
the fourteen points were also an answer to the new bolshevik government in russia.
in december 1917 lenin had issued his own statement of war aims strikingly similar to wilsons.
wilsons announcement which came just three weeks later was among other things a last minute and un successful effort to persuade the bolshevik lenins challenge regime to keep russia in the war.
but wilson also realized that lenin was now a competitor in the effort to lead the postwar order.
and he announced the fourteen points in part to ensure that the world looked to the united states not russia for guidance.
early obstacles wilson was confident as the war neared its end that popular support would enable him to win allied approval of his peace plan.
but there were ominous signs both at home and abroad that his path might be more difficult than he expected.
in europe leaders of the allied forces many resenting what they considered wilsons tone of moral superiority were preparing to resist him even before the armistice was signed.
they had reacted unhappily when wilson refused to make the united states their ally but had kept his distance as an associate of his european partners keeping american military forces separate from the allied armies they were joining.
most of all however britain and france having suffered incalculable losses in their long years of war and having stored.
up an enormous reserve of bitterness toward allied r intransigence germany as a result were in no mood for a benign and generous peace.
the british prime minister david lloyd george insisted for a time that the german kaiser be captured and executed.
he and georges clemenceau president of france remained determined to the end to gain something from the struggle to compensate them for the catastrophe they had suffered.
at the same time wilson was encountering problems at home.
in 1918 with the war almost over he unwisely appealed to the american voters to support his peace plans by electing democrats to congress in the november elections.
a republican victory he declared would be interpreted on the other side of the water as a repudiation of my leadership days later the republicans captured majorities in both houses.
domestic economic troubles more than international issues had been the most important factor in the voting but because of the presidents ill timed appeal the results damaged his ability to claim broad popular support for his peace plans.
the leaders of the republican party in the meantime were developing their own reasons for opposing wilson.
some were angry that he had tried to make the 1918 balloting a referendum on his war aims especially since many republicans had been supporting the fourteen points.
wilson further antagonized them when he refused to appoint any important republicans to the negotiating team that would represent the united states at the peace conference in paris.
but the president considered such matters unimportant.
only one member of the american negotiating party would have any real authority wilson himself.
and once he had produced a just and moral treaty he believed the weight of world and american opinion would compel his enemies to support him.
chapter 10 central park to affluent new yorkers the construction of the city s great central park was important because it provided them with an elegant setting for their daily carriage rides an activity ostensibly designed to expose the riders to fresh air but that was really an occasion for them to display their finery to their neighbors.
private collection the bridgeman art library new yorkers in 1857 were trying to make the city as important as london and paris.
to achieve this goal they decided to build a great park that would impart elegance to the city and draw new yorkers to the upper part of the city where new real estate was available.
two great landscape architects frederick law olmsted and calvert vaux devel oped a vast part of manhattan displacing people from their houses in the process.
the result was one of the largest parks in america.
olmsted called central park a central park r place or great importance as the first real park in this country designed with hills lakes paths bridges and elegant buildings it began as a place for wealthy new yorkers but very soon became important to almost everyone in the city.
there was also a significant population of genuinely desti the urban tute peop e emerging in the growing urban poor centers of the nation.
these were people who were not merely poor in the sense of having to struggle to sustain themselves most americans were poor in that sense.
they were almost entirely without resources often homeless dependent on charity or crime or both for survival.
some of these paupers as contemporaries called them were recent immigrants who had failed to find work or to adjust to life in the new world.
some were widows and orphans stripped of the family structures that allowed most working class americans to survive.
some were people suffering from alcoholism or mental illness unable to work.
others were victims of native prejudice barred from all but the most menial employment because of race or ethnicity.
the irish were particular victims of such prejudice.
among the worst off were free blacks.
african american communities in antebellum northern cities were small by later standards but most major urban areas had significant african black populations.
some of these african american americans were descendants of families poverty that had lived in the north for generations.
others were former slaves who had escaped from the south or been released by their masters or had bought their freedom some former slaves once free then worked to buy the freedom of relatives left behind.
in material terms at least life was not always much better for them in the north than it had been in slavery.
most had access only to very menial jobs which usually paid too little to allow workers to support their families or educate their children in bad times many had access to no jobs at all.
in most parts of the north blacks could not vote could not attend public schools indeed could not use any of the public services available to white americas economic revolution 281 residents.
still most blacks preferred life in the north how ever arduous to life in the south because it permitted them at least some level of freedom.
social mobility one might expect the contrasts between conspicuous wealth and conspicuous poverty in antebellum america to have encouraged more class conflict than actually occurred.
but a number of factors operated to limit resentments.
for one thing however much the relative economic position of american workers may have been declining the absolute living standard of most laborers was improving.
life in material terms at least was usually better for factory workers than it had been on the farms or in the european societies from which they had migrated.
they ate better they were often better clothed and housed and they had greater access to consumer goods.
there was also a significant amount of mobility within the working class which helped to limit discontent.
oppor social tunities for social mobility for working mobility ones way up the economic ladder were relatively modest.
a few workers did manage to move from poverty to riches by dint of work ingenuity and luck a very small number but enough to support the dreams of those who watched them.
and a much larger number of workers managed to move at least one notch up the ladder for example becoming in the course of a lifetime a skilled rather than an unskilled laborer.
such people could envision their children and grandchildren mov ing up even further.
more common than social mobility was geographic mobility which was even more extensive in the united states than in europe where it was considerable.
america had a huge expanse of uncultivated land in the west much of it open for settlement for the first time in the 1840s and 1850s.
some workers saved money bought land and moved west to farm it.
the historian frederick jackson turner later referred to the availability of western lands as a safety valve for discontent a basic explanation for the relative lack of social conflict in the antebellum united states.
but few urban workers and even fewer poor ones could afford to make such a move or had the expertise to know how to work land even if they could.
much more common was the movement of laborers from one industrial town to another.
restless questing sometimes hopeful sometimes despairing these frequently moving people were often the victims of layoffs looking for better opportunities elsewhere.
their searches may seldom have led to a marked improvement in their circumstances but the rootlessness of this large segment of the workforce one of the most distressed segments made effective organization and protest difficult.
there was finally another safety valve for working class discontent politics.
economic opportunity may not have greatly expanded in the nineteenth century but opportuni ties to participate in politics did.
and to many white ma e working people access to the ballot seemed to offer a way to help guide their society and to feel like a significant part of their communities.
middle class life for all the visibility of the very rich and the very poor in antebellum society the fastest growing group in america was the middle class.
the expansion of the middle class was in part a result of the growth of the industrial economy and the increasing commercial life that accompanied it.
economic development opened many more opportunities for people to rapidly own or wor in businesses to own shops expanding t0 ena8e in trade to enter professions middle class and to administer organizations.
in earlier times when ownership of land had been the only real basis of wealth society had been divided between people with little or no land people europeans generally called peasants and a landed gentry which in europe usually meant an inherited aristocracy.
once commerce and industry became a source of wealth these rigid distinctions broke down and many people who did not own land could become prosperous by providing valuable services to the new economy or by owning capital other than land.
middle class life in the years before the civil war rapidly established itself as the most influential cultural form of urban america.
middle class families lived in solid and often substantial homes which like the wealthy they tended to own.
workers and artisans were increasingly becoming renters a relatively new phenomenon in american cities that spread widely in the early nineteenth century.
middle class women tended to remain in the home and care for the children and the household although increasingly they were also able to hire servants usually young unmarried immigrant women who put in long hours of arduous work for very little money.
one of the aspirations of middle class women in an age when doing the familys laundry could take an entire day was to escape from some of the drudgery of housework.
new household inventions altered and greatly improved the character of life in middle class homes.
perhaps the most important was the invention of the cast household iron stove which began to replace fire inventions places as the principal vehicle for cooking and also as an important source of heat.
these wood or coal burning devices were hot clumsy and dirty by the standards of the twenty first century but compared to the inconvenience and danger of cooking on an open hearth they seemed a great luxury.
stoves gave cooks more control over the preparation of food and allowed them to cook several things at once.
middle class diets were changing rapidly in the antebellum years and not just because of the wider range of cooking the stove made possible.
the expansion and diversification of american agriculture and the ability of farmers to ship goods to urban markets by rail from distant regions greatly 282 chapter 21.
marcus garvey marcus garvey rejected the idea of african americans assimilating into white society.
instead he encouraged his supporters to leave america and return to africa to create their own society.
private collection peter newark american pictures bridgeman images facade of attorney general a mitchell palmers home in washington.
in 1920 there was a terrible explosion in front of the morgan bank on wall street which killed thirty people only one of them a clerk in the bank itself.
the bombings crystallized what was already a growing determination among many middle class americans and some government officials to fight back against antiradicalism radicalism a determination steeled by the repressive atmosphere of the war years.
this antiradicalism accompanied and reinforced the already strong commitment among old stock protestants to the idea of 100 percent americanism and it produced what became known as the red scare.
antiradical newspapers and politicians now began to portray almost every form of instability or protest as a sign of a radical threat.
race riots one newspaper claimed were the work of armed revolutionaries running rampant through our cities the steel strike the philadelphia inquirer claimed was penetrated with the bolshevik idea.
steeped in the doctrines of the class struggle and social overthrow nearly thirty states enacted new peacetime sedition laws imposing harsh penalties on those who promoted revolution some 300 people went to jail as a result many of them people whose crime had been nothing more than opposition to the war.
there were spontaneous acts of violence against supposed radicals in some communities.
a mob of off duty soldiers in new york city ransacked the offices of a socialist newspaper and beat up its staff.
another mob in centralia washington dragged an iww agitator from jail and castrated him before hanging him from a bridge.
citizens in many communities removed subversive books from the shelves of libraries administrators in some universities dismissed radical members from their faculties.
womens groups such as the national consumers league came under attack by antiradicals because so many feminists had opposed american intervention in the fighting in europe.
perhaps the greatest contribution to the red scare came from the federal government.
on new years day 1920 attorney general a mitchell palmer and his ambitious assistant j edgar hoover orchestrated a series of raids on alleged radical centers throughout the country and arrested more than 6 000 people.
the palmer raids had been intended to uncover large palmer raids caches of weapons and explosives they discovered only three pistols.
most of those arrested were ultimately released but about 500 who were not american citizens were summarily deported.
the ferocity of the red scare soon abated but its effects lingered well into the 1920s most notably in the celebrated sacco and case of sacco and vanzetti in mav l920 vanzetti two italian immigrants nicola sacco and bartolomeo vanzetti were charged with the murder of a paymaster in braintree massachusetts.
the evidence against them was questionable but because both men were confessed anarchists they faced a widespread public presumption of guilt.
they were convicted in a trial of extraordinary injudiciousness before an openly prejudiced judge webster thayer and were sentenced to death.
over the next several years public support for sacco and america and the great war.
611 vanzetti grew to formidable proportions.
but all requests for a new trial or a pardon were denied.
on august 23 1927 amid widespread protests around the world sacco and vanzetti still proclaiming their innocence died in the electric chair.
theirs was a cause that a generation of americans never forgot.
refuting the red scare an unexpected result of postwar turmoil was the emergence of a vigorous defense of civil liberties that not only discredited the red scare but helped give new force of the bill of rights as well.
the heavy handed actions of the federal government after the war created a powerful backlash.
it destroyed the career of a mitchell palmer.
it almost nipped in the bud the ascent of j edgar hoover.
it damaged the democratic party.
and it led to an organization committed to protecting civil liberties the national civil liberties bureau launched in 1917 which in 1920 was renamed the american civil liberties union aclu which remains a prominent institution today.
at the same time members of the supreme the palmer raids in the years following world war i many americans feared pohtica radicalism especially from the left.
the united states department of justice led by attorney general a mitchell palmer conducted raids and arrested and deported more than 500 foreign citizens including several prominent leftist leaders.
everett collection inc alamy court most notably justices oliver wendell holmes and louis brandeis gradually moved toward a strong position of defense of unpopular speech.
the clash of fighting faiths holmes wrote in a dissent in 1920 was best resolved by free trade in ideas that the best test of truth is the competition of the market this and other dissents eventually became law as other justices committed themselves to a robust defense of speech however unpopular.
the retreat from idealism on august 26 1920 the nineteenth amendment guaranteeing women the right to vote became part of the constitution.
to the woman suffrage movement this was the culmination of nearly a century of struggle.
to many progressives who had seen the inclusion of women in the electorate as a way of bolstering their political strength it seemed to promise new support for reform.
in some respects the amendment helped fulfill that promise.
because of woman suffrage members of congress concerned that women would vote as a bloc on the basis of womens issues passed the sheppard towner maternity and infancy act in 1921 one of the first pieces of federal welfare legislation that provided funds for supporting the health of women and infants.
concern about the womens vote also appeared to create support for the 1922 cable act which granted women the rights of u s citizenship independent of their husbands status and for the proposed but never ratified 1924 constitutional amendment to outlaw child labor.
in other ways however the nineteenth amendment marked less the beginning of an era of reform than an ending.
economic problems feminist demands labor unrest racial tensions and the intensity of the antiradicalism they helped create all combined in the years immediately following the war to produce a general sense of disillusionment.
that became particularly apparent in the election of 1920 woodrow wilson wanted the campaign to be a referendum on the league of nations and the democratic candidates ohio governor james m cox and assistant secretary of the navy return to franklin d roosevelt tried to keep wilsons normalcy ideals alive.
the republican presidential nominee however offered a different vision.
he was warren gamaliel harding an obscure ohio senator whom party leaders had chosen as their nominee confident that he would do their bidding once in office.
harding offered few ideals only a vague promise of a return as he later phrased it to normalcy he won in a landslide.
the republican ticket received 61 percent of the popular vote and carried every state outside the south.
the party made major gains in congress as well.
woodrow wilson who had tried and failed to create a postwar order based on democratic ideals stood repudiated.
early in 1921 he retired to a house on s street in washington where he lived quietly until his death in 1924 in the meantime for most americans a new era had begun.
612 chapter 10 p t barnum and tom thumb p t barnum circus producer next to a table on which stands charles stratton a little person who came to be known as general tom thumb.
hoping to capitalize on the popular fascination with the bizarre and the fantastic barnum hired stratton at the age of five to tour the country with his circus.
stratton sang danced and impersonated famous people such as napoleon bonaparte.
corbis the agricultural north even in the rapidly urbanizing and industrializing northeast and more so in what nineteenth century americans called the northwest and what americans today call the midwest most people remained tied to the agricultural world.
but agriculture rise of in ustry an commerce was becoming commercial increasingly a part of the new capitalist agriculture economy linked to the national and inter national market.
where agriculture could not compete in this new commercial world it declined.
where k could compete it simultaneously flourished and changed.
truck farming in the northeast northeastern agriculture the story of agriculture in the northeast after 1840 is one of decline and transformation.
the reason for the decline was simple the farmers of the section could no longer compete with the new and richer soil of the northwest.
centers of production were gradually shifting westward for many of the farm goods that had in the past been most important to northeastern agriculture wheat corn grapes cattle sheep and hogs.
some eastern farmers responded to these changes by moving west themselves and establishing new farms.
still others moved to mill towns and became laborers.
some farmers however remained on the land and managed to hold their own.
as the eastern urban centers increased in population many farmers turned to the task of supplying food to nearby cities they raised vegetables truck farming or fruit and sold it in local towns.
new york for example led all other states in apple production.
the rise of cities also stimulated the rise of profitable dairy farming.
approximately half the dairy products of the country were produced in the east most of the rest came from the west where ohio was the leading dairy state.
partly because of the expansion of the dairy industry the northeast led other sections in the production of hay.
new york was the leading hay state in the nation pennsylvania and new england grew large crops as well.
the northeast also exceeded other areas in producing potatoes.
but while agriculture in the region remained an important part of the economy it was steadily becoming less important than the industrial growth of the northeast itself.
as a result the rural population in many parts of the northeast continued to decline.
the old northwest there was some industry in the states of the northwest more than in the south and in the two decades before the civil war the region experienced steady industrial growth.
by 1860 it had 36 785 manufacturing establishments employing 209 909 workers.
there was a flourishing industrial and commercial area along the shore of lake erie with cleveland at its center.
another manufacturing region was in the ohio river valley the meatpacking city of cincinnati was its nucleus.
farther west the rising city of chicago destined to become the great metropolis of the region was emerging as the national center of the agricultural machinery and meatpacking industries.
most of the major industrial activities of the west either served agriculture as in the case of farm machinery or relied on agricultural products as in flour milling meatpacking whiskey distilling and the making of leather goods.
as this su88ests industry was much less important in the northwest than farming.
industrialization in the old northwest americas economic revolution 289 some areas of the northwest were not yet dominated by whites.
indians remained the most numerous inhabitants of much of the upper third of the great lakes states until after the civil war.
in those areas hunting and fishing along with some sedentary agriculture remained the principal economic activities of both whites and native americans.
but the tribes did not become integrated into the new commercialized econ omy that was emerging elsewhere in the northwest.
for the white and occasionally black settlers who populated the lands farther south the northwest was primarily an agricultural region.
its rich and plentiful lands made farming a lucrative and expanding activity there in contrast to the declining agrarian northeast.
thus the typical citizen of the northwest was not an industrial worker or poor marginal farmer but the owner of a reasonably prosperous family farm.
the average size of western farms was 200 acres the majority owned by the people who worked them.
rising farm prices around the world provided a strong incentive for these western farmers to engage in commercial agriculture.
that usually meant concentrating on a single crop for market corn wheat cattle sheep hogs and others.
in the early years of white settlement in the northwest farm prices rose because of the debilitation of european agriculture in the.
aftermath of the napoleonic wars and the specialization growing urban population and hence the growing demand for food of industrializing areas of europe.
the northwest with good water routes on the mississippi for getting its crops to oceangoing vessels prof ited from this international trade.
but industrialization in both the united states and europe provided the greatest boost to agriculture.
with the growth of factories and cities in the northeast the domestic market for farm goods increased dramatically.
the growing national and worldwide demand for farm products resulted in steadily rising farm prices.
for most farmers the 1840s and early 1850s were years of increasing prosperity.
to meet the increasing demand for its farm products residents of the northwest worked strenuously and often frantically to increase their productive capacities.
many tried to take advantage of the large areas of still uncultivated land and to enlarge the area of white settlement during the 1840s.
by 1850 the growing western population was moving into the prairie regions both east and west of the mississippi into areas of indiana michigan illinois missouri iowa and minnesota.
residents cleared forest lands or made use of fields the indians had cleared many years earlier.
and they began to develop a timber industry to make use of the forests that remained.
wheat was the staple crop of the region but other crops corn potatoes and oats and livestock were also important.
the northwest increased production not only by expanding the area of settlement but also by adopting new agricultural technologies that greatly reduced the labor necessary for pro ducing a crop and slowed the exhaustion of new the regions rich soil.
farmers began to cul agricultural tivate new varieties of seed notably technologies mediterranean wheat which was hardier cyrus mccormicks automatic reaper cyrus mccormick invented an automatic reaper in 1831 and had it patented in 1834 the machine drawn by a horse cut wheat corn or other crops and left it lying in swaths in the field where farmworkers would gather it up and store it in stacks.
the reaper allowed one worker to harvest as much wheat in a day as five could harvest using earlier methods.
hulton archive getty images mccormick reaper than the native type and they imported better breeds of animals such as hogs and sheep from england and spain to take the place of native stock.
most important were improved tools and farm machines which american inventors and manufacturers produced in rapidly increasing numbers.
during the 1840s more efficient grain drills harrows mowers and hay rakes came into wide use.
the cast iron plow an earlier innovation remained popular because its parts could be replaced when broken.
an even better tool appeared in 1847 when john deere established at moline illinois a factory to manufacture steel plows which were more durable than those made of iron.
two new machines heralded a coming revolution in grain production.
the most important was the automatic reaper the invention of cyrus h mccormick of virginia.
the reaper enabled one worker to harvest as much wheat or any other small grain in a day as five could harvest using older methods.
mccormick who had patented his device in 1834 established a factory at chicago in the heart of the grain belt in 1847 by 1860 more than 100 000 reapers were in use on western farms.
almost as important to the grain grower was the thresher a machine that separated the grain from the wheat stalks.
threshers appeared in large numbers after 1840 before that farmers generally flailed grain by hand seven bushels a day was a good average for a farm or used farm animals to tread it twenty bushels a day on the average.
a threshing machine such as those manufactured by the jerome i case factory in racine wisconsin could thresh twenty five bushels or more in an hour.
the northwest considered itself the most democratic section of the country.
but its democracy was based on a defense of economic freedom and the rights of property a white middle class vision of democracy that was becoming common 290 chapter 22 prohibition 1921 a new york city police commissioner oversees agents pouring illegal liquor into the street.
this raid occurred in the early months of prohibition when the battle against alcohol was still popular hence the eagerness of the commissioner to appear in the photograph.
the library of congress lc usz62 123257 and eastern europeans in the country.
what immigration there was in other words would heavily favor northwestern europeans people of nordic or teutonic stock.
five years later a further restriction set a rigid limit of 150 000 immigrants a year.
in the years that followed immigration officials seldom permitted even half that number actually to enter the country.
but the nativism of the 1920s extended well beyond restricting immigration.
among other things this nativism helped instigate the rebirth of the ku klux kian as a major force in american society.
the first kian founded during reconstruction had died in the 1870s.
but in 1915 another group of white southerners the new klan 5 e met on stone mountain near atlanta and established a new version of the society.
nativist passions had swelled in georgia and elsewhere in response to the case of leo frank a jewish factory manager in atlanta convicted in 1914 on very flimsy evidence of murdering a female employee a mob stormed franks jail and lynched him.
the premiere also in 2 64 total immigration during five year periods in millions 1921 1926 1931 1936 1941 1946 1951 1956 1925 1930 1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 year total immigration 1920 1960 after many years of extremely high rates of immigration from europe and elsewhere the united states experienced several decades of much lower immigration beginning in the 1920s.
immigration restriction legislation passed in 1921 and 1924 was one important reason for the decline.
what other factors depressed immigration in the 1930s and 1940s.
i nis cnari snows a signincam cndiiyc in the so ces of immigration between 1920 and 1960 a direct result of the national origins act k t ic establlshed nat onal quotas for immigrants to the united states based on the num er o such immigrants who had been in the country in 1890 note the shift back toward nor ern an western europe and away from italy and other southern and eastern european na ions w ic a not been heavily represented in the immigration of the 1890s.
but the most c ange was the huge increase in the proportion of immigrants from latin america a region explictly exempted from the quota system established in 1924 law in these years.
mencons treted differentl9 than europeans in immigration the new era 633 atlanta of d w griffiths film the birth of a nation which glorified the early klan also helped inspire white southerners to form a new one.
at first the new klan like the old was largely concerned with intimidating african americans who according to klan leader william j simmons were becoming insubordinate.
and at first it remained small obscure and almost entirely southern.
after world war i however concern about african americans became secondary to concern about catholics jews and foreigners.
at that point membership in the klan expanded rapidly and dramatically not just in the small towns and rural areas of the south but also in industrial cities in the north and midwest.
indiana had the largest klan membership of any state and there were substantial kians in chicago detroit and other northern industrial cities.
the klan was also strong in the west with particularly large and active chapter 23 migrant family dorothea lange one of the great photographers of the depression era worked in the 1930s for the photographic division of the farm security administration fsa.
the fsa photographers sought to record the conditions of life in america s troubled agrarian world during the great depression in the hopes of stimulating reform.
lange s photograph here represents a family in transit as they like thousands of others moved from the great plains to california.
photo by dorothea lange time life pictures getty images was 50 percent or more.
in other cities it was higher.
two million african americans were on some form of relief by 1932 traditional patterns of segregation and disenfranchisement in the south survived the depression largely unchal scottsboro lensed but a few particularly notorious case examples of racism did attract national attention.
the most celebrated was the scottsboro case.
in march 1931 nine black teenagers were taken off a freight train in alabama in a small town near scottsboro and arrested for vagrancy and disorder.
later two white women who had also been riding the train accused them of rape.
in fact there was overwhelming evidence medical and otherwise that the women had not been raped that they may have made their accusations out of fear of being arrested themselves.
nevertheless an all white jury in alabama quickly convicted all nine of the scottsboro boys as they were known to both friends and foes and sentenced eight of them to death.
the supreme court overturned the convictions in 1932 and a series of new trials began that attracted increasing national attention.
the international labor defense an organization associated with the communist party came to the aid of the accused youths and began to publicize the case.
later the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp provided assistance as well.
the trials continued throughout the 1930s.
although the white southern juries who sat on the case never acquitted any of the defendants all of them eventually gained their freedom four because the charges were dropped four because of early paroles and one because he escaped.
but the last of the scottsboro defendants did not leave prison until 1950 the depression was a time of important changes in the role and behavior of leading black organizations.
the naacp for example began to work diligently to win a position for blacks within naacps tbe emer in labr movement changing supporting the formation of the role congress of industrial organ izations and helping to break down racial barriers within labor unions.
walter white secretary of the naacp once made a personal appearance at an auto plant to implore african americans not to work as strikebreakers.
partly as a result of such efforts more than half a million blacks were able to join the labor movement.
in the steelworkers union for example african americans constituted about 20 percent of the membership.
mexican americans in depression america similar patterns of discrimination confronted the large and growing population of mexicans and mexican americans which numbered approximately 2 million in the 1930s.
mexican americans filled many of the same menial jobs in the west and elsewhere that african americans filled in other regions.
some farmed small marginal tracts.
some became agricultural migrants traveling from region to region harvesting fruit lettuce and other crops.
but most lived in urban areas in california new mexico and arizona but also in detroit chicago new york and other eastern industrial cities and occupied the lower ranks of the unskilled labor force in such industries as steel automobiles and meatpacking.
as in the south unemployed white anglos in the southwest discrimination demanded jobs held by hispanics.
thus against mexican unemployment rose quickly to hispanics levels far higher than those for anglos.
some mexicans were in effect forced to leave the country by officials who arbitrarily removed them from relief rolls or simply rounded them up and transported them across the border.
perhaps half a million chicanos left the united states for mexico in the first years of the depression.
most relief programs excluded mexicans from their rolls or the great depression 647 dust storm southwest plains 1937 the dust storms of the 1930s were a terrifying experience for all who lived through them.
resembling a black wall sweeping in from the western horizon such a storm engulfed farms and towns alike blotting out the light of the sun and covering everything with fine dirt.
bettmann corbis.
rr l smith into the cities had bequn before world war i but in the 1930s and 1940s the movement accelerated.
ck migrants the great migration of african americans 1 s truth housing project in detroit under the guard of michigan state troopers and police enters were not always so welcoming.
here vans move african americans to the federal sojourner a t 5 granger collection new york 648.

chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social order work going on from early morning to late evening.
in spite or perhaps because of the harsh living and working conditions new york s jewish community grew strong.
russian jews had no intention of returning to russia where pogroms and poverty reigned.
they established synagogues foreign language newspapers provided news and some 300 hebrew schools maintained their language and culture.
italian immigrants also created their own neighborhoods.
in chicago taylor street became the heart of little italy.
in milwaukee the third ward on the east side was the heart of the italian community where some 20 italian grocery stores existed on brady street alone.
in boston the north end and east boston housed italian communities.
and in new york many italian immigrants like russian jewish immigrants moved to the lower east side of manhattan.
thinking historically the pull of nostalgia the push to continue in 1906 the jewish daily forward a yiddish language newspaper serving jewish immigrants began carrying an advice column in which the editor abraham cahan responded to letters.
one writer a recent immigrant from russia said oh my poor dear parents how saddened they were at my leaving.
the leave taking their seeing me on my way was like a silent funeral i came to america and became a painter.
my great love for hebrew for russian all my other knowledge was smeared with paint.
during the year that i have been here i have had some good periods but i am not happy because i have no interest in anything.
my homesickness and loneliness darken my life i want to run back and i beg you to be my counsel as to how to act.
the editor was blunt noting that almost all immigrants yearn deeply for dear ones and home at first but that the young man must not consider going home but try to take root here.
he should try to overcome all these emotions and strive to make something of himself so that in time he will be able to bring his parents here.
that same year hamilton holt editor of the new york independent published the life stories of undistinguished americans as told by themselves 27 accounts of the immigrant experience including several by those who considered a return to their homeland but who had decided against it.
an italian immigrant who shined shoes in new york city who wrote we had said that when we saved 1 000 each we would go back to italy and buy a farm but now that the time is coming we are so busy and making so much money that we think we will stay.
a swedish immigrant who prospered as a farmer in minnesota wrote father and mother kept writing to the children in america that now they had made their fortunes they should come home and live but they put it off am going over to sweden soon to keep christmas there but will come back again and maybe bring other people with us.
some swedes go to the old country every christmas.
a modern researcher erika lee found that her great great great grandfather moy dong kee had come to california in 1854 before the chinese exclusion act limited chinese mobility.
though he stayed in the united states for 52 years he was able to make at least three trips to visit his family who remained in china.
he finally retired to china in 1906 at the age of 72 some immigrants indeed traveled back and forth often.
others made their fortunes in america and then returned to their homelands.
perhaps a quarter or more of all italian immigrants eventually returned to italy an unusually high percentage among immigrant communities but a little money earned in america could translate into land ownership in italy.
in other immigrant communities especially among russian jews facing pogroms and conscription into the czarist army very few ever returned.
the pull of nostalgia and the usually stronger push to continue to make a life in their new adopted home was part of the life of almost every immigrant.
source isaac metzker a bintel brief sixty years of letters from the lower east side to the jewish daily forward new york doubleday 1971 pp.
117 118 cited in robert d marcus et al america firsthand volume two readings from reconstruction to the present boston bedford st.
martins 2004 pp.
121 122 thinking critically 1 crafting an argument what do the reasons immigrants gave for wanting to leave or wanting to stay tel you about their reasons for immigrating in the first place.
2 contextualization why might some immigrants have found it easier than others to return to their home country.
why was such a trip almost impossible for others.
81 04 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 since most italian immigrants came from the rural poverty of southern italy they had few marketable skills when they got to the united states.
like russian jews some became pushcart owners selling fruits and vegetables.
others opened restaurants.
more than a few became the laborers who built the cities where they lived new york chicago milwaukee and boston all have water and sewer lines dug by italian laborers.
gender roles were perhaps more rigidly defined in the italian immigrant communities than elsewhere.
italian families tried every way they could to encourage married women to stay at home and to depend on the men to earn a living for the family.
for the 900 000 french canadians who emigrated to the united states between 1840 and 1930 the move south meant escape from rural poverty and a chance for a new start especially in the mills of new england.
more than most immigrant groups those coming from quebec tended to bring their priests nearly all french canadians were catholic doctors lawyers and grocers with them all of whom were sure that life might be better or at least marginally more prosperous in rapidly industrializing new york and new england than in the isolated farms of quebec.
like the italians and the french canadians mexican immigrants often moved back and forth between the united states and home communities but in their case that move meant crossing only a river rather than an ocean.
nevertheless more and more immigrants from mexico eventually made permanent homes in the united states creating the barrios which were often extensions of mexican communities that had long stretched along the border from texas to california.
mexican american communities like those of european immigrants often reflected quite different home regions.
one immigrant remembered we came to know families from chihuahua sonora jalisco and durango.
some had come to the united states even before the revolution living in texas before migrating to california the barrio was also home in other ways.
immigrants from mexico could find familiar food including tamales frijoles tortillas and menudo.
they could see traditional clothing enjoy traditional holidays and festivals and feel much less like strangers in someone elses land.
for all catholic immigrants the catholic church was an essential link with their faith and their past.
at the end of the u s civil war there were 42 dioceses and 3 000 catholic churches in the united states.
by 1900 there were 70 dioceses and 10 000 churches many serving specific ethnic communities.
the italian parish the polish parish the mexican parish and the german parish might be in very close proximity but they served their own group often offering parochial schools and classes in a home language that was important to parents coping with children growing up in an english speaking society.
those who entered the united states from asia found different kinds of work in their own ethnic communities.
chinese immigrants such as lee chew found work when they could when i got to san francisco a man got me work as a house servant in an american family and my start was the same as that of almost all the chinese in this country.
the chinese laundryman does not learn his trade in china there are no laundries in china all chinese laundrymen here were taught in the first place by american women just as i was taught.
for the japanese in hawaii an independent country until 1898 housing and work were found on the sugar plantations which were new to them.
hawaiian companies encouraged whole families to immigrate believing that dependable married men made better workers though both women and men were given jobs in the fields.
japanese communities were able to establish themselves with their own traditions religious practices including buddhist temples japanese language schools for chil dren and festivals including the emperor s birthday when work ceased in spite of the frustration of the plantation owners.
in time japanese portuguese chinese and chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 1831 1854 the changing face of the american people in the 1840s and 1850s slavery in the united states 1840s and 1850s new strength for american women chapter 1 the world before 1492 13 inca empire inca town inca road mapi 3 inca empire in 1500 the inca empire was perhaps the largest empire in the world stretching down nearly all of the pacific coast of south america connected by roads and reporting to a single centralized government based in modern day peru.
on an island in the middle of lake texcoco in 1325 connected it to the mainland by three broad causeways and supplied the city with fresh drinking water through a carefully designed aqueduct.
when the aztecs first arrived in central mexico the people who then ruled the region known as the toltecs looked down on them as barbarians.
that soon changed.
the aztecs conquered the toltecs and destroyed their capital.
the aztecs tenochtitlan used toltec designs but was a new and grander capital.
led by their emperor aztec society was highly stratified the emperor and priests at the top ruled a powerful empire with a population of 10 to 20 million that dominated subju gated tribes in surrounding areas.
the huge markets of tenochtitlan in which 40 000 or 50 000 traders met to exchange gold and jewelry pottery and baskets meat fish fruit and vegetables amazed the first spaniards who described it as thrice as large as the celebrated square in salamanca in spain the aztecs maintained an extensive trade network with other peoples but also made war on them to expand their empire and ensure a steady stream of prisoners for the human sacrifices they believed their gods demanded.
while the aztecs built their empire by making strategic alliances with other tribes by the mid 1400s they relied on their own large army and attacked former allies creating enemies who would help the spanish conquer the aztecs in the early 1500s.
to the east and southeast of the aztec empire was the once great empire of the maya.
the mayan empire had been at its height long before the aztecs emerged on the scene.
indeed the mayan culture had been developing for thousands of years when they first came into contact with europeans.
the high point of mayan culture known as the classical period entered a period of decline hundreds of years before the rise of the aztecs probably due to an extended period of drought and overfarming of the land.
the mayans dominated what is now the yucatan peninsula of mexico and much of modern honduras belize and guatemala.
the mayans were the only american culture to develop a fully functional written language.
they also developed sophisticated systems of mathematics and a calendar that projected time far into the future.
like the aztecs they practiced human sacrifice and subjugated other nearby tribes in pursuit of people and goods.
they had an extensive agricultural system producing not only food but also cotton which was a source of trade and wealth.
while in decline the mayans some 800 000 people divided into 16 to 18 independent kingdoms were still a strong presence in western mexico and central america in the 1400s.
the remains of their greatest architecture could be seen all around them.
they still produced and traded cotton and their trade routes connected them with the other empires of the americas.
further south the inca empire was even larger than that of the aztecs.
it extended along the pacific coast of south america from southern colombia to northern chile and included almost all of what is today peru ecuador and bolivia see map 1 3.
the incas ruled some 32 million people from their capital of cuzco another city of 200 000 in what is now peru and from the mountain fortress and religious center of machu picchu.
the empire had a vast bureaucracy and army as well as 25 000 miles of roads and bridges rivaling those of ancient rome all supported by heavy taxes.
incan religion was centered on the sun and its seasons human and animal sacrifice was common.
the inca emperor and his family were considered divine.
like the aztecs the inca empire was relatively new when europeans encountered it in the early 1500s.
the main inca conquests had occurred only in the 1400s.
4 parti contact and exploration.
1491 1607 american indian cultures trade and initial encounters with europeans while the peoples living in north and south america before 1492 were divided by significant language differences and great distances they still knew quite a bit about each other and traded regularly with far distant communities.
trade networks stretched from the aztec empire across all parts of north america.
the presence of sea shells in native american communities a thousand miles from the ocean and copper implements hundreds of miles from the nearest copper mine attests to the trade in goods that was rich and varied by the 1400s see map 1 4.
not all exchanges between tribes were friendly.
there was certainly warfare also sometimes to settle matters of honor and sometimes in the search for valuables.
hunting peoples seem to have raided farming communities and farming communities fought with each other from time to time if one was thought to encroach on anothers land.
bows and arrows were deadly weapons and scalping an enemy to gain a trophy and perhaps a part of the enemys spirit were well known before 1492 even though the native peoples of north and south america maintained their trade networks and fought with other tribes each tribe saw itself as the center of its own world.
their different stories and cultures reflected that although trade might be of value trading partners were not seen as part of their community.
to understand indian responses to the arrival of the europeans it is essential first to understand that no indians thought of themselves as being american indians or native americans as opposed to white europeans.
instead they thought of themselves as senecas or creeks or hopi or some other discrete population.
this mindset prevented any unified resistance to the first european aggressions in the 1400s and later in the 1500s and even 1600s.
if a particular tribe thought it made sense to ally with the europeans against another tribe or trade with the europeans for new goods that would give them an advantage over another tribe they saw no reason not to do so.
if the europeans could become part of well established trade networks or allies in attacking long standing enemies so much the better.
it took several hundred years before most american indians realized that the europeans did not look on them as they looked on themselves and that any equality in trade or warfare was to be short lived.
while different tribes were happy to make alliances with different groups of europeans native american culture tended to understand warfare in ways radically different from most europeans.
war among tribes was usually a way to settle specific issues or achieve honor and most of all to restore the balance that was essential to indian life.
the european model of total conquest was a concept that would have been foreign to most american indian cultures.
in this way as in so many other ways the europeans who began arriving in the 1490s could not have been more different.
at the same time and unknown to the people of the americas other peoples living in europe africa and asia were developing their own societies creation stories and world views.
the world was never the same once representatives from these diverse peoples spanish explorers slaves and free servants from west africa and those who followed them across the atlantic met and mingled with the native peoples of the americas.
but to understand the mingling one must understand the development of separate cultures in other parts of the world.
1 2 quick review what are three unique cultural developments among specific american indian tribes that were influenced by the geography or climate in which their tribe lived.
1 3 black death the bubonic plague that devastated europe in the 1300s reducing the population by as much as half.
a changing europe in the 1400s describe the changes in europe that led to columbus s voyages and that shaped european attitudes when encountering the peoples of the americas.
europeans had been sailing on the atlantic long before columbus was born.
norse sailors commonly known as vikings came from modern day norway and denmark and settled iceland in the late 800s.
in 980 they expanded their territory to greenland where they interacted not always peacefully with the local inuit people and exported lumber to scandinavia while maintaining themselves with successful farms.
in 1001 a norse party led by leif erickson established a colony further west that they named vineland.
no one is sure where vineland was though tradition places it in north america.
modern excavations show the remains of a norse colony in the modern canadian province of newfoundland.
some claim norse settlements as far south as the modern state of maine.
but while iceland maintained contact with europe and the greenland colony survived until the early 1400s when the same colder weather that undermined cahokia also brought the greenland colony to an end vineland was never permanent and by the time columbus was born all earlier european contact with north america was long forgotten.
in the hundred years before columbus sailed across the atlantic europe went through a series of extraordinary changes.
those changes not only set columbus on his travels but shaped the beliefs and expectations with which the first europeans arrived in the americas.
if a time traveler were to go back to the europe of the 1400s to london england or seville spain or paris france or the rural countryside where most people lived they would find a world that would seem strange and primitive.
there were not a lot of people around.
europe was still recovering from the devastating black death the bubonic plague that arrived in 1348 on rats carried by ships trading in the black sea.
in a few years after it first arrived the plague wiped out at least one third perhaps even one half of europe s population.
about 70 million people lived in europe in 1300 by the late 1350s the plague had reduced the population to perhaps 45 million.
whole families and villages disappeared.
through the late 1300s there were empty fields or forests where people had once lived or farmed.
the loss of so many people traumatized the survivors who looked for someone to blame for the disaster jews religious nonconformists and foreigners made good scapegoats and there were massive persecutions across europe.
16 parti contact and exploration 1491 1607 a unified roman catholic christian church dominated the religious life of europe in the 1400s.
the protestant reformation was still a century in the future.
distance between cities the difficulty of travel and political divisions resulted in a catholic church that was far less centralized than it is today.
nevertheless the church with its liturgy creeds and clergy the pope bishops priests monks and nuns was the strongest institution in europe unifying people who had different languages and leaders.
literacy learning and the preservation of culture rested mostly with the church.
the church also provided what social services there were for the aged sick and poor.
jews lived in most parts of europe sometimes tolerated sometimes savagely repressed occasionally honored for their contributions to medicine commerce and scholarship but they were a small minority.
in the cities a great cathedral was the largest building and everywhere church spires marked the center of both secular and religious life.
life to modern eyes would seem primitive.
most people were dirty poorly clothed and illiterate.
life expectancy was in the 30s especially because infant mortality and deaths from childbirth were high.
trade was limited because transporting most things was difficult and expensive.
the church taught that seeking wealth especially charging interest for loans was sinful.
people were encouraged to stay where they were in the community and in social class where they were born whether they were peasants or nobles.
the ottoman empire changes eastern europe in 1453 when christopher columbus was 2 years old muslim ottoman turks conquered the city of constantinople the most important city in eastern europe.
from their new capital renamed istanbul the ottomans ruled an empire that stretched from hungary to include the balkans and most of the middle east and north africa.
the ottoman empire controlled the eastern mediterranean for the next 4 centuries.
the fall of constantinople shocked europe.
constantinople had been at the crossroads of the trade routes between europe and asia and was considered the equivalent of rome as a religious and political center.
the ottomans encouraged trade within their empire but restricted others from using the land and sea routes across the eastern mediterranean.
suddenly christian europe was cut off from the lucrative land based trade in spices and luxury goods with asia that had existed since italys marco polo had traveled to china in the late 1200s.
the mediterranean which had been the great unifying conduit of the roman empire was now as divided as the lands surrounding it.
the city states of italy venice genoa and florence especially which had dominated the mediterranean and trade with asia and grown wealthy from it began a slow decline.
other europeans on the atlantic coast especially those in portugal and spain began to seek new ways to reach asia without the need to deal with the ottomans.
in the 1400s the vast majority of the people of europe were poor peasants who worked long days in the fields with little economic gain to show for their work.
at the top of society were nobles who lived in grand castles like the one pictured and the clergy who reminded nobles and peasants of their responsibility to stay in the class to which they were born and not seek economic or social advancement.
the rise of portuguese exploration the first and in many ways most adventurous european to seek a new way of connecting with asia was prince henry of portugal 1394 1460.
even before the ottoman conquest of constantinople henry a younger son of the king of portugal decided that portugal with its strategic location on europe s southern atlantic coast should try to establish a new trade route to asia by sailing around africa.
although he is known to history as the navigator henrys personal seagoing was modest.
in 1415 he commanded a portuguese fleet but for the rest of his life he stayed at his castle at sagres on the portuguese coast and commissioned others to make voyages and report back to him.
these voyages generated not only geographical information about the african coast but they also led to better navigational instruments and charts as well as better designed ships that could travel greater distances in bad weather and good.
in 1424 prince henry organized a long series of expeditions in which others did the actual travel that sailed farther and farther south along the coast of africa.
once they learned how to navigate the currents off the african coast portuguese explorers moved quickly.
in 1444 portuguese ships reached senegal long fabled as a source of chapter 25 complacency and change 1952 1965 eisenhower s america america s world a culture on the move race and civil rights chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of how the rapid industrialization after the civil war impacted the lives of diverse people and the rise of distinct resistance movements.
learning objectives conflict in the new south analyze how the combined impact of industrialism and the end of reconstruction created the unique character of the new south.
the politics of conflict from populist movement to populist party analyze how agrarian unrest and protest came to have a significant impact on american politics.
worker protest and the rise of organized labor explain the tensions in industrial america that led to major labor strife between the 1870s and 1914 drivers and mules with young laborers in a west virginia coal mine in a 1908 photo by lewis hine.
when he accepted the nomination of the newly growing socialist party for president in the 1912 presidential elections eugene v debs said the worlds workers have always been and still are the worlds slaves.
they have produced all the worlds wealth and supported all the worlds governments.
they have conquered all things but their own freedom.
it was the goal of the socialist party debs said to win that freedom.
debs had an expansive goal for his political organization a party for women and men blacks and whites struggling farmers as well as factory and railroad workers.
when the presidential election was held in november debs won some 900 000 votes or 6 percent of the total.
although that percentage was small it reflected nonetheless unusual support for a nontraditional candidate.
in a nation in the midst of rapid social change debs sought to speak for those being hurt by the changes.
although he failed to rally as many as he hoped to his political banner his campaign reflected the deep tensions in the united states in the late 1800s and early 1900s.
in the face of extraordinary 8 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 v 18 1 significant dates technological and industrial change many were angry.
this chapter 29 a new world on the clinton presidency 2m 29 2 analyze the impact of the clinton presidency and the clinton gingrich conflict on the country.
clinton came to office with high hopes.
he idolized john f kennedy and wanted to be remembered as another kennedy.
clinton the first baby boomer president replaced bush the last of eight presidents who had served in world war ii.
he saw his coming to office as a generational change and told the country today a generation raised in the shadows of the cold war assumes new responsibilities he set an activist agenda saying we must invest more in our own people in their jobs in their future and at the same time cut our massive debt clinton did cut the federal deficit dramatically.
success on other fronts however was more elusive.
29 2 first lady hilary rodham clinton took an unusually active policy role leading the task force to create health care legislation in 1994 the early clinton agenda it s still mostly the economy clinton knew he owed his election to the poor state of the nations economy.
clinton also knew that he would be reelected in 1996 only if the economic picture brightened.
having campaigned as a moderate democrat he surprised many when he made health care reform his first major policy initiative.
clinton however was convinced that reforming the nations chaotic health insurance system would provide a significant jolt to the economy and that providing insurance for the 35 million americans who had no insurance would help close the growing gap between rich and poor.
in spite of personal tensions in their marriage bill and hillary clinton were an especially close political team sometimes compared to franklin and eleanor roosevelt.
the president appointed his wife along with trusted associate ira magaziner to lead a task force to redesign the nations health care system.
unfortunately the clinton magaziner team made two significant errors.
first their final 1 342 page report was too long and far too complicated.
second while they consulted hundreds of experts in developing the report they failed to consult with congress.
in 1993 clinton said if i dont get health care ill wish i didnt run for president in the end he did not get it.
conservatives in the republican minority led by congressman newt gingrich from georgia attacked the plan from the day it was announced.
representatives of physicians and the insurance industry attacked the plan with tv ads and heavily financed congressional lobbying.
without strong support from a large segment of the population or the democratic majority in congress the plan was doomed.
in august 1994 the president announced that he was dropping the plan.
it had not yet reached a single vote in congress but the probable outcome had become clear.
other issues also got in the way of what clinton wanted to accomplish.
when clinton tried to fire long time staff members of the white house travel office for alleged improprieties he was blocked and accused of trying to give those jobs to friends.
when he tried to fulfill a campaign promise to end the ban on gay men and lesbians serving in the armed forces he was blocked again.
the resulting compromise of dont ask dont tell in which officers would not ask about sexual orientation and soldiers and sailors would keep their sexual orientation hidden or face discharge satisfied no one.
only weeks into the new presidency clintons administration had to handle the fallout from an unexpected confrontation in texas.
in waco texas cult members led by david koresh had blockaded themselves in their groups compound.
a gun battle with agents of the fbi and bureau of alcohol tobacco and firearms on february 28 led to a 7 week stand off.
when the fbi became convinced that children in the compound were being abused they attacked.
koresh ordered the compound burned and he and more than 80 of his followers including 21 children were killed.
it was a horrible outcome that brought significant criticism of the administration and especially of janet reno the new attorney general who had approved the raid though few knew what could have been a good outcome.
f46 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present clinton had more success on other fronts.
within 2 weeks of taking office he signed the family and medical leave act which bush had vetoed twice.
the law guaranteed up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for family medical emergencies and pregnancy.
in his campaign he had promised to develop a national service plan and congress quickly approved clinton s americorps which encouraged volunteerism and promised financial support for college costs to those who gave a year of national service.
in september 1994 the first 20 000 americorps volunteers were sworn in.
congress also authorized 2 billion for goals 2000 the clinton version of president bushs america 2000 education plan to set national educational standards in core academic subjects.
in addition congress approved a modest ban on semiautomatic assault weapons and a freedom of access to clinic entrances act that required antiabortion protesters to keep some distance from medical clinics or places of worship.
during his first 2 years the senate confirmed two of clintons supreme court nominees ruth bader ginsburg and stephen breyer.
with their confirmation the courts conservative drift seemed to stop.
in addition clinton was convinced that the huge deficit which had grown substantially under reagan and bush was creating a drag on the american economy.
he was also anxious to establish his political credentials as a moderate.
in august 1993 less than 7 months into office and with the health care bill still pending congress passed clintons first budget.
the budget infuriated conservatives because it included a tax increase and it infuriated liberals because it did little for federal programs.
the administrations goal was simple balance the federal budget and lower the federal debt.
clinton succeeded and during his term in office the total federal spending as a share of the u s gross domestic product dropped from 21 5 percent to 19 1 percent.
starting in 1998 real surpluses allowed a major reduction in the federal debt.
immediately after clintons budget passed congress he turned his attention to getting congressional approval of the north american free trade agreement nafta which had been negotiated by george bush.
few gave nafta much chance for approval.
labor unions hated the treaty because it proposed to reduce all trade barriers between the united states canada and mexico and the unions feared it would cost jobs.
ross perot had based his third party campaign on opposition to nafta and had succeeded in winning 19 percent of the vote.
nevertheless clinton believed that free trade and the development of an unfettered global economy was the key to long term prosperity.
he allied with republicans in congress and against some of his closest democratic allies to get the treaty passed and he signed it in december 1993 although clinton saw himself as a moderate to conservative democrat conservative republicans especially those in the house of representatives did not think he was nearly conservative enough.
clinton also sought to undercut republican efforts to differentiate themselves from him which republicans found utterly frustrating.
under the leadership of a georgia congressman newt gingrich working with congressmen dick armey and tom delay of texas house republicans planned for the 1994 midterm elections.
the house of representatives had enjoyed a democratic majority and a democratic speaker for 60 of the 64 years between 1930 and 1994 while the senate and the white house changed hands the house seemed permanently democratic.
but a new generation of representatives coming mostly from suburban districts especially in the south where there had been few republicans elected until the 1970s were determined to create a republican majority in the congress and enact their agenda.
they were very successful.
in november 1994 34 democrats were defeated in their bids for reelection a new republican majority took control and gingrich became the speaker of the house.
the era of big government is over with the new republican majority and newt gingrich as the new speaker coming to power at the end of clintons second year in office the chance for significant legislative victories for clinton virtually disappeared.
clinton would spend much of the next 6 years either trying to hold on to past democratic victories or doing what he and goals 2000 legislation that set tough new goals over the coming decades to improve the quality of american schooling.
not all americans supported the nafta trade agreement.
many feared it would cost a significant number of jobs in the united states.
chapter traces the parallel changes in the lives of many people who were by 1850 residents of the united states whether or not they had been so 20 years before.
1831 william lloyd garrison launches h the liberator t nat turner leads slave revolt in virginia.
1833 american anti slavery society founded in boston r i 1836 american anti slavery society launches i campaign to send antislavery agents to j every state of the union 1838 sarah grimke s letters on the equality of the sexes and the condition of women 1843 henry highland garnet s address to the slaves of the united states of america 1845 1850 the great famine in ireland 1847 rebellion against american authorities in taos new mexico 1848 discovery of gold in california lures immigrants from around the world including china women s rights convention at seneca falls new york 1849 harriett tubman escapes from slavery 1851 sojourner truth s ain t i a woman.
speech 1854 william lloyd garrison burns a copy of the constitution as source and parent of the other atrocities of slavery in the united states chapter traces the experience of those americans who built a new world in the after math of world war ii describing not only their hopes and fears but also their surprises and disappointments as the postwar world took shape between 1945 and 1952 the united states in 1945 24 1 describe the new technology living patterns and political arrangements in the united states that resulted from world war ii.
those who had been fighting in europe or asia wanted to get home as fast as they could certainly faster than was possible given difficulties in transporting troops and managing germany and japan.
for some women working in wartime production it was time to welcome a long absent husband or boyfriend quit work and raise a family.
other women very much wanted to continue working.
for some who had moved because of the war it was time to go home.
others who had moved wanted to stay in their new locations and have families join them.
for industrial leaders peacetime conversion meant new profits that would come from fulfilling pent up demands for goods that had been unavailable during the war and from harnessing new discoveries related to medicines and emerging technologies.
for government leaders negotiating the international arrangements and managing the uneasy postwar alliances especially with the united soviet socialist republic u s s r commonly called the soviet union made the postwar era one of the most difficult ever.
science medicine technology and the bomb if the nuclear physicists who designed and built the atomic bomb were in the vanguard of wartime scientific breakthroughs biologists and medical researchers were not far behind.
during world war ii the wonder drugs penicillin and streptomycin combated infections and resulted in a dramatic reduction in battlefield deaths.
soon after the war medical scientists and pharmaceutical companies marketed other new antibiotics.
the national institutes of health which had begun as a tiny government agency in the 1930s now led the nations war on disease.
by 1956 80 percent of prescribed drugs had been invented after the beginning of world war ii.
vaccines ended traditional childhood diseases such as whooping cough diphtheria mumps and measles.
in 1955 a vaccine was found for the feared scourge of polio.
for those having a hard time keeping pace with modern life physicians offered tranquilizers sales of which boomed.
people were growing taller and living longer thanks to advances in medicine nutrition and hygiene.
in 1940 the average americans lifespan was 62 9 years but by 1960 it had reached 69 7 science it seemed was offering the key to life itself.
for consumers science and technology offered tangible improvements that changed daily life.
in 1945 consumers were being introduced to freezers dishwashers automatic transmissions and ballpoint pens.
in offices workers were beginning to use electric typewriters.
other technologies that had been developed prior to world war ii from washing machines to electric ranges to electric trains were suddenly available after wartime production restrictions were lifted.
pent up consumer demand and industrial availability combined quickly.
what had been impossible to find during the war was now in every store.
no automobiles for private use had been produced in the united states between 1942 and 1945 but by 1947 new models were replacing the old vehicles from the 1930s.
sales of passenger cars jumped to 6 7 million per year in 1950 and to 7 9 million 686 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 in 1955 general motors which then sold about half of all cars in america became the first corporation to earn 1 billion in a single year.
advertising by general motors ford and chrysler convinced people to trade in 4 5 million old cars per year in the 1950s for large sleek new models with automatic transmissions air conditioning and picturesque tail fins.
by 1960 80 percent of all american families owned a car and 15 percent owned two or more cars.
while most households had radios in 1945 only a very few had televisions black and white of course.
television was developed by a number of inventors notably philo t farnsworth in the early 1930s and was introduced at the 1939 new york worlds fair.
but television production stopped during world war ii while factories made radar equipment.
the number of television sets in american homes exploded after the war.
in 1946 8 000 homes owned a set by 1950 5 million and by 1960 45 million or 90 percent of all american homes.
in 1945 half of the nations farm homes where 25 million people lived still did not have electricity to plug in a tv but that too would change very quickly.
hanging over all of the advances however was the atomic bomb.
as americans learned more about the bomb they realized that it could end all of their improved health and new found prosperity.
few americans had questioned the morality of using the atomic bomb in 1945 indeed only a tiny handful even knew that the weapon existed before its use.
the few physicists who had developed the bomb understood what it meant however.
very soon many more came to understand the sobering reality of the mushroom cloud that a nuclear explosion unleashed.
the bomb might be a new form of protection since only the united states had it but it was also a new threat see chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 27 this image of shows columbus taking his leave from the king and queen of spain to journey across the atlantic on the three ships in the background.
2 1 significant dates 1492 columbus lands on an island in the bahamas 1497 john cabot explores the coast of north america for england a german mapmaker names the new continent america in honor of amerigo vespucci 1509 juan ponce de leon founds san juan puerto rico 1513 juan ponce de leon first explores florida 1514 1566 bartolome de las casas s 50 year campaign for the rights of the indians 1517 martin luther begins protestant reformation 1519 1521 hernan cortes conquers the aztec empire in mexico 1524 giovanni da verrazano explores the atlantic coast of north america for france 1528 1536 cabeza de vaca travels from florida to texas to mexico 1532 francisco pizarro conquers the inca empire 1534 1536 jacques cartier explores the st lawrence river 1534 parliament names henry viii head of the church of england 1540 1542 coronado expedition to the southwest 1539 1542 hernando de soto explores the mississippi river valley 1542 1543 juan rodriguez cabrillo explores the coast of california 1565 st augustine florida founded oldest european city in what is now the united states 1579 francis drake sails along california coast 1587 roanoke virginia first english settlement in north america 1598 first spanish settlement in new mexico not asia but an unknown continent filled with people they had never imagined existed.
the columbian encounter led to unimagined power and wealth for many europeans.
it also led to the creation of new ethnic groups as children were born to american indian european couples.
and it shifted the balance of trade and commerce around the world from land to the worlds oceans.
for the american indians the encounter was even more of a surprise and much more devastating.
suddenly from across the ocean unimagined people arrived with a strange way of talking and dressing a strange religion and a different way of looking at the world.
in part because of differences in technology in part because of differences between european and indigenous peoples understandings of war and conquest and most of all because of differences in the two groups ability to withstand european diseases the encounter led to conquest disease and death for many indians.
understanding what happened in the history of the united states over the next 500 years depends on understanding the differences between those who arrived from europe especially from spain france and england as well as from africa and the diverse peoples who lived in the americas when they arrived.
with the arrival of columbus and the many europeans who followed him once news of his journey spread something new in human history took place a massive transit and mixing of peoples in north and south america.
columbus the columbian exchange and early conquests 2 1 explain the reasons behind the voyages of columbus and early spanish encounters with the peoples of the caribbean mexico and south america.
as delighted as columbus was by the taino welcome and generosity and what seemed to him the easy opportunity to convert them to christianity columbus also noted other things that would be more ominous for their future they do not carry arms nor are they acquainted with them because i showed them swords and they took them by the edge and through ignorance cut themselves.
they have no iron.
their javelins are shafts without iron and some of them have at the end a fish tooth.
conquest columbus came to believe would be easy.
28 parti contact and exploration 1491 1607 2 1 american voices the dedication of columbuss log to the king and queen of spain 1493 2 2 eturning from his first voyage in early 1493 columbus understood how much his exploration was linked to ferdinand and isabella s efforts to unify spain into a militant single minded nation.
he spelled out these links when he dedicated his report to the rulers.
whereas most christian and very noble and very excellent and very powerful princes king and queen of the spain s and of the islands of the sea our lords this present year of 1492 after your highnesses had brought to an end the war with the moors who ruled in europe and had concluded the war in the very great city of granada where this present year on the second day of the month of january i saw the royal standards of your highnesses placed by force of arms on the towers of the alhambra and your highnesses as catholic christians and princes lovers and promoters of the holy christian faith and enemies of the false doctrine of mahomet and of all idolatries and heresies you thought of sending me christobal colon to the said regions of india to see the said princes and the peoples and the lands and the characteristics of the lands and of everything and to see how their conversion to our holy faith might be undertaken so after having expelled all the jews from all of your kingdoms and dominions in the same month of january your highnesses commanded me to go with a suitable fleet to the said regions of india.
source oliver dunn and james e kelley jr translators the diario of christopher columbus s first voyage to america 1492 1493 abstracted by fray bartolome de las casas norman university of oklahoma press 1988 pp.
17 19 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what connection did columbus make between spain s defeat of muslim granada the expulsion of the jews from spain and his own voyage across the atlantic.
2 historical interpretation what does the document suggest about the role of religion in motivating spain s efforts at overseas exploration and expansion.
23 23 23 i i columbus described what would be the terms of much of the european contact with american indians they should be good and intelligent servants for i see that they say very quickly everything that is said to them columbus also looked closely at the ornaments and jewelry that some of the indians were wearing and wrote i was attentive and labored to find out if there was any gold the search for gold and the effort to subjugate the indians in its service had begun.
the four voyages of christopher columbus in spite of the friendly welcome he received columbus took some tainos as captives.
he wanted to teach them spanish and show them to his sponsors in spain.
columbus also wanted guides to the gold he was sure could be found since he had seen some tainos wearing gold ornaments.
led by native guides he sailed on to cuba and sent a party inland to find the local chief or cacique as the taino called their leaders who his guides said had access to gold.
when columbus did not find the leader or the gold he sailed to another island he named hispaniola modern haiti and the dominican republic.
he built a fort and left part of his crew there with instructions to search for gold.
in january 1493 columbus with six taino prisoners turned back to spain.
columbus never fully understood the importance of his voyage.
he set out to discover a route across the atlantic directly to asia and he thought he had indeed reached an unknown part of asia perhaps japan or korea.
thinking the people he met looked like those who came from the part of south asia europeans called the indies he called them indians.
of course he did not really discover a new land because the indians were already there.
columbus certainly discovered a new route across the atlantic but it led to a continent filled with people unknown to europeans.
the rest of columbuss life was a tragedy for himself and for the peoples he had encountered.
to impress the spanish court columbus exaggerated what he had chapter 30 entering a new time 871 no child left behind federal legislation requiring that all students be tested and that schools show adequate yearly progress in the test scores of all students.
the george w bush presidential agenda once in office in january 2001 george w bush did not waste any time implementing his own agenda.
while the events of the following september would make foreign policy central to that agenda he did not come to office with such a focus.
indeed most early initiatives focused on domestic policy.
as his administration took shape especially his choices for members of his cabinet many wondered about his promise to be a uniter he had selected a cabinet with more racial minorities and more women than any previous one but they were a very conservative lot.
three days after the inauguration bush announced that he would use the upcoming renewal of the elementary and secondary education act first passed under lyndon johnson in 1965 see chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 1830 1853 manifest destiny the importance of an idea the u s war with mexico 1846 1848 west into the pacific 8 1 8 2 83 chapter.
american voices bartolome de las casas the history of the indies 1550 tr he publication of the history of the indies along with the many speeches and other writings from priests like las casas had multiple results.
las casas clearly documented for all time just how cruel the first europeans were in their treatment of the indigenous people of the americas.
on a few occasions it led spanish authorities to end some abuses or replace vicious officials but such steps were rare and seldom had lasting effect.
in the hands of enemies of catholic spain the documents were used to create a long lasting story of unique spanish cruelty.
ultimately the careful documentation created one of the best reports even if a romanticized one on the experience of american indians at the time of their first encounter with europeans.
the following is an excerpt from las casas s history the men were sent out to the mines as far as 80 leagues away while their wives remained to work the soil not with hoes or plowshares drawn by oxen but with their own sweat and sharpened poles that were far from equaling the equipment used for similar work in castile.
they had to make silo like heaps for cassava plants by digging 12 square feet 4 palms deep and 10 000 or 12 000 of such hills a giant s work next to one another had to be made and they had other tasks of the same magnitude of whatever nature the spaniards saw as fittest to make more money.
thus husbands and wives were together only once every 8 or 10 months and when they met they were so exhausted and depressed on both sides that they had no mind for marital communication and in this way they ceased to procreate.
as for the newly born they died early because their mothers overworked and famished had no milk to nurse them and for this reason while i was in cuba 7 000 children died in 3 months.
some mothers even drowned their babies from sheer desperation while others caused themselves to abort with certain herbs that produced stillborn children.
in this way husbands died in the mines wives died at work and children died from lack of milk while others had not time or energy for procreation and in a short time this land which was so great so powerful and fertile though so unfortunate was depopulated.
if this concatenation of events had occurred all over the world the human race would have been wiped out in no time.
source bartolome de las casas history of the indies.
1550 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what kinds of abuses did las casas identify.
what motives did he imply were behind spanish brutality.
2 contextualization who might las casas have been hoping to influence by publicizing spanish abuses in the new world.
what allies might he have found for his cause within spanish society.
how might the protestant focus on his work have unintended consequences for las casas.
chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 37 martin luther s challenge to catholic teachings and practices in his day led to a decisive split in the unity among christians that had been known in western europe for centuries.
soon thereafter john calvin also challenged some of luther s teachings leading to a three way split between catholics lutherans and calvinists followed by further splits among protestants.
a divided europe the impact of the protestant reformation 22 explain how the protestant reformation and the development of the nation state changed europe and european ideas about how best to settle and govern america.
ninety five theses a document with 95 debating points that a young monk martin luther hoped would lead to a series of reforms within the catholic church.
protestant reformation the process that began with martin luther s efforts to reform the catholic church s practices in the early 1500s and that eventually led followers of luther calvin and others to completely break from the catholic church.
nation state a relatively new development in europe during the 1300s and 1400s in which nations became the major political organizations replacing both the smaller kingdoms and city states.
when columbus sailed in 1492 he did so with a commission from the rulers of a newly unified spain.
spanish explorers and conquerors brought the same quest for unity to the americas.
they sought to convert all native peoples to catholic christianity as part of the expansion of spains realm.
in 1492 few western europeans would disagree with that mission.
soon however europes religious unity would disappear.
less than 30 years after columbus made his voyage across the atlantic the protestant reformation changed the way europeans thought about the world whether they became protestant or remained catholic.
the initial european encounter with the americas was led by representatives of a religiously united europe.
but nearly all of the subsequent exploration and settlement of north america was conducted by europeans who represented particular groups from a continent deeply divided by religious hostility.
that divide shaped the way they understood their efforts on both sides of the atlantic.
the birth of protestantism in 1517 before hernan cortes began his conquest of mexico a young german monk martin luther 1483 1546 asked for a debate about religious doctrine by posting his ninety five theses on the door of a church in wittenberg in the small independent german speaking state of saxony.
at this time some within the roman catholic church began to challenge some of the churchs practices prompted partly by new translations of the bible and by new attention to the writings of saint augustine a theologian of the early church.
the challenges questioned the catholic churchs insistence that bishops and not everyday christians should interpret the bible and the idea that one could reach salvation through good works in particular the challenge that luther posted questioned the catholic practice of using indulgences that granted forgiveness to sinners to raise money.
his action quickly led to a religious split first in germany and then across europe.
that split known as the protestant reformation would shape the cultural and political development of the future united states.
as word of luthers protests spread many germans including significant members of the nobility who controlled many of the small independent states of germany were drawn to the lutheran cause.
in the century that followed other protestants developed their own religious ideas including followers of the french swiss reformer john calvin 1509 1564 who were known as calvinists while other protestants went in other directions.
part of what fueled the extraordinary response to luthers challenge was the cumulating effect that the technology of printing had produced during the previous 62 years.
johannes gutenbergs creation of a printing press that used moveable type in 1455 and the subsequent rapid spread of printing hugely expanded literacy beyond a small educated elite mostly clergy who had monopolized literacy in the medieval world.
by 1500 at least 10 million individual books had been printed and many people learned to read thus new ideas could spread with a rapidity not known before.
sermons and pamphlets by catholics lutherans and calvinists circulated rapidly.
the printing press prompted a free flow of ideas that most people in europe had not experienced before.
religion and the nation state the idea of the nation state developed more or less at the same time as the protestant catholic split.
the modern idea that the world should be governed by independent nations or nation states was new in the europe of the 1500s.
indeed a world divided into separate independent nations clashed with a long standing ideal held by many of a unified europe unified in religion and government.
in reality the europe of the 1400s was not united at 9 part i contact and exploration 1491 1607 1 united scandinavia scotland north sea united ireland netherlands england amsterdam 5 s a bristol dublin plymouth german and other states london holy roman empire atlantic ocean normandy paris swltz.
genoa pisa vienna ever ice florence aragon lisbon palos madrid castile spain editerranee granada n italian rome states map 2 2 europe on the eve of the columbian encounter.
in the years before columbus made his 1492 voyage across the atlantic western europe was being divided into nation states including england france and spain.
central europe remained a series of separate states loosely united in the holy roman empire.
real power rested in very local territories.
frederick elector or duke of saxony was luthers protector and had enough power to ensure luthers safety in spite of hostility from the holy roman emperor the pope and the kings of nearby france.
but most of europes modern nations did not exist.
even within the church distance and the difficulty of travel gave local catholic bishops great independence from papal authorities in rome.
by the late 1400s however something new was emerging in european views of the best forms of government.
ferdinand and isabella united spain by 1492 kings in france sweden scotland and england had done the same earlier in the 1400s.
the idea of being part of a nation was taking on new importance see map 2 2.
virtually no one argued in favor of religious freedom for the citizens of these nations.
instead different religious parties catholics and assorted protestants lutherans calvinists and others sought to impose their religious beliefs on as many others as possible.
each party argued that it was defending truth and saw no reason to tolerate those they believed were defending error.
this belief in the absolute rightness of ones cause led to more than a century of bloody persecution and religious wars from ireland and scotland to france germany and hungary.
the peace of augsburg in 1555 that addressed divisions between lutherans and catholics and the treaty of westphalia that concluded the thirty years war between catholics and protestants in central europe in 1648 each provided that in each nation covered by the treaty the ruler would decide the faith of the people and that foreign armies would no longer intervene in the religious affairs of another state.
it was a long way from religious freedom but it brought an end to the worst religious bloodshed while linking national unity and religious uniformity more tightly together than ever.
the protestant reformation and the divisions that followed had a huge impact on european settlement in the americas.
different nations from a divided europe battled with each other for control of those new lands.
in addition the wars and divisions in europe led many to seek asylum in a new place preferably as far away from the old as possible.
peace of augsburg in 1555 an agreement among different smaller kingdoms in germany that no ruler would attack the kingdom of another on religious grounds.
treaty of westphalia a 1648 peace treaty between a number of european powers that significantly extended the ideas of the peace of augsburg.
quick review why might religious changes inspire people in europe to look outward to the rest of the world.
how would the link of religious and national unity in spain and other parts of europe affect the behavior of europeans when they conquered other people.
chapter 30 entering a new time 883 inflated housing prices and problems with home mortgages helped cause the financial crisis of 2008 as a result many people were evicted or forced to sell homes they could no longer afford which produced a glut on the housing market and a significant drop in home prices and values.
at the same time banks found new ways to handle and profit from home mortgages.
rather than issue a mortgage and then hold it banks divided mortgages into small shares sliced and diced them as some said and then sold the mortgage shares at a profit to many different banks and investors.
as a result banks could invest in pieces of many different mortgages in ways that seemed to lower the risk of individual mortgage defaulting since investors held portions of many mortgages rather than the whole amount of a few.
with interest rates low and mortgages easier than ever to sell to other banks mortgage lenders also began issuing mortgages to people who never before would have been eligible.
they issued mortgages with no down payment and no required documentation of income or ability to pay in what became known as the subprime mortgage market and then sold these mortgages at a profit.
the institution that had issued the mortgage was not at risk if the person who took out the mortgage later defaulted because that institution had long since sold the mortgage probably in pieces to several different investors.
with such easy funding available sellers found they could ask higher prices for homes and housing prices climbed at an extraordinary rate.
between 2001 and 2006 housing prices kept rising interest rates stayed low and bankers made a lot of money.
the investment bank goldman sachs generated an average income of 661 000 per employee in 2007 goldmans chief lloyd blankfein earned 54 million that year.
mortgages were no longer merely for primary residences but for investment.
people bought houses as investments and then sold them for higher amounts known as flipping which enabled them to buy more expensive houses with the profits or simply pocket the money.
everyone seemed to be making money and many argued that only fools were left out of the process.
the situation was a classic bubble very much like every other bubble from the tulip bubble of the 1600s in holland to the stock market bubble of 1929 to the bubble of the 1990s.
in 2006 the housing bubble reached its peak.
housing prices stopped rising.
people who had bought houses they could not afford and had planned to flip them could not sell them.
people who had bought homes with flexible interest rates thinking that they would refinance for a lower rate later could not find a new mortgage.
more people started defaulting on loans.
as defaults grew banks who held the mortgages started to get into trouble.
even if mortgages had been sliced and diced banks that owned slices of mortgages that were in default were now themselves in trouble.
initially most people thought the crisis would be limited to a few mortgage lenders who had taken too many risks.
they were wrong.
before long it became clear that large and supposedly stable investment banks like lehman and goldman sachs which held portions of many sliced loans were in a lot of trouble.
bankers who had taken risks throughout their careers confident that there was always a way out could not find a way out of the crisis.
over the weekend of september 13 14 2008 while treasury secretary paulson was trying to maintain confidence he privately called his wife to share his worries.
what if the system collapses he asked.
in the end the nations financial system did not collapse.
but it did not resume the financial health that had characterized most of the 1990s and early 2000s.
at the end of september secretary paulson and congressional leaders put together troubled asset relief program tarp legislation that would stop the continuing financial collapse.
when tarp was put to a vote in the house of representatives in spite of the support of leaders of both parties the bailout was rejected by a 228 to 205 vote by members of both parties who did not think it was the governments business to use taxpayer money to bail out investors who had taken too many risks with their own funds.
immediately after the vote the dow jones industrial average lost another 777 points the biggest 1 day drop ever.
another report 884 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present indicated that 159 000 jobs had been lost in september.
the crisis was spreading far beyond the banks.
as credit and confidence dried up people saw jobs savings and pensions disappear.
the american economy seemed to be teetering badly.
finally on friday october 3 under pressure from president bush and from both major presidential candidates congress passed the tarp legislation.
the law created a 700 billion fund to buy the worst of the troubled assets from the banks and stabilize the system.
we have shown the world that the united states will stabilize our financial markets and maintain a leading role in the global economy bush said.
in may 2009 congress created a financial crisis inquiry commission to study the crisis.
the commission held a number of hearings.
at one of them in june 2010 the financier warren buffett was asked who was to blame.
i ts a little bit like cinderella at the ball buffett said.
people may have some feeling that at midnight it s going to turn to pumpkin and mice but its so darn much fun theres no villain.
others thought there was some specific blame to be assigned.
people blamed lehman brothers and other banks.
they blamed the auditing companies that should have looked more closely at the account books of the banks.
they blamed the repeal of glass steagall.
and many saw the crisis as one more in the sad long line of investment bubbles that when they burst hurt not only those caught up in the speculation but the economy of the whole nation and indeed of the world.
certainly the crisis could have been worse and the work of the treasury secretary and the tarp legislation may have kept the country from another great depression.
however as congressman barney frank said of paulsons efforts you dont get any credit for disaster averted after 2008 unemployment rates stayed stubbornly high.
in 2009 and 2010 the united states had an official unemployment rate of 10 percent and if one counted discouraged and part time workers it was closer to 16 percent.
those who lost their jobs were out of work for increasingly longer periods of time.
high unemployment creates its own negative cycle.
for the unemployed it is devastating.
when unemployed people do not buy cars computers and refrigerators the whole economy slows down.
as the nation entered the 2012 election cycle economic movement was very slow.
the crisis of 2008 also brought other economic problems to light.
firms like lehman brothers had been painting a rosier picture of their finances than the situation warranted and others were engaged in much more corrupt practices.
three months after the collapse of lehman brothers a new york financier bernard madoff was arrested and charged with securities fraud.
madoff s investment securities company was in reality a giant ponzi scheme see chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 45 23 have the same opportunities to acquire land and the wealth that went with it.
some would opt to spend their lives in the church but many would opt to spend their lives as soldiers where through conquest of new lands they might be rewarded.
unlike mexico and peru the spanish colonies in florida were settled by soldiers who did not want to create a vast empire but valued the independence that distance from imperial authorities gave them and by families of artisans and farmers who meant to build a richer life than they could have in spain.
as citizens on the border between european settlement and american indian territory these settlers wanted to enjoy the municipal liberties that the free cities of castile had enjoyed when they had represented the border between christian and muslim spain.
they also wanted to avoid the tightly ordered hierarchical society that was evolving in mexico.
the cities and the farms in florida prospered.
one settler recorded i have planted with my own hands grapevines pomegranates orange trees and figs wheat barley onions garlic and many vegetables that grow in spain the colonists quickly took to the corn that was the staple of the indian diet.
there were also slaves in st augustine from the beginning.
although his royal commission had authorized him to bring up to 500 african slaves to st augustine de aviles actually brought only about 50 in time spanish florida had a black militia and included both african slaves and free africans.
there was also intermarriage and more casual sexual encounters among europeans native americans and africans in spanish florida.
in this outpost the races blended creating a new culture and new bloodlines.
in addition st augustine became a place where europeans from other nations settled.
some settled of necessity after their ships were wrecked on the florida coast.
others came to escape legal problems military commitments or families.
despite strict rules issued in madrid isolated places like st augustine reflected considerable diversity including jews escaping an increasingly intolerant europe as well as french flemish and german immigrants escaping religious persecution or simply wanting a new start in life.
after its founding in 1565 and up until 1705 st augustine was home to a large scale effort to send franciscan missionaries into the surrounding native american territories.
the franciscans who traveled into the interior of florida and georgia to make converts also sought alliances with the indians.
tribal leaders came to st augustine to trade and negotiate and they accepted however casually spanish rule.
eventually about 80 mission centers were established from the savannah river in georgia to as far south as modern daytona beach.
the franciscans however also brought european diseases along with their preaching and the american indian population fell drastically.
nevertheless for a century native americans missionaries and soldiers traded religious and cultural ideas as well as the tools of commerce and war.
they intermarried and substantially influenced each other and their offspring in florida.
despite occasional battles with the american indians raids by european navies and hurricanes life in spanish florida continued more or less uninterrupted well into the 1700s.
while the english focused their efforts further north and the spanish empire centered on mexico central and south america those who were in florida were left alone.
except for a brief period of british rule between 1763 and 1784 florida remained a spanish colony until it was ceded to the united states in 1821 256 years after the founding of st augustine.
settling new mexico 1598 after coronados expedition to explore the north american southwest returned to mexico city in 1542 there was little further exploration of new mexico for over half a century.
then in 1598 the spanish viceroy in mexico city decided it was time for another look at the lands of the north and appointed a new governor for what was called new mexico the rumors that great wealth existed there had never died.
more pragmatically the spanish were worried about the protestant english.
in 1579 francis 46 exploration 1491 1607 drake an english privateer a pirate working for the government sailed up the coast of california duplicating cabrillos route and his failure to find san francisco.
drake then turned west and duplicated the route of an earlier spanish explorer ferdinand magellan sailing across the pacific and on around the world before returning to london in 1580 to the authorities in spain this achievement was a real threat.
settling the interior of north america suddenly seemed imperative.
don juan de onate was appointed governor of new mexico with instructions not to follow the harsh policies of cortes or pizarro.
the kings appointment letter said you will endeavor to attract the natives with peace friendship and good treatment and to induce them to hear and accept the holy gospel a succession of spanish monarchs never approved of the viciousness of the conquistadors though they accepted the gold and silver that flowed back to spain without asking too many questions about how it was acquired.
onates expedition included 400 men women and children among them a few spanish soldiers franciscan friars and indians along with supply wagons cattle sheep and mules.
onates wife isabel tolosa cortes montezuma was herself a granddaughter of cortes and a great granddaughter of the aztec emperor montezuma.
on april 30 1598 the expedition stopped on the banks of the rio grande and claimed all of the lands and peoples to the north for spain.
onate named the place where he crossed the river el paso del norte the pass to the north since coronados day the pueblo indians had seen spanish soldiers and missionaries come and go.
the spanish could be ruthless but they also seemed to have little staying power.
with the onate expedition spanish occupation of new mexico would come closer to being permanent.
onate sought political allegiance from the pueblos of southern new mexico.
in july 1598 he asked pueblo chiefs to swear allegiance to spain and convert to christianity.
onate chose to interpret their lack of hostility as agreement.
he also built a capital which he named san gabriel.
something resembling a permanent settlement of 400 europeans in the middle of thousands of pueblo indians took shape.
at first all was peaceful.
onate divided new mexico into administrative districts each with a priest in each to try to convert the american indians to christianity.
he allowed self government to continue in each pueblo he had little choice but insisted that each one must have a political governor.
he was more interested in exploring for the gold silver or pearls which he was sure were just over the horizon and did not try to force the native americans to labor for the spanish.
the peace did not last however.
zutucapan the leader of the acoma pueblo had avoided meeting onate because he did not want to cede any authority to the spaniards.
late in 1598 he attacked a spanish scouting party and in 1599 onate struck back.
after a fierce battle the spaniards whose guns swords and horses gave them a huge advantage burned acoma to the ground.
one thousand of its residents were killed and the remaining 500 were taken as slaves.
the male captives had one foot cut off.
when the jumano indians also resisted onate he hanged their chiefs and burned their village.
onates cruelty and his failure to find riches led to his recall in 1609 the new royal governor don pedro de peralta moved the capital further north to a new town that he created and named santa fe inl610.
there peralta built the oldest public building still standing in the united states the governors mansion.
the colonys attention turned from gold to farming.
churches were built at the center of each pueblo.
the spanish hoped these churches would become new centers of indian life and faith but tensions would continue that would eventually culminate some 50 years later in a surprising revolt.
quick review how did spanish exploration in north america change overtime.
what was different between the exploration that took place between 1513 and 1543 and the latter developments between 1565 and 1598.
identify and explain factors that most contributed to this evolution.
chapter review which changes in the united states had the greatest impact on emerging social movements in the 1840s and 1850s.
you may want to consider immigration the growth of both antislavery and proslavery propaganda and the campaign for equal rights for women in your answer.
354 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 chapter review how did some of the disenfranchised workers blacks farmers etc.
attempt to make their voices heard in the late 1800s and early 1900s.
why were their tactics different.
how successful were they.
534 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 chapter 18 chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change 53 the iww supported strikes all over the country like this one by women from the ladies tailors union on the picket line during the uprising of the 20 000 garment workers strike.
the convention adopted a constitution that began by organizing industrially we are forming the structure of the new society within the shell of the old.
this mission was very different from the incremental goals of the american federation of labor.
for the iww contract negotiations and strikes were only a step within the shell of the old to help launch the new world.
in the early 1900s workers were not embarrassed to sing about their dreams and the iww song book described them in songs including one that mocked the idea that the poor should hope that youll get pie in the sky when you die instead of taking action now.
another iww song promised that if the workers took a notion they could bring the current economy to a halt.
the iww was attacked by the press the corporate world and the government.
it was also torn by ideological splits personality tensions and factional divisions.
but for 15 years the iww was a major force in labor organizing around the country and included some of the countrys most charismatic labor leaders among its members.
the garment industry and the triangle shirtwaist fire of 1911 the garment industry one of the nations largest employed mostly women.
between 1900 and 1910 new york city became the nations center in the manufacture of ready to wear clothing.
led by innovative owners much of the work moved from the small sweatshops of the lower east side to larger factories in the new high rise buildings of 10 and 12 stories in southern manhattan.
max blanck and isaac harris operated their factory the triangle shirtwaist company in greenwich village.
there over 500 workers most of them young jewish and italian women assembled the popular shirtwaists as womens blouses were called that were sold in department stores across the country.
in new york city alone over 40 000 people worked in the garment trades in the early 1900s.
although divided by language yiddish italian english and a host of other languages the garment workers joined together to protest low salaries.
the international ladies garment workers union ilgwu had a tough organizer clara lemlich who had emigrated from russia in 1903 and who led women in a number of strikes.
during some of the strikes factories hired replacement nonunion workers while police arrested strikers or thugs beat them up.
women from new yorks social elite including anne morgan daughter of j p morgan sometimes joined the picket lines and they too were sometimes arrested or beaten.
in the late fall of 1909 as the ilgwu considered a general strike in the garment industry many including a f of l president samuel gompers urged caution.
but clara lemlich said i have no further patience for talk 1 move that we go on a general strike workers cheered and the strike began.
factories all over manhattan were picketed that fall.
the garment industry owners organized their own association and refused to give in to the strikers demands.
striking garment workers got help from the national leadership of the a f.
of l and from the western federation of miners whose leader big bill haywood sent word that the western miners are hearty admirers of your courage and fighting qualities they also got support from society women like morgan and from african american women who were being recruited as strikebreakers but who refused though in a meeting they asked the union to exercise a proper consideration of the claims and demands of the men and women of color who desire to enter the various trades the long strike ended in exhaustion for both sides in early 1911 when the union and the owners agreed to a compromise.
on saturday march 25 1911 only a month after the strike ended a fire started under one of the cutting room tables 132 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 bread and roses strike a spontaneous strike of workers in the mills of lawrence massachusetts in 1912 at the triangle shirtwaist factory.
perhaps a cigarette butt had been tossed in the bin of cotton scrap and dust which exploded in a massive fire.
workers tried to put the fire out with buckets of water they kept on each floor but it spread too rapidly.
the fire started on the eighth floor and quickly filled the cutting room with smoke.
flames spread up airshafts to the ninth and tenth floors.
workers ran for exits some of which had been blocked by the owners who fearful of theft insisted that all workers use only one exit.
new yorks firefighters arrived but none had ladders that could reach to the eighth or higher floors.
some workers were quickly consumed by flames.
more than 50 jumped from the windows and 20 were killed when a flimsy fire escape on the outside of the building collapsed.
in the end 146 workers most of them young women were killed in the triangle shirtwaist factory fire the deadliest industrial catastrophe in manhattan for decades.
eventually the triangle shirtwaist fire led to new industrial regulations and important labor reforms.
at the time however when devastated husbands parents friends and relatives lined up at the makeshift morgue on twenty sixth street to try to identify the bodies only the terrible loss seemed real.
bread and roses the lawrence strike of 1912 a few months after the triangle fire on new years day 1912 a new massachusetts law limited the work week to 54 hours a cut from the 56 hour norm in the mills of lawrence.
the management of the mill companies complied with the law and cut wages accordingly.
they saw little reason to worry about any protest.
the workers of lawrence spoke 45 different languages and were divided into different crafts less than one in ten was a union member.
cutting their pay seemed both prudent and low risk.
but when the pay cuts appeared in the pay envelopes workers immediately started to walk off the job.
an estimated 14 000 workers were on strike by the end of the first day.
in response to the strikers spontaneous action the iww then at the height of its influence sent some of its top organizers to lawrence.
they planned smaller meetings by language groups and large rallies on the lawrence common.
to get around a city ordinance that banned gatherings in front of any of the mills the strikers devised a new tactic a moving picket line in which strikers did not stop but kept walking in a continuous line around the mill.
when iww leaders were accused of putting women in the front lines the iwws elizabeth gurley flynn responded the iww has been accused of putting the women in the front.
the truth is the iww does not keep them in the back and they go to the front at some point in the strike when women with their babies in their arms marched through the streets of lawrence with signs reading we want bread and roses too the strike was given a new name.
the public generally supported the strikers and the mill owners eventually agreed to an increase in salary and no discrimination against strikers.
the bread and roses strike was a success probably the greatest success in the iwws short history.
ludlow colorado 1914 in the mountains of southern colorado brutal working conditions persisted in the coal mines that were owned by john d rockefeller.
on september 15 1913 delegates from the mining camps gathered at trinidad colorado and voted for a strike demanding recognition for their union a 10 percent increase in wages an 8 hour day the right to elect those who would weigh the coal free choice of stores and doctors chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change chapter 30 entering a new time 895 chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 229 10 1 land granted to indians west of the mississippi river date and route of removal map 10 1 indian removal.
while indian removal began with the forced relocation of the sac and fox tribes from illinois and iowa by far the largest relocation of tribes took place when the five indian nations who were living in large territories in georgia alabama florida and mississippi were forced far to the west to the newly created indian territory.
catharine beecher a reformer associated with many causes organized women across the northwest to defend indian rights and flooded congress with petitions.
missionaries campaigned against the bill so vigorously that georgia sentenced two of them to prison at hard labor for refusing to abandon the indians.
in the senate theodore frelinghuysen of new jersey long a supporter of protestant missionaries and reform efforts led the opposition to the indian removal bill.
frelinghuysen insisted that the government was bound by its treaties and that if need be should use the u s army to force georgia to retract its claims to the indian lands.
henry clay who had not previously spoken in favor of indian rights joined the antiremoval forces.
in the end the removal bill passed the senate 28 to 19 but passed the house by only a 102 98 vote.
among those voting no was congressman davy crockett of tennessee who called the bill oppression with a vengeance but jackson signed the law may 28 1830 making half a century of treaties void.
the tribes would have to move.
while all of the tribes resisted negotiated and ultimately had to surrender the cherokees went to u s courts to assert their claims to their lands.
initially 276 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 10 1 american voices perspectives on indian removal 1818 1829 10 j mericans responded differently to president andrew jackson s plan to remove american indians from the old southwest to reservations west of the mississippi.
most whites in georgia and many elsewhere applauded.
in the north many opposed indian removal and catharine beecher organized a petition campaign in which women petitioned congress to stop what they saw as an immoral process.
not surprisingly most cherokees t like the other tribes involved also opposed removal.
writing a s decade before jackson s speech cherokee women demanded that the tribal elders not cede land to the united states.
the following i three documents represent three different american voices.
andrew jackson message to congress december8 1829 statements of residents of steubenville ohio february 15 1830 cherokee women s petition june 30 1818 the condition and ulterior destiny of the indian tribes within the limits of some of our states have become objects of much interest and importance.
it has long been the policy of government to introduce among them the arts of civilization in the hope of gradually reclaiming them from a wandering life.
this policy has however been coupled with another wholly incompatible with its success.
professing a desire to civilize and settle them we have at the same time lost no opportunity to purchase their lands and thrust them farther into the wilderness.
by this means they have not only been kept in a wandering state but been led to look upon us as unjust and indifferent to their fate our ancestors found them the uncontrolled possessors of these vast regions.
by persuasion and force they have been made to retire from river to river and from mountain to mountain until some of the tribes have become extinct and others have left but remnants to preserve for awhile their once terrible names humanity and national honor demand that every effort should be made to avert so great a calamity as a means of effecting this end 1 suggest for your consideration the propriety of setting apart an ample district west of the mississippi and without the limits of any state or territory now formed to be guaranteed to the indian tribes as long as they shall occupy it each tribe having a distinct control over the portion designated for its use.
there they may be secured in the enjoyment of governments of their own choice subject to no other control from the united states than such as may be necessary to preserve peace on the frontier and between the several tribes that your memorialists are deeply impressed with the belief that the present crisis in the affairs of the indian nations calls loudly on all who can feel for the woes of humanity it is readily acknowledged that the wise and venerated founders of our country s free institutions have committed the powers of government to those whom nature and reason declare the best fitted to exercise them and your memorialists would sincerely deprecate any presumptuous interference on the part of their own sex with the ordinary political affairs of the country as wholly unbecoming the character of american females yet all admit that there are times when duty and affection call on us to advise and persuade as well as to cheer or to console.
and if we approach the public representatives of our husbands and brothers only in the humble character of suppliants in the cause of mercy and humanity may we not hope that even the small voice of female sympathy will be heard.
in despite of the undoubted natural right which the indians have to the land of their forefathers and in the face of solemn treaties pledging the faith of the nation for their secure possession of those lands it is intended we are told to force them from their native soil and to compel them to seek new homes in a distant and dreary wilderness.
to you then as the constitutional protectors of the indians within our territory and as the peculiar guardians of our national character and our country s welfare we solemnly and earnestly appeal to save this remnant of a much injured people from annihilation to shield our country from the curses denounced on the cruel and ungrateful and to shelter the american character from lasting dishonor.
we have called a meeting among ourselves to consult on the different points now before the council relating to our national affairs.
we have heard with painful feelings that the bounds of the land we now possess are to be drawn into very narrow limits.
the land was given to us by the great spirit above as our common right to raise our children upon to make support for our rising generations.
we therefore humbly petition our beloved children the head men warriors to hold out to the last in support of our common right as the cherokee nation have been the first settlers of this land we therefore claim the right to the soil.
we well remember that our country was formerly very extensive but by repeated sales it has become circumscribed to the very narrow limits we have at present.
our father the president advised us to become farmers to manufacture our own clothes to have our children instructed.
to this advice we have attended in everything as far as we were able.
now the thought of being compelled to remove to the other side of the mississippi is dreadful to us because it appears to us that we by this removal shall be brought to a savage state again for we have by the endeavor of our father the president become too much enlightened to throw aside the privileges of a civilized life.
we therefore unanimously join in our meeting to hold our country in common as hitherto.
some of our children have become christians.
we have missionary schools among us.
we have h e ard the gospel in our nation.
we have become civilized enlightened are in hopes that in a few years our nation will be prepared for instruction in other branches of sciences arts which are both useful necessary in civilized society sources andrew jackson annual message to congress december 8 1829 messages and papers of the presidents ed.
j d richardson national archives and records administration 1896 ii 456 459 dec 8 1829 ladies of steubenville ohio petition against indian removal february 15 1830 ellen skinner women and the national experience sources in women s history third edition boston prentice hall 1996 pp 42 143 petition of nancy ward and other cherokee women to the united states congress 19 818 in karen l kilcup editor native american women s writings 1800 1924 an anthology malden ma blackwell 2000 pp.
continued chapter 18 murphy knew they had to do something or lose the support of families who had lost so many daughters and sons in the fire.
murphy directed wagner and smith to sponsor the creation of the new york factory investigating commission which the legislature approved within 3 months.
where tammany controlled police officers had harassed striking garment workers only months before the tammany created factory investigating commission hired some of the same strikers to investigate conditions in the citys garment industries where they found unsafe and unworkable fire escapes and locked exits.
a social worker frances perkins who had witnessed the triangle fire was one of many to volunteer her services to the factory investigating commission.
perkins also wrote much of the legislation that came from the commissions work.
in the 2 years wagner and smith working closely with perkins pushed 36 measures through the new york legislature including those requiring sprinklers in high rise buildings fire drills in large shops unlocked exits and a reorganization of the state department of labor to enforce the new regulations.
later these new yorkers would bring progressive legislation to a national stage.
frances perkins served as the head of the state s department of labor and then from 1933 to 1945 as the u s secretary of labor the first woman to serve in a chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 19 1 j j 19 2 w presidential cabinet.
robert wagner went to washington as a u s senator where he sponsored legislation creating the social security system and legislation guaranteeing unemployment insurance and workers compensation.
in addition he sponsored the wagner act which gave labor unions the right to bargain effectively the most important piece of labor legislation enacted in the united states in the 1900s.
al smith served as a progressive governor of new york in the 1920s and as the democratic nominee for u s president in 1928 the first catholic nominated by a major party.
progressive reform had influenced one of the most powerful political machines tammany and in turn tammany had cultivated powerfully effective legislators who generated historic reforms.
progressive education in 1899 john dewey wrote the school and society describing what he thought a progressive approach to education should be one that he had tried to create with his wife alice chapman dewey and ella flagg young a chicago teacher leader who would later be superintendent of schools in chicago the first woman to lead a big city system.
together they opened the laboratory school at the university of chicago in 1896 a child centered approach.
for dewey and others the focus was not on structure at all but on the child.
these child centered progressives wanted to shift the emphasis in schools from the curriculum to the needs of the child.
progressive education meant many different things to different people and dewey represented only one aspect of it.
other educators who also called themselves progressives argued bitterly with him.
for some progressive education meant reorganizing schools to be more business like with centralized administrations and bureaucratic top down modes of decision making.
progressive teachers wanted to restructure schools to give themselves more voice and more influence while also earning better pay and teaching smaller classes.
for yet others the goal was to make education scientific and to use standardized testing to improve schools.
certainly in the field of education there were many movements that called themselves progressive and no one definition fit all of them.
jane addams and the settlement house movement jane addams 1860 1935 spent all of her adult life at hull house in chicago living among the city s poor.
she not only provided social services but also learned much from her neighbors.
in 1913 when jane addams had been living at hull house on halsted street in chicago for more than 20 years she summed up her belief about the role of the settlement house and all efforts to improve society.
we have learned to say she wrote that the good must be extended to all of society before it can be held secure by any one person or any one class but we have not yet learned to add to that statement that unless all men and all classes contribute to a good we cannot even be sure it is worth having while many progressives might have agreed that society must find a way to extend the good things of life to all citizens far fewer would have agreed with addams that all citizens needed to play a role in defining what good looked like.
nevertheless she held firm on both points.
at hull house social reformers met those they were trying to help in face to face encounters and all involved learned from each other.
addams was born to a comfortable life in 1860 her father was a friend of abraham lincolns and moved to chicago in 1889 when she and her friend ellen starr opened hull house.
chicagos hull house though not the first american settlement house became the model for most others.
addams said she was at hull house to be a part of the community not to offer help from above.
she knew that she was living there as much to learn as to help her economically poorer neighbors.
hull house and similar settlement houses in other cities organized badly needed social services in poor urban neighborhoods.
lillian wald and mary brewster founded the henry street settlement and the henry street visiting nurse services in new york citys lower east side.
others settlement houses including hull house did the same.
visiting nurses based in settlement houses visited the tenement apartments of the poor and brought medical help.
546 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 american voices jane addams twenty years at hull house 1910 jane addams was a younger contemporary of mother jones but from a very different background.
she and her good friend ellen starr opened hull house in one of chicago s poorest neighborhoods in september 1889 and addams lived there for the next 45 years serving successive generations of chicago s poor.
in the process she became a nationally and internationally known advocate for settlement houses and later for political reform and an end to war.
nevertheless for all of her national and international travel and fame her home and her roots remained on halsted street where she lived until she died in 1935 the next january 1889 found miss starr and myself in chicago searching for a neighborhood in which we might put our plans into execution.
in our eagerness to win friends for the new undertaking we utilized every opportunity to set forth the meaning of the settlement as it had been embodied intoynbee hall although in those days we made no appeal for money meaning to start with our own slender resources in those early days we were often asked why we had come to live on halsted street when we could afford to live somewhere else.
i remember one man who used to shake his head and say it was the strangest thing he had met in his experience but who was finally convinced that it was not strange but natural.
in time it came to seem natural to all of us that the settlement should be there.
if it is natural to feed the hungry and care for the sick it is certainly natural to give pleasure to the young comfort to the aged and to minister to the deep seated craving for social intercourse that all men feel.
whoever does it is rewarded by something which if not gratitude is at least spontaneous and vital and lacks that irksome sense of obligation with which a substantial benefit is too often acknowledged from the first it seemed understood that we were ready to perform the humblest neighborhood services.
we were asked to wash the newborn babies and to prepare the dead for burial to nurse the sick and to mind the children.
but in spite of some untoward experiences we were constantly impressed with the uniform kindness and courtesy we received.
perhaps these first days laid the simple human foundations which are certainly essential for continuous living among the poor first genuine preference for residence in an industrial quarter to any other part of the city because it is interesting and makes the human appeal and second the conviction in the words of canon barnett that the things which make men alike are finer and better than the things that keep them apart and that these basic likenesses if they are properly accentuated easily transcend the less essential differences of race language creed and tradition.
perhaps even in those first days we made a beginning toward that object which was afterward stated in our charter to provide a center for a higher civic and social life to institute and maintain educational and philanthropic enterprises and to investigate and improve the conditions in the industrial districts of chicago.
source jane addams twenty years at hull house originally published 1910.
thinking critically 1 documentary analysis why did jane addams believe that living among the poor was a central part of her mission.
2 contextualization how did addams see her relationship with the people she served.
what aspects of the progressive movement were reflected in her views.
under addams leadership hull house did more than provide services to the poor.
it also took the side of the poor in labor and legal disputes.
when addams realized that young women strikers were in danger of losing their company housing hull house launched a cooperative womens boarding house.
such direct support for strikers did not endear addams to some of chicagos most powerful leaders who were willing to tolerate even support social services but were hostile to her involvement in a strike.
nevertheless such efforts solidified her base within the communities that mattered the most to her.
quick review why were political reforms school reforms and assistance for the working class deemed necessary to improve life in american cities.
which were the most beneficial.
were some harmful.
chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 283 l 10 1 io j j 10.
5 tariff of abominations a revised federal tariff or tax on imports that lowered the tax on cotton products but raised it on many of the products made in the mid atlantic states.
the tariff not the issue of slavery brought the issue of nullification to the fore.
the tariff or tax on imported goods had been the major source of financial support since the washington administration and it had been an issue in the 1828 election in which jackson defeated adams.
as jacksons supporters prepared for that election jacksons chief advisor martin van buren realized that even though he and jackson opposed a high tariff in part because they thought the federal government needed less money and in part because the tax raised the cost of foreign made consumer products in the united states the adams clay tariff was popular in many parts of the country because it protected local industries from foreign competition and because many people liked the internal improvements like roads and canals that the tariff helped finance.
adams and clay might want to fight the 1828 election on the issue of tariffs but van buren did not.
when the adams administration suggested a new tariff van buren and his congressional allies decided to reshape it rather than oppose it.
they knew they could not win new england in the next election so they did not hesitate to modify the proposed tariff by reducing the protection for the cotton produced by new england mill owners thus allowing foreign made cotton to be sold more cheaply than might otherwise have been the case.
they also raised tariffs to protect export of products like molasses hemp iron and wool which were produced in the mid atlantic states especially in pennsylvania to woo voters there by protecting their industries and jobs from foreign competition.
the result was a tariff that raised the price of products that many americans bought from foreign sources and that angered the cotton mill owners who originally wanted the tariff but now saw the protection of their industry disappear.
the new tariff also infuriated rural interests especially southern plantation owners who saw the cost of everything they needed go up while no protection was provided to the price of the goods they produced and sold on the international market.
the 1828 tariff came to be known as the tariff of abominations because it was so uneven and obviously unfair in the industries and regions it protected but it passed congress and set the stage for a confusing presidential campaign and the crisis that followed.
planters in south carolina saw the tariff as a terrible hardship and an unfair use of federal power.
to a degree they were right.
a tax on imports raised the cost of virtually everything the planters needed.
planters claimed that 40 out of every 100 bales of cotton they produced went to pay the tariff.
this claim was an exaggeration but the tariff may have raised the cost of living in south carolina by 20 percent.
in addition planters worried that a tariff on imported goods might cause other nations to purchase less cotton either in retaliation or because with americans buying less from abroad other nations might not have had the funds to purchase american grown cotton.
with their states economy hurting public opinion in south carolina supported nullification of the tariff.
the issue of states rights versus the rights of the federal government was argued on the floor of the u s senate in january 1830 it was a debate that would be remembered for generations.
south carolina senator robert y hayne a protege of calhouns claimed that the federal government was making the north the winner and the south the loser and that the pro northern policy has invaded the state of south carolina is making war upon her citizens and endeavoring to overthrow her principles and institutions everyone understood that hayne was talking about the tariff but also the issue of slavery.
he was determined to defend the right of south carolina to nullify federal law and if still dissatisfied to secede from the union if congress ever made a move against slavery.
massachusetts senator daniel websters second reply to hayne staked out a different position.
webster pleaded for a strong federal union that no state should be allowed to undermine.
his closing line liberty and union now and forever one and inseparable became part of american lore.
hayne congratulated webster on winning the war of words though hayne never changed his mind.
14 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 in january 1830 as tensions were building over the right claimed by south carolina to nullify federal law massachusetts senator daniel webster shown here defended the priority of the federal government and the cause of the national union.
at first people wondered how the president would respond to the debate.
jackson had campaigned for reducing the federal role in peoples lives but he did not like to be crossed.
he was not elected to see the government over which he presided pushed aside.
as a military man he would not countenance mutiny.
as a politician he despised calhoun s self serving strategic maneuvering.
to the surprise of some jackson the president elected with virtually no support from new england embraced websters speech in spite of the fact that it was given by the senator from massachusetts.
four months after the hayne webster debate political leaders were asked to make toasts at a banquet.
looking directly at his vice president jackson offered a simple toast our union it must be preserved calhoun responded the union.
next to our liberty the most dear.
may we always remember that it can only be preserved by respecting the rights of the states it marked the final break between the two men.
nevertheless as strongly as jackson believed in asserting federal authority he was still prepared to compromise about the tariff itself.
the actual rate charged in the tariff mattered far less to jackson than the principle that no state had a right to nullify federal law.
a compromise seemed possible when congress convened in 1831 former president john quincy adams had been elected to the house of representatives from massachusetts the only former president in history to return to congress and the congressional leaders asked him to write a new tariff to replace the tariff of abominations.
adams took the job seriously.
he reduced the duty on goods not produced in the united states and therefore not in need of protection but retained tariffs to protect growing u s industries especially iron and cotton textiles.
he also reduced the tariff on cheap woolens which slaves wore from 45 percent to 5 percent a significant concession to the slave states.
most of the south found adamss tariff reasonable.
besides much of the cottongrowing south was prospering despite the tariff because of other jacksonian policies especially from the new land that indian removal had made available for growing cotton.
other states were in no mood to press the nullification issue.
but south carolina was different.
much of the states farmland had been exhausted by decades of overuse and its dependency on slave labor made its leaders more fearful of federal intervention in the institution of slavery than those of any other state.
led by calhoun the states leaders believed that they had to win the right to nullify the tariff to establish the larger principal that states could nullify any law.
for them the adams tariff was not enough.
in november 1832 a south carolina state convention declared that both the tariffs of 1828 and 1832 were unconstitutional and that it shall not be lawful to enforce payment of duties imposed by the said acts within the limits of this state after february 1833 they also said that the state would secede if the federal government tried to force it to back down.
the south carolina legislature elected robert hayne who had debated with webster as the governor to lead the state through these difficult times and elected calhoun to replace hayne in the senate.
calhoun would essentially be south carolinas ambassador to the federal government for the next 2 decades.
calhoun resigned as vice president in december 1832 a little more than 2 months before his term ended and returned to the senate as a member a very belligerent member.
the stage was set for a major confrontation.
in november 1832 the south carolina legislature also raised a state militia of25 000 volunteers.
jackson responded with a proclamation stating that the states vote was in direct violation of their duty as citizens of the united states according to jackson they had no right to nullify federal law and certainly not to raise their own army and chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 67 this map of new amsterdam just at the time the english first took control note the english flag flying on the fort shows the site of the fort at the tip of manhattan and the british ships off shore.
substantial debt that the king owed to the penn family.
king charles ii repaid the debt in the form of land in north america.
but while william penn inherited both fortune and royal connections unlike his admiral father he was a member of a dissident religious community known as quakers because they supposedly trembled quaked at the name of god.
quakers broke with much of the traditional theology and religious practice of the day.
when they gathered for worship quakers sat in silence until someone was moved by the spirit to speak.
they did not have formal clergy and gave women equal standing with men in their community known as the society of friends.
in addition they were absolute pacifists who would not serve in the military.
because of their refusal to serve in the military and attend the services of the church of england they were constantly in legal trouble.
penn himself was briefly jailed for following quaker practices.
penn received his land grant from king charles ii in 1681 and the next year he sailed to pennsylvania and founded philadelphia the city of brotherly love.
penn recruited settlers widely in britain and on the european continent especially in germany.
by 1700 18 000 europeans had arrived.
in keeping with his quaker beliefs penn insisted on peaceful trade with the indians.
although he had been granted land from the king penn also paid the indians for their land.
during his lifetime pennsylvania was generally a peaceful place.
tribes from other colonies found a new home there.
despite all of his commitment to peace with the indians penn did not outlaw slavery in his colony.
as early as 1684 2 years after its founding 150 african slaves arrived in philadelphia.
slaves quickly came to have a key role as household servants and by the early 1700s slaves made up one sixth of the citys population.
in rural communities slaves worked in iron furnaces mines tanneries salt works and on farms.
penn tried to create a prosperous colony based on high ideals.
but he was also an aristocrat who held absolute power.
by the 1690s many in the colony including quakers who appreciated their religious freedom demanded more political freedom.
in 1701 penn reluctantly agreed to a charter of liberties that established an elected legislature though the legislature and the penn family would continue to argue until the beginnings of the american revolution.
the 1701 charter also allowed the three most southern counties of pennsylvania to create their own assembly which became the core of the separate colony of delaware.
the first europeans to settle in delaware were from sweden and finland creating the small new sweden colony at fort christina todays wilmington delaware in 1638.
68 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 the dutch of new amsterdam conquered the colony in 1655 before themselves being defeated by the english in 1664 the area was included in the land grant given to william penn but its separate history and geographical distance limited its relationship to the rest of pennsylvania.
carolina south of virginia the land was contested between england and spain to say nothing of the indian tribes who lived there.
but england meant to claim the area.
soon after coming to the throne charles ii rewarded eight of his supporters and sought to secure englands land claims by creating a colony named carolina based on the latin for charles.
the proprietors developed an elaborate system of government that prescribed a hierarchical society with themselves at the top followed by the local gentry then poor white servants with african slaves at the bottom.
the city of charles town later charleston became the colonys capital.
carolina was a divided colony.
in the north most of the settlers were relatively poor white farmers from virginia.
farther south large scale rice growing created a rich colony.
much of the colonys commercial success focused on the city and harbor at charleston and on trade with the british caribbean colonies especially barbados.
many of the early immigrants were from barbados both wealthy europeans who became the elite of the mainland colony and african slaves who did the actual work of the rice farming.
following the model of barbados in the caribbean which depended on plantations to grow sugarcane the southern part of carolina became one of the earliest plantation economies on the mainland of north america.
the split between the north and south was formalized when king george ii officially divided the colony into north and south carolina in 1729 although this painting was done long after the 1682 treaty shown here was concluded it portrays penn s commitment to negotiate with the tribes in pennsylvania including these negotiations to purchase the land on which philadelphia was built.
georgia the last english colony that would later be part of the united states was georgia founded in 1733 for idealistic reasons.
james oglethorpe a war hero in england wanted to create a place where the poorest of englands poor those in debtors prisons because they could not repay what they owed could find new lives.
oglethorpe also believed that england needed a strong frontier colony on the border with spanish florida.
these settlers people whose alternative might well be prison would be inspired to be not only farmers but also soldiers within this frontier border.
given this focus oglethorpe excluded catholics who might be secretly loyal to catholic spain and africans free or slave since they might be tempted to run away.
with georgia the 13 colonies that went on to unite in 1776 were in place.
africans and indentured servants in england s colonies in 1619 a dutch ship arrived at jamestown.
john rolfe anxious to expand the work force for his tobacco farm traded food supplies to the dutch in return for 20 african slaves.
rolfes 1619 purchase of other humans is usually given as the date for the begin ning of slavery in what is now the united states.
in fact the spanish had african slaves in florida during the 1500s see chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 55 effectively and certainly suppress free competition and ordered the northern security trust broken up into competing lines.
from then on roosevelt would be known as the trustbuster and he liked the title.
roosevelt kept up the pressure for change.
in a series of speeches in the summer of 1902 he told audiences the great corporations which we have grown to speak of rather loosely as trusts are the creatures of the state and the state not only has the right to control them but it is in duty bound to control them wherever need of such control is shown his natural inclination to expand the governments power to supervise corporations was supported by many in congress and by muckraking publications like mcclures which roosevelt may have disliked but which nonetheless provided him with new ammunition with every issue.
roosevelt wanted a new cabinet level department of commerce with investigative authority a ban on secret deals between railroads and specific companies of the sort that launched rockefellers oil empire and additional funds for the department of justice to expedite antitrust cases.
ironically once roosevelt had won his northern securities victory and gained the tools that congress gave him he did not pursue many other antitrust cases.
the taft and wilson administrations would use the new tools more than roosevelt himself.
the president had made his point.
as was often the case during his 7 years in office having done so he moved on to other issues.
conservation in nature as a child theodore roosevelt was a birdwatcher and developed an intense love of nature.
years later he walked into a cabinet meeting and asked gentlemen do you know what has happened this morning the members of the cabinet waited for important news.
roosevelt told them just now i saw a chestnut sided warbler and this is only february the birds did not usually appear in washington on their return from central america until much later in the spring.
while roosevelt loved nature watched birds and as president saved thousands of acres of land from development he was also an avid hunter who loved to shoot bear cougar or just about anything in the wilderness.
however on one bear hunt in 1902 roosevelt refused to shoot a bear that had been captured and tied to a tree so the president could have the honor of the shot.
he was happy to kill many other bears on real hunts but attacking a tied up bear was unsportsmanlike.
his refusal made national news and sparked a new craze fostered by the steiff and ideal toy companies a new toy known as a teddy bear in honor of the president who would not shoot one.
just before he became vice president roosevelt published the strenuous life in which he argued that americans were getting far too little time to replenish their bodies and souls in the great outdoors.
but the strenuous life in nature that he advocated was only possible if the wilderness and the wildlife were preserved for future generations to enjoy.
once he became president roosevelt combined all of this considerable enthusiasm for nature with his political skill to become perhaps the most conservation minded of any president.
although a keenly passionate advocate roosevelt was not however the first president to care about conservation.
harrison cleveland and mckinley all set aside federal lands for permanent parks and both yellowstone and the grand canyon were federal reserves before roosevelt took office.
but from roosevelts perspective too few animals were protected too little land had been put aside and too little was being done to protect the environment.
even though his attack on the trusts got most of the headlines a short line in trs december 1901 message to congress said the preservation of our forests is an imperative business necessity people like his friend gifford pinchot and members of the audubon and sierra clubs cheered.
western senators were furious at an attack on the prime source of wealth in their states.
again some hoped that it was a mere rhetorical flourish.
they soon learned differently.
when roosevelt came to the presidency in 1901 43 million acres of land were included in u s forest reserves.
when he left office in 1909 that number had increased more than fourfold to 194 million acres.
34 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 roosevelt also professionalized the protection of nature.
he wrote that the nation as a whole should earnestly desire and strive to leave to the next generation the national honor unstained and the national resources unexhausted and only new conservation efforts would preserve either honor or resources.
he appointed a former rough rider david e warford as a federal forest ranger with authority to protect the 4 15 million acres of federal land in arizona and colorado.
he nominated gifford pinchot who shared the presidents commitment to be head of the division of forestry and later head of the u s forest service in the department of the interior and gave him an absolutely free hand between 1906 and 1908 roosevelt used or misused as his critics said authority given to him by the antiquities act of 1906 to declare a 295 acre stand of giant redwood trees just north of san francisco as muir woods national monument 800 000 acres in arizona as the grand canyon national monument and 2 500 acres later expanded to 26 000 acres as the pinnacles national monument in california.
he also set aside the natural bridges national monument in utah and a dozen other similar monuments ensuring that the land would never pass into private hands see map 19 2.
the presidents continued expansion of the amount of land protected by the federal government provoked resistance in congress.
in early 1907 senator charles w fulton a republican from oregon attached an amendment to the department of agricultures appropriations bill that said that no further forest reserves or expansions of reserves could be created within six western states without an act of congress.
when the bill reached the president he had 10 days to sign it or risk having no funds to operate the department of agriculture.
roosevelt quickly approved a total of 21 new forest reserves in the six states medicine bow forest in colorado priest river forest in idaho and washington toiyabe forest in nevada blue mountain in oregon and hawaii volcano 1916 191 pacific ocean national parks with date of initial protection and date of current designation national forests atlantic ocean biscayne 1968 1980 everglades 1934 map 19 2 major national parks.
while the federal government claimed ownership of much of the land in the west no president matched theodore roosevelt in setting aside large tracts of that land as national parks and forests so it would be preserved for future generations rather than be sold or developed.
r a a drnnmrci a pnlitirc olympic and rainier forests in washington.
when the paperwork creating these new forests was done roosevelt then signed the agriculture bill with fultons amendment saying that no additional forests would be created.
roosevelt and african americans one of roosevelts first moves as president was to invite booker t washington the countrys best known african american to the white house for a meeting and then in october 1901 for dinner with the president and his family.
no african american had ever before eaten a meal as a guest at the white house.
roosevelt was making a very public statement about race relations in the united states.
he was also taking a first step toward securing a full term as elected president for himself.
booker t washington controlled a block of delegates to the republican nominating conventions since even though blacks could not vote in the segregated south of roosevelts day they could and did win election as delegates to national republican nominating conventions.
although neither roosevelt nor washington discussed the dinner in public the press made a great deal of the evening.
while some reports were positive papers like the memphis scimitar called the dinner the most damnable outrage which has ever been perpetrated by any citizen of the united states for the rest of his 7 years in the white house roosevelt had a decidedly mixed record on african american concerns.
he did not mention black disenfranchisement or lynching in his first presidential message to congress.
however in his 1906 annual message to congress he said the members of the white race should understand that every lynching represents by just so much a loosening of the bands of civilization they were important words though with too little follow up.
in symbolic ways the white house dinner and speeches on lynching roosevelt did more to support african americans than several of his predecessors or successors.
in comparison to the energy he gave to other issues he considered important however his track record was certainly lackluster.
roosevelt s continuing popularity roosevelts obvious joy at life and enjoyment of the presidency was infectious.
people loved having a young and enthusiastic chief executive.
a friend once said of roosevelt that he wanted to be the bride at every wedding and the corpse at every funeral roosevelts large family brought life and vitality to the previously staid white house.
alice daughter of his first marriage was a young adult who flirted with and charmed everyone she met including ohio congressman nicholas longworth whom she married in a white house wedding.
she would continue to charm washington society for the next three quarters of a century.
the president and ediths younger children ted kermit ethel archie and quentin played at the white house chasing rabbits on the white house grounds marching with the white house police and riding bicycles on the lawn and occasionally down the stairs.
in 1904 the republicans easily nominated roosevelt for a full term.
having lost with bryan in 1896 and 1900 democrats were looking for a fresh face and nominated alton b parker chief justice of the new york court of appeals.
it was not a close contest.
parker was a colorless candidate but it is unlikely that any democrat could have won.
republicans were the countrys major party and roosevelts energy carried the day.
he won by a landslide.
after his reelection roosevelts popularity only grew and he and everyone knew that he could easily win a third term or as his daughter alice kept saying a second elected term if he were a candidate in 1908 nevertheless he had promised himself and the country in 1904 that he would not seek a third term saying as he claimed victory in november 1904 the wise custom which limits the president to two terms regards the substance and not the form as 1908 approached the president was tempted to break the pledge but did not.
roosevelts goal in 1908 was to find a part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 556 candidate who would carry on the policies that he had championed.
he thought he had found just the right candidate in secretary of war william howard taft.
taft wins taft loses the elections of 1908 and 1912 william howard taft who had served as a federal district court judge in ohio before becoming governor general of the philippines and then secretary of war would have loved an appointment to the supreme court one he finally won in 1921 when warren harding appointed him.
but in 1908 roosevelt had picked taft as the successor most likely to continue his programs and once roosevelt had made up his mind there was little that taft or anyone else could do to stop him.
having failed miserably with the conservative alton parker in the 1904 election the democrats returned to william jennings bryan for a third try for the white house.
the socialist party was also growing in strength and their candidate eugene v debs made a respectable showing.
but the election was never really in doubt and taft won easily on the promise to continue roosevelts progressivism.
tafts administration tafts policies not surprisingly given their very different personalities tensions between the outgoing and the incoming president began even before tafts inauguration.
roosevelt expected taft to keep most of the existing cabinet taft wanted some of his own people.
most disappointing to the conservationist roosevelt taft replaced secretary of the interior james r garfield an ardent conservationist with richard a ballinger a seattle lawyer and former reform mayor who was more interested in exploiting public lands than conserving them.
nevertheless taft kept gifford pinchot on at the u s forest service and roosevelt sailed for africa soon after the inauguration confident that the country was in good hands.
taft kept a key roosevelt taft pledge and called congress into special session in early 1909 to lower the nations tariff rates.
ida tarbell one of the best known muckraking journalists insisted that the poor could not afford warm clothing because of the high tariff charged on imported wool and many economists felt that overly high tariffs were protecting industries that no longer needed protection.
income and inheritance taxes seemed more equitable ways to pay for the government.
but not everyone in congress agreed especially rhode island senator nelson aldrich and house speaker joe cannon.
new york representative sereno payne proposed reducing the tariff rates and substituting an income tax.
but when the bill reached the senate aldrich dropped the income tax and revised the tariffs up significantly.
aldrich acknowledged that the republican platform had promised to revise the tariff but he asked where did we ever make the statement that we would revise the tariff downward everyone knew that the downward revision had been the promise but it was not the outcome.
even most moderate republicans criticized the payne aldrich tariff but taft signed the bill.
when congress later passed bills to lower the tariff on cotton wool steel and iron taft vetoed them.
in the process he built an alliance with the conservative aldrich wing of the party losing the support of many roosevelt progressives.
while roosevelt was in africa word came to him in january 1910 that taft had fired pinchot.
pinchot wrote to the former president we have fallen back down the hill you led us up the tariff might be abstract to roosevelt but conservation was the issue nearest and dearest to him and pinchot was the agent tr had counted on to keep the movement alive in the new administration.
on many fronts taft kept his pledge to carry out roosevelts policies in some cases with more vigor than tr had ever shown.
it was taft not roosevelt who decreed an 8 hour workday for government employees and who advocated the sixteenth amendment to the constitution passed in 1913 to ensure that federal income taxes could be collected.
in addition taft was a far tougher trustbuster than roosevelt breaking up john d rockefellers standard oil company and bringing more antitrust suits in his 4 years than roosevelt did in 7 chapter 19.
however the african american community never accepted segregation or second class citizenship and in the 1950s it seemed as if african american resistance to separate but equal burst forth in many different places at about the same time see map 25 3.
legal challenges to school segregation that had been building for decades achieved a major victory in 1954 soon thereafter long simmering opposition to segregation in public transportation led to a year long bus boycott in montgomery alabama.
meanwhile young african americans and some white supporters sat in at segregated lunch counters organized voter registration drives and found themselves considering significant alternatives to american culture.
brown v board of education a supreme court decision in 1954 declaring that separate but equal schools for children of different races violated the constitution.
the long road to brown v board of education on may 17 1954 the united states supreme court announced its unanimous decision in the legal challenge to the racial segregation of public schools a case known as brown v board of education.
chief justice earl warren wrote we conclude that in the field of public education the doctrine of separate but equal has no place.
separate educational facilities are inherently unequal.
it had been a long road to the day of that finding.
the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp though founded in 1909 was often only whispered in black communities in the south throughout the 1930s 1940s and 1950s.
in the early 1950s anne moody then a high school student in centerville mississippi asked her homeroom teacher what naacp meant.
the teacher said you see the naacp is trying to do a lot for the negroes and get the right to vote for negroes in the south she also warned moody i shouldnt be telling you all of this it could cost me my job the teacher was gone the following year.
in the 1930s the naacp began to challenge state separate but equal laws bypassing state legislatures and governors with federal court cases arguing that the separate facilities were in fact far from equal.
two brilliant lawyers took charge of the naacp legal effort charles hamilton houston then dean of the howard university law school and his former student thurgood marshall.
when houston retired in 1938 marshall then just 30 years old became the naacp chief counsel a position he held for 23 years.
in 1961 marshall was appointed as a federal judge serving on the u s court of appeals and from 1967 to 1991 he served as the first appointed african american justice of the u s supreme court.
the houston marshall strategy at the naacp was to chip away at segregation.
in a 1938 case missouri ex rel.
gaines v canada registrar of the university et al the u s supreme court ruled that lloyd gaines could not be rejected by the university of missouri law school on the basis of his race unless the university could offer him an equally good legal education within the state of missouri.
to offer legal education to whites but not to blacks or to force blacks to leave the state for their education chief justice hughes said is a denial of the equality of legal right in alston v school board of the city of norfolk in 1940 the naacp won a ruling that said separate salary schedules for black and white teachers violated the fourteenth amendment.
in 1950 the court issued two rulings.
in sweatt v painter it said that separate law schools for blacks and whites were not equal and in mclaurin v oklahoma state regents it ruled that segregating graduate students violated their equal protection rights.
with each case segregation was becoming more expensive for states to maintain and the arena 732 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 in brown v ihe topeka board of education the u s supreme court ruled in 1954 that public school segregation was unconstitutional topeka kansas president eisenhower ordered troops to enforce the intergration of central high school in 1957 oklahoma routes of 1961 freedom rides core congress on racial equality route from washington d c to birmingham alabama sncc student nonviolent coordinating committee route from birmingham alabama to jackson mississippi map 25 3 civil rights events 1953 1963 most of the major events of the civil rights movement took place in the states of the south.
some are indicated in this map.
nebraska in 1962 james meredith integrated j the university of mississippi texas in 1955 the murder of i emmett till age 14 by i whites drew national attention in which it could be exercised smaller.
the time was coming for a direct challenge to plessy v ferguson the 1896 decision by which the supreme court had originally approved separate but equal arrangements.
while the naacp lawyers were winning cases students at the all black r r morton high school in farmville virginia called a strike to protest conditions at their school in 1951 although the white school in farmville had comfortable facilities some classes at r r.
morton were held in tar paper shacks students had to wear coats to keep warm and the teachers had to gather wood for the wood stoves.
the authorities had long promised new facilities but construction was continually postponed.
only after going on strike did the students appeal to the naacp.
the national organization sent word that they would consider taking the case but only if the challenge was for completely integrated schools.
the students agreed and called on the adults in their community to follow them.
thus was launched one of the five cases that would be consolidated as brown v board of education.
the five states whose policies were challenged in the naacp suit hired the 1924 democratic presidential nominee john w davis as their attorney to defend the separate but equal policies.
however the supreme court agreed with the naacps argument that separate education always violated the 14th amendments guarantee of the equal protection of the laws the unanimous 1954 decision said we come then to the question presented does segregation of children in public schools solely on the basis of race even though the physical facilities and other tangible factors may be equal deprive the children of the minority group of the equal educational opportunities.
we believe that it does.
there were those who thought that with the brown decision the battle was over.
many years later kenneth clark whose testimony was central to the case recalled ruefully how naive i was i thought that within ten years or so america would be free of it i expected southern states to resist but i thought that their resistance would decrease and that we were on the road to some sort of functional democracy.
it would take much more.
chapter review how progressive was the progressive era.
include the work of individuals government policy and philosophy in your answer.
chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 79 1 i 33 fear of hostile tribes and of being captured by the spanish led joliet and marquette to turn back before reaching the mouth of the mississippi.
on the return trip they visited other indian villages including a miami indian village of checagou or chicago.
joliet returned to quebec to report and draw maps of their travels.
marquette continued his missionary work until he died in 1675 what would some two centuries later become the midwest of the united states was first described for europeans and mapped by these two explorers.
while the authorities in france wanted to strengthen the settlements in the st lawrence river valley surrounding montreal and quebec before expanding further governor frontenac had no patience with such caution.
in young robert de la salle he found a perfect ally for exploring the mississippi valley.
la salle led a much larger expedition than that of joliet and marquette down the illinois and mississippi rivers in 1679 la salles goals were to build an alliance with the illinois and other tribes against the iroquois and to establish a permanent french presence throughout the mississippi valley.
in 1681 1682 he and his men traveled down the mississippi to the gulf of mexico.
in the name of king louis xiv he claimed possession of this country of louisiana and of the seas harbors ports bays adjacent straits and all the nations peoples provinces cities towns villages mines minerals fisheries streams and rivers within it it was a claim to more than one third of north america.
not content with reaching the mouth of the mississippi la salle then continued as far west on the gulf of mexico as texas.
eventually he pushed his followers too hard and some of them murdered him in 1687 american voices journal of the voyage of father jacques gravier of the society of jesus jesuits in 1700 from the country of the illinois to the mouth of the mississippi river the jesuit relations was a publication that gave regular reports on jesuit missionary work and provided an extraordinary glimpse of the countryside and of the people who lived together along the mississippi from modern day wisconsin to the gulf of mexico between the 1690s and the mid 1700s.
i started in 1700 on the 8th of september to come here i was accompanied by 5 canoes manned by frenchmen we made only 4 leagues the 1 st day because one of our canoes was split by a snag hidden in the water and we had to halt in order to repair it i embarked in my canoe to visit monsieur davion a missionary priest who was sick in his mission 3 different languages are spoken the lakou with 30 cabins the ounspik with 10 or 12 cabins and thetoumika who are in 7 hamlets consisting in all of 50 or 60 small cabins another village is on the crest of a steep mountain precipitous on all sides.
there are 80 cabins in it and in the middle of the village is a fine and very level open space where from morning to night young men exercise themselves.
they run after a flat stone which they throw in the air from one end of the square to the other and try to make it fall on two cylinders which they roll wherever they think the stone will fall.
there is nothing fine about the temple except the vestibule which is embellished with the most pleasant and best executed grotesque figures that one can see the old man who keeps up the fire the name of which he told us was louak ouloughe the sacred fire.
since we have left the natches we have lived only on indian corn with a few squashes for it is a long time since either wild oxen deer or bears have been seen in this quarter and if we have found a few bustards or wild geese they have been so lean that they were as tasteless as wood this has caused our canoemen very often to sigh for the river of the illinois and the beauty of the country and of the landing places and for the numbers of wild oxen and deer and all kinds of fat and excellent game.
the navigation of the mississippi is very slow and tedious and very difficult especially in ascending it.
it is also very troublesome on account of the gnats and other insects called mosquitoes midges and black flies at last on the 17th of december i reached fort mississippi after 68 days of navigation in descending the river the commandant monsieur de bienville has there a small and very neat house.
source reuben gold thwaites editor travels and explorations of the jesuit missionaries in new france 1610 1791 vol.
lxv lower canada mississippi valley 1696 1702 cleveland the burrows brothers 1900 pp.
101 105 127 129 145 147 159 161 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what kinds of communities did father gravier encounter on his journey.
2 historical interpretation what does father gravier s account suggest about the nature of french settlement along the mississippi river in 1700.
ml 80 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 other french explorers and settlers followed in la salles wake.
working independently french trappers and traders known as coureurs de bois or runners of the woods established relationships with various native american tribes and brought wealth back to new france.
some of them established a base called fort arkansas at the confluence of the arkansas and mississippi rivers.
french jesuits built a mission at chicago.
inl698 the bishop of quebec appointed missionary priests to a new mission at the natchez post on the arkansas river.
the french communities that dotted the mississippi in the late 1600s and early 1700s were small.
they included american indians and french trappers families and missionaries.
but they were there to stay.
creating the french gulf coast biloxi mobile and new orleans as a result of the reports from explorers and missionaries louis xiv decided to secure the french claim to the mouth of the mississippi.
pierre dlbreville was commissioned in 1698 to scout the area.
diberville landed on the east bank of the mississippi river and built a fort near a bilochi indian settlement which came to be called biloxi.
diberville and his crew moved up the mississippi river until they found a trail connecting the mississippi to lake ponchartrain and promised to return.
to his surprise diberville also found a group of free blacks who were living with indians and who did not take kindly to the arrival of europeans.
queen annes war of 1702 1713 see chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 395 american voices susie king taylor reminiscences of my life in camp 1862 susie king taylor 1848 1912 published her autobiography long after the civil war but her memories of the war and the rumors of freedom that arrived in advance of the reality remained vivid.
taylor was born in rural georgia but lived in savannah as a child where she attended a secret and illegal school for slaves and learned to read and write.
soon after her trip to st simon s island and freedom with the union army she opened a school for other newly freed slaves and later taught black troops to read and write while also serving as a nurse.
i was born under the slave law in georgia in 1848 and was brought up by my grandmother in savannah.
there were three of us with her my younger sister and brother.
my brother and i being the two eldest we were sent to a friend of my grandmother mrs woodhouse a widow to learn to read and write.
she was a free woman and lived on bay lane between habersham and price streets about half a mile from my house.
we went every day about nine o clock with our books wrapped in paper to prevent the police or white persons from seeing them.
we went in one at a time through the gate into the yard to the l kitchen which was the schoolroom.
she had twenty five or thirty children whom she taught assisted by her daughter mary jane about this time i had been reading so much about the yankees i was very anxious to see them.
the whites would tell their colored people not to go to the yankees for they would harness them to carts and make them pull the carts around in place of horses.
i asked grandmother one day if this was true.
she replied certainly not.
that the white people did not want slaves to go over to the yankees and told them these things to frighten them.
don t you see those signs pasted about the streets.
one reading i am a rattlesnake if you touch me i will strike.
another reads i am a wild cat.
beware etc.
these are warnings to the north so don t mind what the white people say.
i wanted to see these wonderful yankees so much as i heard my parents say the yankee was going to set all the slaves free on april 1 1862 about the time the union soldiers were firing on fort pulaski i was sent out into the country to my mother.
i remember what a roar and din the guns made.
they jarred the earth for miles.
the fort was at last taken by them.
two days after the taking of fort pulaski my uncle took his family of seven and myself to st catherine island.
we landed under the protection of the union fleet and remained there two weeks when about thirty of us were taken aboard the gunboat p to be transferred to st simon s island and at last to my unbounded joy i saw the yankee.
source susie king taylor reminiscences of my life in camp with the 33d united states colored troops late 1 st s c volunteers boston published by the author 1902 pp.
10 12 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what steps did taylor s family take to prepare her for freedom.
2 historical interpretation what does this document tell you about the priorities of enslaved african americans as freedom approached.
what might explain the importance they attached to education.
ini white officers.
in rural franklin country pennsylvania not far from the mason dixon line 45 free black men signed up for the fifty fourth regiment and more joined the fifty fifth.
most free blacks who volunteered for service were from the lowest rungs of the economy including thomas burgess a carpenter joseph christy a woodcutter and hezekiah watson and thomas cuff quarrymen.
the bounties paid to all soldiers for joining and the subsequent pay mattered to poor families black or white.
the opportunity to fight for freedom mattered even more to black soldiers.
in spring 1863 black soldiers in louisiana fought hard and rescued white troops who faced defeat turning what could have been defeat into a victory.
at fort wagner south carolina the fifty fourth massachusetts regiment lost half its number including its white commander robert gould shaw after requesting the right to be first in the assault.
after those encounters many shared secretary of war stantons view that these troops were among the bravest of the brave in fighting for the union their bravery convinced some including lincoln that they were as deserving as any whites not only of their freedom but also of the right to vote and participate equally in the political process.
black soldiers also demanded and eventually got equal treatment within the army.
officers were told that any soldier whatever his rank who mistreated freedmen would be dismissed.
the militia act of 1862 set the pay of black soldiers at the level of military laborers on the assumption that their work would be behind the lines.
as their role changed black soldiers demanded equal pay.
soldiers in the massachusetts fifty fourth and fifty fifth regiments refused to accept any pay until it was raised to that of part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 j 1 even before and especially after the emancipation proclamation formalized their place in the union army thousands of african americans joined the army to fight for the union cause and for freedom.
white soldiers.
in june 1864 congress provided equal pay and enlistment bounties for blacks and whites.
in the army blacks also had equal rights in military courts and rights to testify in trials something they could not do as civilians in most of the country.
finally during the last months of the war blacks were promoted to the officer ranks.
the presence of black troops in the union army enraged many in the confederacy.
in may 1863 the south refused to include black troops in prisoner of war exchanges since they had declared all such troops to be runaway slaves who should be returned to slavery.
in response and despite pressure lincoln suspended the exchange of prisoners until early 1865 when the confederacy agreed to resume exchanges.
black prisoners of war were treated more harshly than white prisoners.
in april 1864 when the union garrison at fort pillow tennessee surrendered to confederate general nathan b forest he ordered the massacre of black soldiers.
blacks who fought knew what danger they faced and they fought anyway.
quick review how did the battles fought at the beginning of the civil war change people s attitudes about the war in the north and the south.
the home front shortages opposition riots and battles 14 3 explain how the war s death toll and civilian shortages affected life north and south during the war.
after the initial euphoria wore off and as the reports of casualties began to circulate support for the war dropped in both the north and the south.
even those supporting the war had second thoughts.
it was not only the terrible toll from the battlefields though nearly every family was touched by those losses but also the wars effects on the home front which had not been expected when it began.
inflation and bread riots in the south the wars heaviest toll was in the south.
ihe confederate government never succeeded in placing its financial house in order.
southern politicians had long objected to federal tariffs and other taxes.
it was hard now that independence was claimed to turn to chapter 25 complacency ie 741 fannie lou hamer spoke to the mississippi freedom party delegation after they were barred from the democratic convention in 1964 american voices fannie lou hamer testimony to the credentials committee 1964 j hen fannie lou hamer gave her testimony at the national j w democratic convention she had come a long way from a sncc voter registration meeting.
until then she said id never heard of no mass meeting and i didn t know that a negro could register and vote when they asked for those to raise their hands who d go down to the courthouse the next day i raised mine.
had it up as high as i could get it.
it was the 31st of august in 1962 that eighteen of us traveled twenty six miles to the county courthouse in indianola mississippi to try to register to become first class citizens.
we was met in indianola by policemen highway patrolmen and they only allowed two of us in to take the literacy test at the time.
after we had taken this test we continued on to ruleville where i had worked as a timekeeper and sharecropper for eighteen years.
i was met there by my children who told me that the plantation owner was angry because i had gone down to try to register he said if you don t go down and withdraw your registration you will have to leave.
said then if you go down and withdraw said you still might have to go because we are not ready for that in mississippi.
and i addressed him and told him and said i didn t try to register for you.
i tried to register for myself.
i had to leave that same night hamer also described her subsequent arrest i was carried to the county jail and putin the booking room i was carried out of that cel into another cell where they had two negro prisoners.
the state highway patrolmen ordered the first negro to take the blackjack a wooden club.
the first negro prisoner ordered me by orders from the state highway patrolman for me to lay down on a bunk bed on my face.
i laid on my face and the first negro began to beat i began to scream and one white man got up and began to beat me in my head and tell me to hush i was in jail when medgar evers was murdered.
al of this is on account of we want to register to become first class citizens.
and if the freedom democratic party is not seated now i question america.
is this america the land of the free and the home of the brave where we have to sleep with our telephones off the hooks because our lives be threatened daily because we want to live as decent human beings in america.
source downloaded july 8 2011 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what light does the document shed on hamer s motives in registering to vote.
2 historical interpretation what do hamer s experiences suggest about the nature of white resistance to the civil rights movement.
742 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 the north and malcolm x by the 1960s half of the nations african americans lived in the north most in racially segregated urban neighborhoods.
while the hopes of blacks in the south generally focused on ending the brutal segregation and on winning the right to vote the hopes of northern blacks focused on ending segregated housing patterns poor quality schooling and economic marginalization.
one of the most prominent voices for northern urban blacks was malcolm x as marcus garvey had done for a previous generation malcolm spoke of pride self sufficiency and self determination.
malcolm was born malcolm little in omaha nebraska in 1925 he remembered the grinding poverty racism and violence of depression era america.
as a young adult malcolm pursued a life of crime and in february 1946 just before his 21 birthday received a 10 year sentence for a string of burglaries.
in his autobiography he said i had sunk to the very bottom of the american white mans society while he was in prison malcolm experienced a religious conversion and joined the nation of islam or the black muslims as they were commonly known.
when he was released in 1952 he moved to detroit and was soon named assistant minister at detroit temple number one.
the black muslims believed that it was important to reject traditional last names which they saw as slave names since many came from former slave owners and so malcolm little became malcolm x his message as a minister was we didnt land on plymouth rock my brothers and sisters plymouth rock landed on us.
it was a mix of pride and separation from white people the white devils along with a call for total allegiance to allah and allahs messenger elijah muhammad.
malcolm disdained integration and the southern civil rights movement.
while he was gaining fame as the fiery black muslim malcolm was also starting to have his doubts about elijah muhammad.
early in 1964 he broke with the nation of islam and set off on a pilgrimage to mecca as is required of every devout muslim man.
in mecca malcolm found himself among muslims from all over the world.
he was transformed by the experience.
when a fellow pilgrim asked him what about the hajj had impressed him the most malcolm answered the brotherhood.
the people of all races colors from all over the world coming together as one.
it has proved to me the power of the one god no longer would he preach separation for its own sake.
he was not any less militant but malcolm returned from mecca as el hajj malik el shabazz a devout traditional muslim.
when he returned to new york in 1964 malcolm explained his new beliefs.
he said of his experience in mecca in the past yes i have made sweeping indictments of all white people.
i never will be guilty of that again as i know now that some white people are truly sincere that some truly are capable of being brotherly toward a black man he was willing to join interracial coalitions to achieve immediate goals and would work within as well as against the political system.
malcolm was not willing to adopt kings nonviolence and believed african americans needed to defend themselves.
in 1964 he met fannie lou hamer.
when he heard her describe the beating she had received he said when i listened to mrs hamer a black woman could be my mother my sister my daughter describe what they had done to her in mississippi i asked myself how in the world can we ever expect to be respected and we do nothing about it.
he was not the advocate of violence that others portrayed him to be but at one point he said let sincere whites go and teach non violence to white people after his break with the nation of islam he established his own independent muslim mosque incorporated to preach what he believed was a truer islam than that taught by the black muslims.
he also established a political organization chapter will explore the political diplomatic and military issues involved in turning the idea of manifest destiny into a geographic reality.
it is also important to understand how the acquisition of so much new territory in the 1830s and 1840s as well as other developments in peoples thinking changed the lives of those who lived in the united states.
the population of the country was expanding as dramatically as its geographical borders.
migrants from around the world especially flocked to california to find their fortunes in the gold.
citizens of the republic of mexico suddenly found themselves living in the united states because the border had moved as did american indians who rejected the claims of all nations to their lands.
other immigrants came to the already established parts of the nation.
in addition amid the many changes slaves supporters and opponents of slavery and women became increasingly vocal about the issue of freedom and equality.
these issues will be explored in chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 405 14 4 previously thought improper.
but the sick were there and the women were determined to help.
the confederate baptist offered religious sanction for this new role for women saying that they are most valuable auxiliaries.
in spite of concerns about delicacy modesty and refinement women went to work as nurses in the south.
sara agnes pryor who had lived in omfort before the war volunteered to help in virginia hospitals.
when she saw a nurse kneeling to hold the stump of an amputated arm she fainted and thought she was wholly unfit for the work but pryor overcame her fine lady faintness and became a serious professional.
mary rutledge fogg was from one of the souths grand families in nashville and she used her status to pressure jefferson davis to allow her to start military hospitals in nashville memphis and knoxville after seeing 50 brave soldiers die for the want of proper nurses phoebe yates levy pember a 40 year old widow was named matron of the confederate hospital in richmond where she and her sisters provided for the hundreds of wounded soldiers who streamed into the confederate capital.
women nurses north and south looked to their hero florence nightingale the english woman who had virtually invented modern nursing while serving british troops in the 1853 1856 crimean war.
and like nightingale the nurses of the civil war sought to bring healing to wounded soldiers as well as comfort to the dying and those who were recovering.
presidential politics and sherman s march to the sea then north while women like pryor and barton tried to comfort the wounded soldiers fought and grant held his line in virginia it was not clear whether lincoln could hold his office.
continuing losses lack of progress at petersburg and hostility to emancipation all combined to strengthen the chances of the copperhead antiwar democrats in the 1864 presidential election.
none were more aware of this situation than the leaders of the confederacy.
lee knew he could not hold petersburg forever but he was confident that all he needed to do was hold the city until the november elections.
if grant made no progress and casualties remained high lee and davis thought that the copperhead democrats would win the election and make peace.
while the democrats grew stronger many republicans were losing heart by 1864 congressman martin f conway a republican from kansas who had once criticized lincoln for pursuing the war too slowly now asked the president for gods sake try and arrange peace with the south the war spirit is gone when in august 1864 the democrats nominated general mcclellan whom lincoln had fired for being too cautious lincoln expected to be a one term president.
his only hope he wrote was to save the union between the election and the inauguration that would take place in march 1865 then the picture on the battlefield changed dramatically see map 14 2.
when grant had come east to fight in virginia he left his closest subordinate william t sherman in charge in the west.
sherman began a march across the heart of the confederacy.
just as the mississippi river campaign had cut the confederacy in half from north to south sherman aimed to cut it in half from west to east.
slowly avoiding major confrontations and keeping a careful eye on his supply trains sherman led his army moving from tennessee across mississippi alabama and into georgia.
sherman saw little value or glory in winning battles.
he said that glory in war is all moonshine even success the most brilliant is over dead and mangled bodies with the anguish and lamentation of distant families sherman just kept maneuvering and kept marching fighting when necessary.
confederate general john bell hood tried to stop sherman before he reached atlanta an important railroad center.
in august 1864 sherman changed course and the confederate general thought sherman was retreating but sherman won the next battle on august 30 the confederates then evacuated atlanta and burned most of 406 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 v map 14 2 major civil war battles 1863 1865 while armies fought in pennsylvania maryland and virginia all through 1863 1864 and 1865 a union force led by william t sherman marched through the confederate states from tennessee to georgia and the carolinas.
on september 1 sherman led his troops into atlanta.
mary boykin chesnut wrote in her diary since atlanta i have felt as if all were dead within me forever.
we are going to be wiped off the earth as sherman was taking atlanta admiral farragut led a daring raid on mobile bay alabama.
confederate forts guarded the harbor and well placed mines known then as torpedoes blocked the entrance.
when the lead ship in farraguts fleet was sunk by an exploding mine the fleet stopped.
farragut in one of the wars immortal chapter 9 new industries new politics 249 9 1 92 93 only as ada shared these challenges and hopes in biblical terms that her peers would appreciate do unto others as ye would that they should do to you is a great precept given to us by our great teacher what but the neglect of this great principle has brought into the world all this confusion this disorder this isolated state of interest between man and man all this monopoly and competition in business.
as the industrial revolution expanded ada would not be the last one to ask that question.
new york and the international cotton trade as significant as the mills of new england were in cotton production most american cotton was shipped in its raw state to manchester and leeds in england.
the permanent peace that had been established between the united states and great britain after the end of the war of 1812 made this trade easy.
new york city became the center of the shipment of cotton across the atlantic and in the process became the nations largest city and commercial center a position it has retained ever since.
new york city enjoyed several advantages that allowed it to play such a dominant role in the nations cotton economy even though no cotton was grown within hundreds of miles of the city and few cotton mills were nearby.
first new york had an extraordinary deep water harbor.
ships could dock directly in manhattan and american voices h robinson worked in the cotton mills at lowell from b 1835 to 1848 she was 10 when she began and left at age 23 to be married.
she published her story half a century later.
the book loom and spindle or life among the early mill girls remains a classic story of what life was like for the first generation of young women most fresh from the farms to take these jobs.
the working hours of all the girls extended from five o clock in the morning until seven in the evening with one half hour for breakfast and for dinner one of the first strikes of cotton factory operatives that ever took place in this country was that in lowell in october 1836 when it was announced that the wages were to be cut down great indignation was felt and it was decided to strike en mass.
this was done.
the mills were shut down and the girls went in procession and listened to incendiary speeches from early labor reformers.
one of the girls stood on a pump and gave vent to the feelings of her companions in a neat speech declaring that it was their duty to resist all attempts at cutting down the wages.
this was the first time a woman had spoken in public in lowell and the event caused surprise and consternation among her audience my own recollection of this first strike or turn out as it was called is very vivid.
i worked in a lower room where i had heard the proposed strike fully if not vehemently discussed i had been an ardent listener to what was said against this attempt at oppression on the part of the corporation and naturally i took sides with the strikers.
when the day came on which the girls were to turn out those in the upper rooms started first and so many of them left that our mill was at once shut down.
then when the girls in my room stood irresolute uncertain what to do asking each other would you.
or shall we turn out.
and not one of them having the courage to lead off i who began to think they would not go out after all their talk became impatient and started on ahead saying with childish bravado i don t care what you do i am going to turn out whether anyone else does or not and i marched out and was followed by the others.
as i looked back at the long line that followed me i was more proud than i have ever been since at any success i may have achieved and more proud than i shall ever be again until my own beloved state gives to its women citizens the right of suffrage.
source harriet h robinson loom and spindle or life among the early mill girls boston t y.
crowell 1898.
31 83 85 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis how did robinson explain the factors that led to her decision to join the strike at her mill.
2 contextualization how did work in a textile factory change robinson s outlook.
what connections can you make between her strike experience and her commitment to the suffrage movement.
50 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 brooklyn without needing to anchor offshore and unload goods to smaller boats.
the port was also easily accessible by coastal vessels from southern ports.
as the production of cotton expanded after 1815 most of the souths cotton was shipped north to new york and then reshipped either across the atlantic to english ports or up long island sound to boston for the new england mills.
second new york already had the infrastructure necessary to accommodate this level of shipping including miles of docks and a community of merchants.
third new york an established port already had experienced workers including dockworkers and longshoremen who handled cargo to handle the hundreds of ships that did business there.
the already large numbers of workers grew rapidly as new york not counting brooklyn which was a separate city until 1898 grew six times its size between the american revolution and 1820 in 1820 it mushroomed again from 125 000 residents and to over 500 000 in 1850 new york businesses sent agents called factors to charleston south carolina savannah georgia mobile alabama and new orleans to buy cotton for shipment to new york.
in turn the cotton was transferred from coastal ships to larger transatlantic ships that sailed to ports in england racing each other to make the trip in the shortest amount of time.
on the return trip from england these ships brought cash from the sale of cotton and all sorts of british and european goods iron and steel tools from sheffield england wine from france and manufactured goods that the united states needed and that could often be bought in new york for less than it cost to make them elsewhere in america.
while american manufacturers disliked this reality merchants from across the country flocked to new york to stock up on cheap goods enhancing the citys commerce.
in 1818 shipping across the atlantic was improved when a quaker businessman jeremiah thompson founded the black ball line and established a fixed schedule of weekly departures of fast ships from new york to liverpool england.
the black ball line announced that it had undertaken to establish a line of vessels between new york and liverpool to sail from each place on a certain day in every month through the year and printed the schedule.
until that time commercial vessels waited to fill their holds with cargo however long that took before sailing.
now with the fixed schedule passengers and goods could be sure of leaving on time and factories in england could be sure of a steady flow of cotton to keep their mills operating.
the new ships were called packet ships because the line had a contract with the federal government to carry packets of u s mail.
these packet ships became a regular feature of world commerce and new yorks waterfront.
any packet ship captain who made the trip to liverpool in under 22 days or the return trip to new york which took longer because of less favorable winds in under 35 days would be rewarded with a new coat and a dress for his wife courtesy of thompson.
competition with the black ball line soon developed and the passenger cabins became elegant as different lines competed for business.
shipwrights along new yorks east river changed the construction of new ships so they could make the voyage even more quickly than the original schedule.
but most important the black ball lines ships and its many competitors that emerged in the 1820s and 1830s ensured a steady supply of cotton for english mills and steady profits to u s cotton growers.
new york was also the place in the united states to raise money.
from the time alexander hamilton established the first bank of the united states in new york city in 1791 some new yorkers grew rich financing commercial activities that were far away from the city itself.
many farmers had long needed to borrow money for seed and fertilizer to plant a crop.
after industrialists like francis cabot lowell began creating giant new corporations to build the factories for producing the cotton cloth that launched the industrial revolution they too needed ways to borrow much larger amounts of money as well as longer periods of time to make profits and pay off the loans.
without such financing the industrial revolution would never have happened.
financial brokers had agreed to work together in new york in 1792 and the new 9 1 chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 20 1 202 202 20 4 the increased involvement of the united states in international affairs in the late 1800s and early 1900s and its expanded territorial reach made the united states a major world power.
consequently diplomatic tensions began to mount especially between the united states and latin america where construction of the american controlled panama canal and military interventions in mexico nicaragua the dominican republic and haiti created resentment.
although the united states had successfully brokered a peace agreement between russia and japan in 1905 further u s involvement in asia coupled with anti asian legislation in california embittered the japanese.
many within the united states also opposed american involvement in the affairs of the rest of the world especially after the 1898 war with spain and the continued u s occupation of the philippine islands.
after the assassination of archduke franz ferdinand in 1914 the central powers germany austria hungary and the ottoman empire went to war against the allies russia france and great britain.
americans were divided about the conflict and looked to president wilson to maintain u s neutrality.
however for some americans feelings changed when german u boats sank three u s merchant ships and a british ocean liner which killed 127 american citizens.
the publication of a secret german cable to mexico known as the zimmermann telegram in which germany promised the return of texas to mexico if mexico would attack the united states turned more of american public opinion against germany.
in 1917 when germany expanded its submarine attacks the united states entered the war.
support for u s involvement in the war was not universal and a large and vocal peace movement emerged.
but the wilson administration pressed for a series of laws to silence dissent.
in particular the sedition act and the espionage act gave the government unprecedented power to restrict free speech.
the supreme court upheld these laws and many antiwar protesters were prosecuted and jailed.
by 1918 the allies with support from american troops had defeated the central powers and an armistice was signed.
at the paris peace talks president wilson hoped to secure a lasting peace and favored treaty provisions that called for a league of nations.
republican opposition to the league blocked u s adoption of the treaty and the league of nations was launched without american involvement.
chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 59.
1919 1929 21 a unique prosperous and discontented time chapter 18 riots erupted in several cities including cleveland ohio where one socialist was killed and 40 injured in a parade.
a few days later a protester in washington dc was shot and killed when he refused to stand for the national anthem.
the crowd applauded.
the american legion a new organization of returning soldiers promised to uphold americanism and attack radicals.
in centralia washington an iww group killed four parading legion members and the legion lynched an iww organizer.
at the same time the worldwide influenza pandemic that began in 1918 came to the united states.
during 1919 half a million americans died of the flu many more than had died in the war.
the influenza did not discriminate between young and old or rich and poor.
although its source was microbes not radicals the influenza epidemic contributed to the sense that something was terribly wrong in the postwar world.
1919 palmer raids and red summer major strikes in many industries chicago race riot 1920 eighteenth amendment creating prohibition takes effect.
nineteenth amendment giving women the right to vote takes effect congress again defeats treaty of versailles charles ponzi s scheme collapses warren harding elected u s president first radio broadcast as station kdka reports election returns 1921 margaret sanger founds american birth control league washington conference agrees to limit growth of world s navies 1923 warren harding dies calvin coolidge becomes president 1924 calvin coolidge defeats john w davis for president 1925 the great gatsby published scopes trial in dayton tennessee 1927 babe ruth hits 60 home runs sacco and vanzetti executed kellogg briand pact outlawing war negotiated 1928 herbert hoover defeats al smith for president mickey mouse born mi chapter 27 rights lkj 272 27j thinking historically the young lords party and the origin of political movements in the 1970s 27 j 27 a historians have debated why so many different political movements among women latinos american indians gay men and lesbians and others emerged in the late 1960s and 1970s.
in the 1950s and early 1960s the civil rights movement had been confined almost exclusively to the black freedom struggle.
a new white student movement also emerged in the 1960s.
in the next 10 years it seemed every group of americans was starting to demand its own rights and to challenge social injustice wherever it was found.
one of the most colorful if short lived movement groups was the young lords party a puerto rican group that came into existence in new york city in 1969 pablo guzman one of the founders of the young lords remembered their origins.
his description of the diverse forces that led them to organize sheds light on the experience of many other groups.
in guzman s account the young lords began with a street protest in the summer of 1969.
all we had been trying to do after sweeping up the streets on previous sundays was talk with sanitation about once a week pickups and nonexistent trash cans and about how to decently treat people asking for help instead of blowing them off.
if protests helped win victories for the african american community they reasoned why not them.
but when the protest produced an angry police presence guzman and his friends decided to recruit others.
it was the summer of 1969 and the first stateside organization of radical young puerto ricans was announcing itself we hoped as a political force.
they quickly learned about la raza unida the people united that was emerging among mexican americans in the west about the weather underground that had broken off from the students for a democratic society to embrace more violent tactics and about the black panther party the militant black organization on which the young lords would model themselves.
they were also influenced by international connections in a world where many were challenging american dominance.
guzman had spent a semester studying in mexico.
he said i left as paul guzman a nervous only child of a puerto rican cuban mother and a puerto rican father i came back to the states as pablo guzman.
while other groups influenced young urban puerto ricans like guzman there were also other roots to the protest movement as guzman reflected but it didn t come from nowhere my parents and my grandparents after all had first instilled in me a sense that there was far too long a history of injustice in this society.
only as my father would say later at my trial your mother and i never thought you would actually try to do something about it.
not on such a scale anyhow.
but with deep roots in their own communities and with the inspiration of seeing others the young lords like the american indian movement or the gay men of the stonewall inn were not going to remain quiet in the face of what they saw as significant injustice.
note today pablo guzman is a senior journalist with cbs news.
source pablo guzman the village voice march 21 1995 thinking critically 1 compare and contrast how does guzman s description compare with the emergence of other movements described in this chapter 9 new industries new politics 269 conclusion washington irvings story rip van winkle published in 1819 tells the story of a man who awakens after a 20 year nap to find that everything in his village has completely changed.
the story captures the transformation of the physical commercial and political landscapes of the united states and the corresponding changes in the lives of americans during the first decades of independence largely caused by the rapid growth of cotton production and technological innovation.
although it would have seemed unimaginable even a few years earlier after 1815 distances seemed shorter money and material goods more important and politics omnipresent to many americans not just national leaders.
production of cotton and all the accompanying commerce it generated changed the lives of nearly all of the countrys residents and focused the attention of many americans on productivity and hoped for prosperity.
slavery expanded from the atlantic coast as thousands of enslaved people were forced to move into the interior of the country where the black belt stretching from georgia through alabama mississippi and louisiana became the center of cotton production based on the backbreaking labor of slaves.
at the same time many white americans especially young women who had been used to the rhythms of farm life went to work in highly regimented mills spinning cotton into cloth.
other americans transported cotton between states and across the atlantic ocean at speeds their forbearers could not have imagined.
the new prominence of public clocks with a hand that noted minutes in addition to the passage of hours reflected this shift.
the demand for cotton and the labor intensive process of its cultivation led to the explosion of slavery in the south the growth of the textile industry in the north and a revolution in industry and transportation.
new york city emerged as a transportation hub connecting the united states to the international cotton trade.
the erie canal also secured new yorks place as a commercial center as it made transport between interior locations and coastal ports more efficient.
steamboats canal boats transatlantic packet ships and stagecoaches traveled the routes in ever faster circuits.
banks some of the first and most important corporations in the young nation played an essential role in the market economy.
corporate shareholders a dramatically new development deepened the stability of businesses and extended their ability to operate.
however the cotton market slumped in 1819 which caused an economic downturn and financial panic among americans.
although the economy would eventually recover and thrive the experience reflected a new and not fully understood national economy.
during monroes administration the supreme court led by chief justice john marshall decided a series of cases that expanded the power of the federal government and limited that of the states claiming a role for the supreme court in reviewing the constitutionality of acts of state legislatures which would become important in the years to come.
despite general calm during the era of good feelings of monroes two term administration political tensions over the cotton economy territorial expansion and slavery exploded with surprising force in the 1820s.
when missouri applied to become a state in 1819 the divisions over slavery intensified and although the missouri compromise was meant to resolve the differences many agreed with the aging thomas jefferson that it was a reprieve only the era of good feelings gave way to divisive contests for the presidency in 1824 a victory for john quincy adams and in 1828 a victory for andrew jackson and the rebirth of political parties.
jacksons political agenda reflected his concerns for the economic and political interests of a broad spectrum of white america that was growing in influence in the government and he represented the symbolic voice of a new generation.
chapter 15 reconstruction 447 chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 279 10 1 10 j 10 j in the meantime the sac and fox tribes which had already been exiled to the indian territory as a result of earlier removals from the old northwest were not too happy about life there.
in april 1832 a chief named black hawk led 1 000 2 000 sac and fox people back east across the mississippi closer to their old homelands.
the sac and fox indians were moving mostly to escape from hostile sioux groups on the great plains and iowa territory.
the illinois governor took the tribes move into illinois as an attack called out the militia and asked for federal troops.
in black hawk s war federal and state troops on the east side of the mississippi and sioux warriors on the west virtually annihilated the fox and sac tribes to the delight of whites who were happy to see these tribes completely out of their way.
in fact jackson had meant to use the removal law for georgia to force all indians east of the mississippi out of their lands.
when the forced exile finally reached its goal by the end of the 1830s only the iroquois in new york a few cherokees in north carolina and scattered small communities remained legally east of the mississippi although others like the seminoles simply melted into the woods and could not be found by the government.
all in all 46 000 indians were forcibly removed during the jackson administration and subsequent administrations removed as many more.
the cherokees and other tribes tend to disappear from the history books after the trail of tears.
but the cherokees choctaws and creeks were resilient people.
forced onto an inhospitable and alien land they sought to reestablish their communities and culture.
to a surprising degree they succeeded.
as the last cherokees arrived in indian territory in 1839 the tribe adopted a new constitution and established tahlequah as their capital.
in 1844 they began publishing the cherokee advocate in both english and cherokee.
they also set up a school system with elementary schools as well as higher education institutes and seminaries to prepare teachers european and cherokee for their schools.
in the u s civil war parts of the tribe favored each side and the divided tribe fought internally.
but again they rebuilt after the war.
today there are some 200 000 to 300 000 cherokees of whom 70 000 live within the cherokee nation in northeast oklahoma and the rest are scattered around the country making them the largest federally recognized tribe today.
jacksonian economics the war on the bank of the united states the second bank of the united states a national bank chartered by congress in 1816 with extensive regulatory powers over currency and credit.
in his campaign for president jackson pledged to do something about the bank of the united states which he and many others blamed for the panic of 1819 and saw as an elitist threat to a democracy.
the second bank of the united states was patterned on the first bank of the united states that had been a cornerstone of alexander hamiltons economic plans for the new nation see chapter 27 chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 321 a hot july 4th of 1850 taylor suddenly died and vice president fillmore ascended to the presidency.
this time however unlike tyler s accession with the death of harrison there were no major policy shifts when fillmore took office.
11 2 quick review considering u s actions in texas and california was the mexican american war a land grab.
why or why not.
113 california gold rush the rush to find gold that brought thousands of new residents to california and produced millions of dollars in new wealth for the region and the united states.
west into the pacific describe the causes and outcomes of u s expansion in california and into the pacific region including establishing new relationships with hawaii china and japan.
early in his term of office president polk had told congress that he was interested in acquiring californias harbors from mexico because he said these ports would shelter american ships and allow the pacific ocean to provide the basis for an extensive and profitable commerce with china and other countries of the east he had no idea how quickly his dream would come true.
even before the negotiations with mexico were complete gold was discovered in california and the resulting gold rush made into thriving commercial centers not only the gold camps but also the cities around harbors that polk wanted.
these same pacific coast harbors quickly became home to american ships that had been dominating much of the pacific ocean for a decade before polk spoke.
in the 1840s american whaling ships led all other nations in the whale trade in the pacific and the u s navy led the way to american negotiations for a role in trade with hawaii and china.
after the acquisition of california the navy also established a trading relationship with japan.
after 1848 the profits of the pacific trade poured into the united states through the newly acquired pacific ports.
the acquisition of oregon and california not only expanded the united states to the pacific coast but also allowed the nation to become a dominant player all across the pacific ocean.
the gold rush to california another 1848 development was perhaps even more important to californias history than the shift in political authority from mexico to the united states.
on january 24 1848 while american and mexican negotiators were still meeting in the mexican town of guadalupe hidalgo james marshall a carpenter at the fort and mill owned by swiss native johann sutter on the american river in northern california was deepening the channel going into the mills water wheel when he noticed some odd material in the water.
he reported boys i believe i have found a gold mine his was the first discovery of gold that would quickly lead to the california gold rush.
sutter and marshall tried to keep the discovery a secret but word spread all too quickly.
by may 1848 everyone in san francisco seemed to know that gold had been discovered.
and while communications were still slow prospective miners from all over california indians long time mexican residents and american settlers as well as immigrants from oregon hawaii mexico and as far away as chile peru australia france and parts of china moved into the gold fields of the sierra nevada mountains.
the rush was on.
two thirds of the white men in oregon came south to california.
recently discharged soldiers from the mexican and american armies joined them there.
in the earliest days california indians who knew the land best made excellent gold prospectors.
newcomers expressed surprise that in the first year of the gold rush miwok indian women panned for gold alongside of miwok men and the newcomers from around the globe.
the diversity in the fields did not last.
in august 1848 an article in the new york herald included a brief mention that gold worth in value 30 was picked up in the bed of a stream of the sacramento.
president polk determined to show the value of the newly acquired territory 322 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 113 included a mention in l s annual message to congress.
ten million dollars in gold produced in california in 1848 and within 3 years the revenue had grown to s22o million.
so much gold changed the economic calculations of the united states and much of the world from china to south america to europe.
suddenly there was a great deal of gold in circulation everywhere.
thousands of people wanted to get rich quickly by coming to california to find the gold.
californias non indian population was around 7 000 in 1845 it had grown to almost 93 000 in the first u s census of 1850 while the first prospectors had come from the south mexico and south america and the east from pacific whaling ships hawaii and china by 1849 the largest numbers were coming from the eastern united states and europe.
getting to california from other parts of the united states or europe could mean a long slow and expensive trip by ocean around the southern tip of south america.
it could also involve a shorter sea voyage to nicaragua then an overland trek by pack mule across the isthmus and another voyage from there up to san francisco.
still for others it could mean traveling overland by walking and on ox drawn wagons across the continent.
sea travel around south america was certainly the most comfortable and perhaps safest but it cost a lot from 300 to 700 and it was slow taking 4 to 8 months.
the trip via nicaragua or panama was almost as expensive perhaps 600 and dangerous but it was certainly the fastest taking 5 to 8 weeks.
coming by land across the continent was by far the cheapest costing not more than 200 but it also took at least 3 months and had to be timed just right to avoid winter on the rocky mountains.
the majority opted for the cheapest way.
small numbers of people had been coming west for decades but in 1849 50 many thousands of prospective californians traveled along the platte and humboldt rivers and then the oregon and california trails into the gold fields see map 11 3.
the gold camps themselves were harsh places.
fortunes were made and lost not only in the fields but also at gambling tables and through theft and intimidation.
white americans some of them very recent americans resented the competition of miners from south america and elsewhere especially those who came from china or who were indians or californios.
within a short time most chinese and indians miners had been driven from the gold fields through violence and intimidation though some indians were retained to work for subsistence wages mining gold for others while the chinese found other kinds of work eventually building the western railroads and developing service industries for miners and others.
the incredible jump in californias immigrant population came at a terrible cost for the california indians.
their population already declining in the face of the missions declined much more rapidly after the beginnings of the gold rush because of disease and outright murder decreasing by almost 85 percent between 1848 and 1880 to 23 000 african slaves were rare both because slave owners knew it was all too easy for a slave to escape in california and because other miners hated all competition.
few women were able to succeed as miners indeed far fewer women than men even came to california in the gold rush.
mining camps were overwhelmingly male communities.
some women who did come to california were forced or tricked into prostitution to pay for their passage from europe china and latin america.
the most freewheeling era of the gold camps was very short lived.
by 1851 the chances of finding gold by simply looking in a stream bed as marshall and sutter had done in 1848 or even finding gold with a pan had pretty much ended except in the more southerly tuolumne and merced gold regions.
some miners began using a rocker or cradle that washed dirt out more quickly.
soon enough gold mining was transformed into large scale hydraulic mining which required large corporate investments and reduced most miners to hired labor.
even for hired laborers though mining paid much better than most east coast jobs the possibility of making r z nntimied and fortunes were still made in the gold a fortune evaporated.
gold mining continued ano ioi iu fields but the gold rush was over.
chapter 27 rights reaction and limits part w beginning 1980 to the present part outline chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontented time zl dayton and the nation got quite a show.
clarence darrow the best known lawyer in the country volunteered to join the aclu team.
former presidential candidate william jennings bryan volunteered for the prosecution.
every major newspaper in the country covered the trial.
most people thought darrow got the better of bryan in the arguments but on the facts scopes was clearly guilty.
scopes admitted he had violated the law and he was found guilty and fined 100 though the tennessee supreme court threw the case out on a technicality to avoid appeal to the u s supreme court which the aclu wanted.
cautious textbook publishers changed their books.
in future editions a civic biology stopped calling darwin the grand old man of biology and instead simply said that he was a leading biologist evolution which in the earlier editions had been a wonderful discovery now became merely darwins interpretation of the way in which all life changes only in the late 1950s would a full discussion of evolution return to high school textbooks.
quick review to what extent were the racism anti immigration efforts and fundamentalism of the 1920s the result of changes throughout the united states.
harding coolidge and hoover national politics and policies in the 1920s 21 4 analyze the political and policy developments of the decade.
washington conference a conference called by the united states in 1921 that led to the adoption of the five powers treaty in 1922 in an ultimately ineffective effort to limit the growth of the world s navies and thus preserve peace.
three republican presidents led the united states during the 1920s.
the election of warren harding in november of 1920 was almost a foregone conclusion given the general disenchantment with woodrow wilsons policies the war and the league of nations.
a politician who promised to return the nation to normalcy was just what people wanted.
harding and his running mate massachusetts governor calvin coolidge defeated the democratic nominee ohio governor james cox and his running mate the young franklin roosevelt by 16 million to 9 million popular votes.
in what was his last race the socialist party candidate eugene v debs polled close to a million votes while still in prison for violating the world war i sedition laws.
late in 1921 harding commuted his sentence and debs was freed.
although harding was remembered mostly for the scandals of his administration he also made some very strong appointments.
three months after coming to office he appointed former president william howard taft to the job taft had always wanted chief justice of the supreme court where taft served until 1930 charles evans hughes the 1916 republican presidential candidate became secretary of state.
knowing that there was no chance of u s participation in the league of nations but wanting to foster peace in the postwar world hughes called the washington conference in 1921 to try to end the competition among the united states britain and japan to build up their navies.
to the surprise of many the result of the conference the five powers treaty of february 1922 slowed the worldwide navy build up and established limits on battleships battle cruisers and aircraft carriers in a ratio of 5 each for the united states and britain 3 each for japan and 1 75 each for france and italy.
no limits were set for other types of ships.
in 1922 hughes also ended the longstanding u s occupation of the dominican republic.
harding also appointed andrew mellon one of the wealthiest people in the united states to serve as secretary of the treasury.
mellon who served through the harding coolidge and hoover administrations ensured that there was a close and comfortable relationship between government and business.
he cut government spending cut taxes and retired half of the world war i debt while in office.
he was often hailed as the greatest secretary of the treasury ever until the coming of the great depression raised serious questions about his policies.
herbert hoover perhaps the most liberal 620 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 member of the cabinet served as secretary of commerce for harding and coolidge encouraging cooperation between businesses to stabilize industrial production and the economy.
harding died suddenly in august 1923 probably the result of a heart attack.
his wifes refusal to allow an autopsy led to rumors that he was poisoned or committed suicide though there was never any evidence for either.
his death came just as the tea pot dome scandal was about to come to light.
he was reported to have asked herbert hoover what a president should do whose friends had betrayed him harding was deeply mourned but as the scandals of the harding administration surfaced his reputation was tarnished before the year was out.
fortunately for the republican party hardings vice president the stern and distant calvin coolidge had no connection to the scandals and quickly took steps to investigate them.
news of hardings death reached the vice president while he was vacationing with his father in a rustic vermont farmhouse.
since the house had no electricity colonel john coolidge administered the presidential oath of office to his son by the light of a kerosene lamp a reassuring image that perfectly fit the tone of austerity and adherence to old time values that the new president wanted to set.
more important to coolidges success the economic downturn of 1921 had eased and by 1923 many americans were experiencing an economic boom known as the coolidge prosperity to no ones surprise coolidge a man of so few words he came to be known as silent cal was nominated for a full term by the republican party in the summer of 1924 the democratic party was deeply divided between a southern and western wing that was primarily white protestant rural and supportive of prohibition and a northern wing that though also very white included many catholics and jews and was highly urban as well as strongly anti prohibition.
the kian was a force at the summer nominating convention where their opposition to a catholic candidate who wanted to repeal prohibition made itself felt.
the two leading contenders for the nomination included former treasury secretary william g mcadoo a dry who favored prohibition and was supported by the southern and western wing of the party and new york governor al smith a catholic and a wet staunch opponent of prohibition.
they battled for 103 ballots before the delegates turned to the west virginia lawyer and former congressman john davis in an exhausted compromise.
others disgusted with both parties rebuilt the old progressive party of 1912 and nominated wisconsin s popular progressive senator robert la follette for president.
coolidges victory in the 1924 elections was as decisive as harding s had been in 1920 he won 54 percent of the total with only 28 8 percent for the democrats and 16 6 percent for the la follette progressives.
except for wisconsin which went for la follette coolidge carried every state outside of the then solidly democratic south.
the coolidge administration took some important steps in foreign policy.
just before he took office as coolidges vice president charles g dawes negotiated the so called dawes plan to help ameliorate the german financial crisis brought on by the huge reparations payments to britain and france.
in 1925 coolidge appointed frank kellogg as secretary of state.
two years later in 1927 french foreign minister aristide briand proposed a joint u s french alliance but kellogg turned the conversation to a multilateral treaty.
the kellogg briand pact outlawing war was signed in paris in aw gneher.
will the brakes hold.
as this cartoon shows the tea pot dome scandal that came to light in 1923 soon after president harding s death threatened to steamroll over many leaders of the republican party.
however the fact that the new republican president calvin coolidge had nothing to do with it allowed party leaders to distance themselves from the scandal and in the end have an easy road to the white house in the november 1924 elections.
the kellogg briand pact 1928 international treaty that denounced aggression and war but lacked provisions.
enforcement.
chapter 6 chapter 30 entering a new time 2001 to the present the impact of september 11 2001 hurricane katrina and its aftermath the financial crisis of 2008 new liberals new conservatives 1980 1989 no american president since franklin roosevelt has so dominated the nation s politics and indeed culture as ronald reagan shown here at his inauguration in 1981 the voters who gave ronald reagan his margin of victory over jimmy carter in 1980 were a diverse lot.
working class whites north and south sometimes called reagan democrats were alienated by the civil rights and protest movements of the 1960s and 1970s.
many feared crime which they tended to see as a black issue and wanted a champion of law and order the coalition also included middle class and upper middle class suburbanites in revolt over taxes especially rising property taxes and government regulations that they thought were intrusive.
the antitax movement led to the passage of proposition 13 in california in 1978 a law sponsored by a private citizen howard jarvis which significantly cut californias property taxes and ultimately the states vaunted government services.
other states copied proposition 13 reducing taxes and public services.
a third group of reagan supporters were social conservatives catholics and protestants associated with the religious right for whom the key issues were their opposition to abortion sexual and reproductive freedoms gay rights and the teaching of evolution as well as their desire for prayer in the public schools.
in seeking to limit abortion or gay rights the social conservatives wanted a more activist government even if they otherwise favored a smaller government and lower taxes.
these diverse groups also shared a staunch hostility to communism and believed that presidents from franklin roosevelt to richard nixon had been too soft.
they were united in their anger at those they considered elitist celebrities in hollywood the media universities and the federal government.
in ronald reagan the former actor and two term governor of california they chapter 22 living in han 625 significant dates the coming of the great depression 1929 stock market crash 1930 smoot hawley tariff sets off an international tariff war worsening worldwide depression 1932 reconstruction finance corporation bill signed by president hoover bonus marchers evicted from washington d c franklin d roosevelt defeats hoover for president 1933 banks close around country fdr inaugurated declared a bank holiday first fdr press conference and fireside chat volstead act amended to legalize beer civilian conservation corps and national recovery administration social security act and national labor relations act wagner act pass congress roosevelt is reelected defeating alfred landon roosevelt s court packing plan proposed and defeated explain the coming of the great depression and the initial response to it.
the great depression was a worldwide crisis.
the crash of the american stock market was but one of many causes of the economic catastrophe.
people lost their jobs in japan.
in chile mineral exports the mainstay of its economy collapsed leading to joblessness and the government which lost tax income could do little.
in germany already suffering from a precarious economy industries went bankrupt and millions of workers were laid off.
industrial production collapsed in great britain leading to hunger marches by the unemployed.
jobs disappeared in canada.
and in the united states the combined impact of the stock market crash which had an impact worldwide the continuing farm depression and the rapid decline in industrial production led to national paralysis.
626 1935 1936 1937 the great crash october 1929 and the coming of the great depression speculative booms and busts had occurred regularly in economies and continue even in modern times as people allowed prices to rise far beyond value and then the inevitable crash in prices came.
in the 1600s dutch investors were caught up in speculation in tulip bulbs and in the 1720s english investors lost fortunes in what came to be known as the great south sea bubble.
in the mid 1920s many americans began to buy florida real estate that later became worthless.
the great crash of 1929 was a prime example of this phenomenon.
the u s economy did well in the 1920s and it would have been strange if the value of stocks had not gone up.
stocks after all are merely partial ownership in a company so a share of stock purchased on the new york stock exchange for a company u s steel or general electric for example is a share in the ownership of that company.
if the company makes a sufficient profit dividends are paid to shareholders.
if a company increases in value the value of each share increases.
however if a company does poorly or a lot of people start to worry that a company will do poorly shares will probably decrease in value.
the stock market is in theory a place where people who want to sell a share of stock meet people who want to buy one and agree on a price the price of the most recent sale of stock is then listed as the current value of the stock.
during the 1920s stock prices generally rose with some modest downturns between 1924 and 1928 toward the end of 1928 especially after herbert hoovers election victory in november the stock market started going up much faster.
many people including president elect hoover as he later wrote in his memoirs were worried that the prices were showing all the hallmarks of a speculative boom.
still people continued to buy stocks.
the radio corporation of america known on the stock market simply as radio was a relatively new company that had never paid a dividend.
radio sold for 85 a share at the beginning of the year and the price rose to 420 a share by the end of the year.
stock prices are reported simply as whole numbers so radio sold for 85 and 420.
other companies followed the same course dupont began the year at 310 ending at 525 department store giant montgomery ward began at 117 ending at 440 at the height of the market in september 1929 still without distributing a single dividend radio was selling for 505 as people saw the chance to make money they also borrowed money to buy stocks a process called buying on margin.
if a person could invest 85 in radio and a year later have a stock worth 420 why not borrow enough to buy ten shares for 850 and fairly quickly reap 4 200.
and brokers were more than happy to lend the money.
buyers were expected to use their own money for 25 percent to 50 percent of the value of a stock but could easily borrow the rest.
early in the 1920s perhaps a billion dollars of loans were provided to cover stock purchases by the end of 1928 those loans reached six billion dollars.
part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 in the spring of 1929 the outgoing president calvin coolidge reported that the economy was absolutely sound and stocks were cheap at current prices the more cautious hoover who understood economics better than his predecessor believed instead that the growing tide of speculation was not merely a problem but was indeed a crime yet worried that his saying so might cause a devastating loss in confidence.
by september 1929 a respected economist roger babson warned sooner or later a crash is coming and it may be terrific.
factories will shut down he predicted and men will be thrown out of work.
the speech precipitated a drop in stock prices but the so called babson break lasted only for 1 day.
most economists thought babson was wrong.
stock prices kept going up through the spring of 1929 and then in the summer they skyrocketed.
from the beginning of june to the end of august westinghouse stock went from 151 to 286 general electric from 268 to 391 and u s steel from 165 to 258 at the sight of those kinds of profits most investors simply forgot about the warnings.
the market reached its high point on the day after labor day in 1929 there was a small downturn in september and by october everyone started to worry.
then in late october speculation turned to panic as stock prices just kept falling.
tuesday october 29 known as black tuesday was the worst single day in the history of the stock exchange.
crowds formed all up and down wall street.
contrary to contemporary rumors and latter day myths there were no suicidal leaps from windows though a few speculators did die by their own hand on that and the following days.
most quietly watched their life savings disappear as prices continued to fall.
in the months and years that followed stock prices continued to fall.
on november 11 the new york times industrial average closed at 224 a drop by half from 452 from september.
the worst possible news was followed by even worse news as prices kept falling through 1930 1931 and 1932 by july 1932 the new york times reported the dow jones industrial average as 58 a little more than a tenth of what it had been only 3 years earlier.
value it seemed had simply disappeared from american businesses.
ihe loans that had enabled many to buy stock on margins made things worse.
when the value of a stock fell to the actual percentage the buyer had invested 50 percent or 25 percent the stock broker who had arranged the loan would notify the owner that he or she had to produce more money to pay off the loan or else the stock would be taken over by the broker and sold to recoup the loan.
since many investors had put all their savings into the stock market they had no funds to cover such calls and were wiped out.
even if the market later rallied they had no investment left.
in addition the brokers often were not able to sell the stock in time to protect the loan either so brokers lost money too.
the stock market crash was far from the only problem with the nations economy in 1929 at the same time basic underpinnings of the american economy including banking manufacturing farming and international trade were also surprisingly fragile.
when the economy came apart it came apart thoroughly.
a sizable number of americans perhaps as many as half farmers farm workers and sharecroppers american indians living on reservations factory workers widows and the elderly had been living on the edge of poverty throughout the boom.
22 1 222 223 in early 1932 u s army troops and local police attacked the bonus marchers camp within sight of the u s capitol building.
the attack on former soldiers who had come to washington from all parts of the united states seeking pensions from congress infuriated many and further undermined hoover s reputation.
hoovervilles shantytowns sarcastically named after president hoover in which unemployed and homeless people lived in makeshift shacks tents and boxes.
hoovervilles cropped up in many cities in 1930 and 1931 bonus army a protest movement of world war i veterans in 1932 demanding early payment of service bonuses not due until 1945 to help them through the great depression and to provide a stimulus for the economy.
in 1930 before even the initial impact of the depression 60 percent of american families had a total income of less than 2 000 per year which was then considered the poverty line.
between 1929 and 1932 farms across the country were foreclosed on and more would have been had not armed groups of farmers banded together to prevent the sales.
factories which had been overproducing now closed and workers lost their jobs.
one out of four people in the united states was out of work by 1932 many were living in shanties and others rode the rails as stowaways or waited in bread lines.
in the winter of 1932 33 the nations banking system started to collapse as banks that had also invested in stocks or offered mortgage loans on property that was now worthless failed and state governors announced bank holidays in their states to stop further failures.
the hoover years 1929 1933 herbert hoover had been president for only 7 months when the stock market crashed.
given his background hoover seemed the ideal president for a moment of crisis.
as a trained engineer who had helped feed a starving europe during world war i and served as secretary of commerce he understood economics moreover he was far more flexible than coolidge.
as the economy worsened hoover called on people to engage in voluntary collective action asking business leaders to keep wages and prices up asking bankers to pool resources to help weaker banks encouraging farmers to form cooperatives and keep excess crops off the market.
he cut taxes and supported federal public works such as construction of dams bridges and hospitals to stimulate the economy.
after 1932 he reluctantly agreed with a democratic congress to create the reconstruction finance corporation to provide funds to keep banks and railroads from bankruptcy as well as the emergency relief and construction act to lend money to states for relief and public projects.
as the economy worsened however hoovers call for voluntary solutions seemed weak.
farmers were reluctant to cut back on their crops if their neighbors would simply fill the gap.
bankers were too worried about staying solvent to bail out other banks.
the reconstruction finance corporation never invested enough to save all the banks that needed saving.
hoover tried but failed to negotiate a reduction in the reparations that were wrecking the german economy and thus undermining u s trade with europe.
then in 1930 congress passed the smoot hawley tariff a disastrous move that was designed to protect american industries by raising the cost of imported goods but resulted in a trade war as other nations also raised their tariffs in return leading to a huge decrease in international trade with devastating results.
despite the dire circumstances hoover though no orthodox conservative could not bring himself to support further government intervention and debt.
perhaps it was simply hoovers bad luck to preside over the beginning of the depression.
people would have blamed him no matter what he did.
when he tried to restore confidence by announcing that the fundamental business of the country that is production and distribution of commodities is on a sound and prosperous basis things just kept getting worse and people lost confidence in him.
when homeless families built communities of shacks they called them hoovervilles.
when out of work veterans marched to washington as the bonus army to demand a pension he ordered the army to disperse them and people called him heartless.
when he had lost his bid for reelection and tried to get the incoming administration to cooperate on a plan for the banking crisis in early 1933 roosevelt ignored him.
hoovers was an unhappy presidency in an unhappy time.
22 1 quick review how did the fragile economy of the 1920s combined with the stock market crash create a dire situation for the american people.
what actions did the hoover administration take to address the situation.
what other actions could hoover have taken.
628 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 the new deal explain the goals and results of the new deal and the responses to change on the part of diverse americans.
in the desperate situation that the united states faced in 1932 probably the most desperate economic moment in american history most thought that whoever won the 1932 democratic nomination would win the election.
after all the crisis had occurred under the leadership of previous republican presidents.
among the democrats a1 smith entered the race again along with speaker of the house of representatives john nance garner former cabinet member newton baker and new york governor franklin delano roosevelt.
roosevelt won the nomination on the fourth ballot and breaking precedent flew to the democratic national convention in chicago to accept the nomination in person on july 2 1932 where he promised a new deal for the american people coining the phrase by which his administration would be known.
he selected garner to be his running mate and promising a new deal for the american people while offering very few specifics defeated hoover by a landslide in the november election carrying 57 percent of the vote and 472 electoral votes.
in the long months between the election in november and the inauguration on march 4 1933 the u s economy kept getting worse.
the date of the inauguration was later changed by the 20th amendment to the constitution so that every president after roosevelt was inaugurated on january 20 after a much shorter wait.
the number of unemployed workers and evicted farmers kept growing.
in addition the banking system the heart of the nations economic structure faltered and more banks closed.
banks that had given loans to buy stocks now held worthless paper since the loans could never be repaid.
banks that had given loans to farmers now owned worthless farm land or were blocked from foreclosure by angry farmers.
as more banks failed people began to take their money out of the remaining banks.
a run on a bank as a large number of withdrawals all at once was known could put any bank out of business because no bank simply kept deposits in its vaults but rather invested the money.
in 1930 1 352 banks closed in 1931 2 294 more went out of business and in 1932 another 1 453 failed.
in november 1932 nevadas governor proclaimed a bank holiday temporarily closing all banking before more banks got into trouble.
iowa followed in january then michigan maryland oklahoma indiana ohio arkansas and arizona in february.
sixteen more states closed banks at the beginning of march and finally on march 4 illinois and new york home to the nations largest banks in chicago and new york city declared a bank holiday.
on that day at noon with most banks closed and most economic activity in the country at a standstill franklin roosevelt was inaugurated to replace herbert hoover as president.
the brain trust and the first 100 days at his inauguration the new president told the nation that it must not shrink from honestly facing conditions in our country today.
and he was blunt about what those conditions were saying only a foolish optimist can deny the dark realities of the moment.
yet our distress comes from no failure of substance plenty is at our doorstep but a generous use of it languishes in the very sight of the supply.
primarily this is because the rulers of the exchange of mankinds goods have failed through their own stubbornness and their own incompetence have admitted their failure and abdicated.
but in that same address he also insisted on his firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself nameless unreasoning unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance given the nations situation many could think of quite a few things to fear but roosevelt made it clear that he was ready to act to address the crisis and that alone gave people optimism for a time.
new deal a term for the programs and legislation developed during franklin roosevelt s administration aimed at ending the great depression.
times 629 chapter review 5 1 preludes to revolution explain britain s victory over france in the french and indian war and what conflicts followed this victory.
review questions 1 crafting an argument is it valid to describe the seven years war as a world war.
why or why not.
2 comparison compare and contrast the position of the european powers in north america before and after the seven years war.
what were the most important changes.
3 historical interpretation how did british victory in the seven years war alter the relationship between indian peoples and british colonists.
revolution was in the minds of the people explain why in the 15 years before the revolutionary war began support for the patriot cause spread so quickly among many different groups of north americans who opposed britain for different reasons.
review questions 4 contextualization explain what john adams meant when he said that the revolution was in the minds of the people and this was effected from 1760 to 1775 in the course of fifteen years before a drop of blood was shed at lexington 5 2 53 5 historical interpretation what were the political consequences of the revolution in religion during the mid 1700s.
6 historical interpretation what might explain the fact that seaport cities were important centers of revolutionary activity.
7 crafting an argument why in some ways is the term american revolutions more appropriate than american revolution.
the war for independence explain how political and military strategy support for the patriot cause and american alliances with france and spain led to an american victory in the war for independence.
review questions 8 chronological reasoning how and why did colonial resentment of british policies move from protest and demonstration to war and the declaration of independence between 1774 and 1776.
9 contextualization what do the articles of confederation indicate about the political ideals and hopes and fears of the delegates to the second continental congress.
10 crafting an argument what factors do you think are most important in explaining the american victory in the revolutionary war.
148 partlll a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 creating a nation having won independence the new united states faced many crises.
in an effort to resolve some of the tensions some of the nation s leaders proposed a new form of government and met in philadelphia over the long hot summer of 1787 to produce a new constitution.
1783 1788 in 1787 a philadelphia physician benjamin rush wrote the american war is over but this is far from the case with the american revolution.
on the contrary nothing but the first act of the great drama is closed for the generation that had lived through the 1760s and 1770s opportunities abounded to help shape the new nation they had created.
when congress adopted the official seal of the new nation found today on the back of every dollar bill they included the latin phrase novus ordo seclorum a new order of the ages thomas paine wrote we have it in our power to begin the world over again many in the new united states of america thought they could do just that.
the revolutionary leaders washington adams jefferson have become cardboard characters.
their words have been invoked too often their deeds too sanitized.
but if todays citizens are to make sense of the revolution and the creation of a new nation they need to see those leaders as real.
in addition people today need to realize that many other actors were also asserting their place in or in the case of american indians and loyalists on the margins of the new nation.
those known as the founding fathers were far from the only actors.
women who had lived through the revolution were far less willing to leave political or domestic decisions to men than their mothers and grandmothers had been.
poor farmers often felt objectives chapter 15.
quantrill was killed before the war ended but the james brothers continued a long reign as postwar outlaws starting with a bank robbery at liberty missouri on february 13 1866 and continuing in the new and lucrative arena of train robberies well into the 1880s.
many robbers like the james brothers found widespread though quiet support by farm families who would never attempt illegal behavior but who hated the railroads and the large commercial ranchers.
these families privately cheered when those more powerful forces suffered losses at the hands of these outlaws however violent and self serving the particular rebels might be.
in new mexico the so called lincoln county war of 1878 pitted two groups of ranchers seeking to dominate the county.
both hired outlaws one of whom was a young teenager named henry mccarty who changed his name to william bonney a famous pirate and who came to be known as the kid after the lincoln county war ended the hired outlaws drifted away.
after trying unsuccessfully to find honest work and after being promised a pardon but then having it revoked by new mexicos governor the kid turned to cattle rustling and robbery until he was shot by lincoln county sheriff pat garrett.
but billy the kid who was 21 when he died had killed 10 people in his short and violent life.
his legend grew far beyond his life as a whole publishing industry came to thrive on the retelling and expansion of his legend.
stories of gunfighters like billy the kid and wyatt earp became legends of the american west but the person who did the most to create the legend of the wild west was a former army scout named william cody who created his highly successful buffalo bills wild west show in the 1880s.
according to his autobiography cody was born in iowa in 1846 but his family soon moved to kansas where his father was killed by the border ruffians from missouri in the battles of bleeding kansas.
cody took a job herding cattle to support his family when he was 11 years old.
during the civil war he was part of a local militia that protected the territory from attacks by quantrill and the james brothers.
later he hunted buffalo and served as a scout.
on one occasion cody scouted for a party that included james gorden bennett of the new york herald one of chapter 16 conflict in the west chapter 7 practicing democracy 185 1a despite the opposition of some of the nations most eloquent leaders the bank bill sailed through congress.
almost all northern representatives voted for it and almost all southern ones against it.
the sectional lines and the lines between the federalist and democratic republican factions they were not yet political parties were clearly emerging.
once the bill passed both houses of congress washington had to decide whether to sign it.
for madison who had been operating as washingtons key spokesperson in congress the bank was an unconstitutional extension of federal power and he argued privately and persuasively that washington should veto the bill.
washington then turned to his cabinet for advice.
attorney general randolph and secretary of state jefferson both urged a veto.
the tenth amendment was clear they said that anything not mentioned in the constitution was left to the states and the constitution certainly did not authorize a federal bank.
for secretary of the treasury hamilton however the bank was essential and the constitution he said gave congress the authority to do everything necessary and proper for the smooth functioning of the nation.
he warned washington that if the national government did not invoke the necessary and proper clause then americans would become a people governed without government washington signed the bill in february 1791 and the united states now had a bank and deeper political divisions than previously imagined.
after the bank bill hamilton proposed a federal mint to create uniform coins for use throughout the country.
for almost 20 years after the revolution people had used foreign coins.
hamilton wanted u s coins based on the u s dollar not the british pound.
it was not a controversial proposal and the federal mint was soon established.
with the mint in place hamilton resigned as secretary of the treasury in 1795 and washington appointed oliver wolcott in his place.
though he remained a close presidential advisor until the end of washingtons term hamilton preferred to make money as a private citizen.
hamilton s commercial nation vs jefferson s agrarian vision hamiltons last major report to congress was his report on manufactures.
unlike the earlier reports this one was not a plea for immediate legislation but rather a blueprint for the future of the nation as hamilton saw it.
where jefferson wanted an agrarian nation that exported raw materials hamilton wanted a more complete economy within the united states.
he too saw farming as the backbone of the economy but he also wanted to support factories that would create finished goods from the products of the fields forests and mines for both domestic consumption and export.
in addition he wanted the nation to make everything its military might need from uniforms to gunpowder and warships.
hamilton was a harsh critic of slavery but although he did not mention slavery in his report on manufactures the document was suffused with what 70 years later a new republican party would call free labor hamiltons vision promoted open immigration.
immigrants from europe would work in the emerging factories hamilton said and a plentiful supply of new workers would keep wages low and factories profitable for their owners.
he had no fear of child labor either noting in general women and children are rendered more useful and the latter more early useful by manufacturing establishments than they would otherwise be hamilton wanted a federal government that would shape the nations economy rather than leave economic development to individuals.
he believed that higher tariffs should protect new industries and that government incentives should help launch those ventures when private investment was not sufficient.
he saw strong patent protection as essential to invention.
moreover he wanted to build a network of roads and canals to help commerce flow.
part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 these ideas frightened jefferson and madison.
at one point jefferson told washington that he thought his treasury secretary was expanding the general welfare clause of the constitution to give congress the authority to regulate every aspect of the nation s economy.
jefferson would continue to worry especially as washington sided with his treasury secretary more often than not.
although hamilton was a brilliant if sometimes unscrupulous leader not all of his ideas were his alone.
he was regularly looking to europe especially britain for ideas and there were many economic ideas ready for export.
hamilton greatly admired the british industrialists who were creating mechanized production on a scale never seen before.
he was also influenced by the scottish philosopher adam smith whose book wealth of nations was published in 1776 in the economic world that smith described wealth was generated not by the simple ownership of things land or gold or products but rather by the free trade of goods and services and by competition to expand trade.
as people competed to make a profit on their transactions they increased the circulation of money lowered the cost of goods and created general prosperity the wealth of nations and of individuals.
competition smith said was the key to wealth.
thus he wrote it is not from the benevolence of the butcher the brewer or the baker that we expect our dinner but from their regard to their self interest as that self interest is satisfied through competition there is more meat beer and bread at lower cost available for everyone while the butcher brewer and baker live well.
for smith who called britain a nation of shopkeepers it was the shopkeepers and manufacturers and traders not the hoarders of gold and silver who made wealth.
73 7 2 73 thinking historically hamilton vs jefferson in his 1791 report on manufactures alexander hamilton defended the expediency of encouraging manufacturers in the united states.
contrast ng farming with manufacturing he noted labour employed in agriculture is in a great measure periodical and occasional depending on seasons liable to various and long intermissions while that occupied in many manufactures is constant and regular extending through the year embracing in some instances night as well as day.
hamilton knew that not everyone agreed with him.
some believed that it was wrong to use the government to accelerate the growth of manufactures.
critics he knew liked a world in which the less independent condition of an artisan can be exchanged for the more independent condition of a farmer.
hamilton s critics led by thomas jefferson and james madison feared an activist government and thought his plans were an antidemocratic effort to strengthen the power of the financial elite and their political allies.
where hamilton wanted the federal government to foster manufacturing and commerce jefferson and his supporters wanted a passive federal government that stayed out of people s way.
while still secretary of state jefferson wrote hamilton s financial system had two objects 1 st as a puzzle to exclude popular understanding and inquiry 2nd as a machine for the corruption of the legislature.
jefferson believed that independent farmers were far more likely to maintain a strong democratic government than paid employees who in giving up their economic freedom would soon also give up their political freedom.
he saw hamilton s plan as a way to confuse the true agents of democracy.
this debate from the 1790s is still alive today.
thinking critically 1 contextualization what regions of the country in the 1790s best reflected jefferson s view of america.
what regions reflected hamilton s view.
2 historical interpretation what groups in american society stood to gain the most if hamilton s vision was enacted.
which groups would gain from jefferson s vision.
chapter review how did the great depression affect the united states both in the 1930s and for the future.
what were the three most significant effects.
chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of how the idea of manifest destiny and the policies of the polk administration almost doubled the size of the united states in 12 years in spite of opposition from many people in the country.
manifest destiny the importance of an idea explain what manifest destiny meant and how it led the united states to involvement in texas california and oregon.
the u s war with mexico 1846 1848 analyze the causes strategies and outcomes of the u s war with mexico.
west to the pacific analyze the causes and outcomes of u s expansion in california and into the pacific region including establishing new relationships with hawaii china and japan.
11 1 11 2 chapter explores how the nation came to be that giant at what cost to its people and the world and with what results in the culture or rather the many different cultures of the country.
technology changes the nation 17 1 explain the inventions of the late 1800s and their impact.
alexander graham bell saw himself as a teacher more than an inventor.
while teaching deaf students at boston university bell sought new ways to help deaf people hear.
in july 1874 he discovered that if a person were to speak into a vibrating set of reeds it created a fluctuating current that could at the other end of an electronic wire be turned back into the same sound through another set of tuned reeds.
he patented his new invention in march 1876 and demonstrated it first by calling his assistant thomas watson from the next room.
later he showed it at the massachusetts institute of technology and then at the worlds fair.
while bell returned to teaching others organized the bell telephone company.
by 1880 there were 30 000 telephone subscribers.
by 1900 the number had grown to 1 3 million and by 1920 to 13 million.
in four decades bells experiment had become a necessity of modern life.
for most americans the telephone replaced the telegraph developed by samuel f b morse from earlier inventions in 1835 by the 1840s telegraphs were relaying messages and news in morse code consisting of dot and dash signals over miles of telegraph wires 215 000 miles of wires by 1900 but the telephone quickly made the telegraph outdated.
before bell gained fame for his telephone thomas edison was already on his way to being known as the greatest inventor of the era.
edison was born in milan ohio in 1847 the same year as bell.
at 16 with little formal schooling he became a telegraph transmitter.
several people in the telegraph industry were trying to design what they called a diplex a way to send two messages one in each direction on the same telegraph wire at the same time.
in 1873 edison produced both a diplex and a quadruplex that could send two messages simultaneously each way on a single wire greatly increasing the value of every telegraph line in the nation and securing edisons fame and fortune.
while he was toying with that invention edison had also invented the edison universal stock printer in 1871 a greatly improved version of the stock ticker tape machine.
in 1876 edison established an independent research laboratory at menlo park new jersey.
the many employees there were made to understand that they worked only at edisons direction and he got all of the credit.
eventually he had 1 000 patents to his name thus becoming the most productive american inventor of all time.
he tinkered with ways to record a human voice and music.
on april 18 1878 he demonstrated his new phonograph at the national academy of sciences in washington dc and later that night at a midnight show at the white house.
edisons most important invention was the electric light bulb.
in the 1870s large meeting halls were lit by arc lamps and gas lights were popular in many places.
the rest of the nation city as well as country depended on kerosene lamps or candles when the sun went down.
the electric light bulb changed things across the country.
given edisons fame he was able to assemble a consortium of financiers led by j pierpont morgan to support his research.
after toying with different options the edison labs created a bulb that lit a room for 16 hours on november 17 1879 almost immediately everyone wanted electric lights and edison wanted everyone to have power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 ki 80 part vi becoming an industrial world them.
he made london paris and new york the priority cities because he knew that what happened in those places would quickly be reported elsewhere.
within 2 years all three cities had buildings lit by electric lights.
on september 4 1882 edison pulled the switch that lit a number of buildings in southern manhattan including the house of morgan the new york stock exchange and the headquarters of the new york times and new york herald.
the inventions just kept coming.
george westinghouse and nikola tesla found that alternating current was a much more efficient way to transmit electricity than the direct current that edison used.
edison was initially skeptical but by the 1890s alternating current produced at generating plants from new york to california was powering much of the nation.
frank j sprague introduced the first electric streetcars in richmond virginia in 1888 and these cars which were cheaper and cleaner and safer than horse drawn or steam cars caught on quickly.
in 1892 the general edison electric company merged with a rival to create general electric the company that not only produced light bulbs but also all things electric.
by 1896 using film developed by george eastman of rochester new york edison moved from small scale to large screen moving pictures and in 1902 the victor talking machine company began mass producing recording disks and players.
the country was radically different because of edisons work and that of other prolific inventors who gave the country elevators invented by elisha g otis machine tools from pratt and whitney steam boilers from babcock and wilcox newspaper linotype compositors and typewriters.
a total of 440 000 patents issued between 1860 and 1890 transformed modern life.
in the 1890s a number of independent manufacturers began experimenting with gasoline powered vehicles putting a gasoline engine on bicycles or carriages which led to automobiles.
although by 1899 only 2 500 automobiles were produced per year many were predicting that the new vehicles would replace horse drawn carriages.
they were right.
by 1916 1 million automobiles were produced in the united states which created massive change as work with horses declined and a new set of jobs in the automobile industry began as more and more americans experienced the freedom that an automobile gave them.
the key to the vastly expanded production of automobiles was the vehicle itself which was relatively simple given other inventions that existed.
rather expanded production was possible only after inventing a way to produce large numbers of cars at low cost.
the genius who revolutionized the production of automobiles was henry ford.
ford a former machinist built his first automobile in 1896 after many others had done so but it was his invention of the assembly line that made possible the mass production of cars at reasonable costs.
ford took the idea of interchangeable parts first developed for guns by eli whitney and applied it to cars.
then he created a process whereby those parts could be assembled in a routinized fashion that greatly speeded production thus lowering cost even if it made the role of most workers extremely boring.
ford opened a plant for the production of the model t ford in highland park michigan in 1910 and added a moving assembly line in 1913 each worker was assigned one small task to be repeated over and over.
as ford described it every piece of work in the shop moves.
there is no lifting or trucking of anything other than materials worker after worker did his assigned task over and over again.
at the end of the process a fully assembled model t emerged from the assembly line.
ford paid his workers well.
they found the work mind numbing but valued the pay high enough that they too could afford their own model t he transformed an industry bringing the cost of an automobile to within the reach of many americans and spawning a whole set of new industries from highway construction to automobile repairs.
the success of the automobile dramatically expanded the nation s need for oil now refined into gasoline to power the rapidly growing numbers of vehicles see table 17 1.
chapter objective understand how the united states became an industrial giant at what cost and with what impact on its diverse peoples and cultures.
learning objectives technology changes the nation explain the inventions of the late 1800s and their impact.
corporations and monopolies analyze the role of the new giant corporations in american life.
lives of the middle class in the gilded age analyze daily life popular ideas and political direction for the middle class during the gilded age.
immigration explain the reasons immigrants came to the united states in such large numbers during the gilded age and what their experience was.
chanter 17 the gilded aqe building a technological and industrial giant and a new social order 17 1 17 j 173 17 4 significant dates 1859 edwin drake discovers oil in titusville pennsylvania 1870 standard oil company launched by john d rockefeller and henry m flagler 1871 thomas edison demonstrates universal stock printer treaty of washington settles u s canadian border and claims between united states and britain 1873 panic of 1873 economic panic and depression senate rejects united states acquisition of dominican republic 1875 dwight l moody launches religious revivals 1876 alexander graham bell patents the telephone thomas edison establishes research laboratory in menlo park new jersey president grant opens philadelphia centennial exhibition 1877 cornelius vanderbilt richest man in america dies in new york city 1878 edison demonstrates new phonograph 1879 edison s first successful incandescent lamp burns for 16 hours on november 17 1882 edison illuminating company lights southern manhattan chinese exclusion act 1886 1888 george westinghouse and nikola tesla discover alternating current to transmit electricity 1887 first electronic trolley cars built 1890 greatly increased immigration from eastern europe and asia begins 1892 ellis island immigration station opens in new york harbor 1893 panic of 1893 major u s depression 1896 edison demonstrates first moving pictures u s steel becomes the largest corporation in history 1902 victor talking machine company begins mass producing recording disks 1903 wright brothers make first flight at kitty hawk north carolina 1913 henry ford s moving assembly line begins operation at highland park michigan an appreciative audience that included the emperor of brazil.
it was a fitting opening to an era in which business manufacturing and technology would dominate the nations political economic and cultural life bringing prosperity and power that was previously unimagined.
it would also hring clashes between those who benefited and those who did not which frightened many and nearly tore the nation apart.
this chapter review 16 1.
the tribes of the west and the u s government explain western development from an indian perspective and the way indian and white cultures shaped each other.
review questions 1 cause and effect what new opportunities did the civil war create for the comanche people.
2 contextualization what does the ghost dance phenomenon tell us about how the sioux of the 1890s saw their recent history.
3 historical interpretation why did the u s government come to believe that it needed new approaches to indian policy in the 1870s and 1880s.
whose interests did the new policies serve.
the impact of the transcontinental railroad 1869 analyze the building of transcontinental railroads and its impact on the nation especially the west.
16 2 16 3 5 craft an argument what factors might explain the widespread support for a transcontinental railroad in the 1850s and 1860s.
the transformation of the west analyze how indigenous people ranchers farmers miners outlaws politicians and mythmakers shaped the west and our understanding of its history.
review questions 6 cause and effect what factors contributed to the boom in cattle ranching in the second half of the 1800s.
7 contextualization what motives brought white farmers to the west in the decades following the civil war.
8 historical interpretation how did issues of race and gender impact the admission of western states into the union.
review questions 4 historical interpretation how did railroads contribute to the growth of a national economy.
part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 if anything symbolized the new industrial might that began to characterize the united states in the gilded age it was the production of steel at one of andrew carnegie s plants.
on may 10 1876 ulysses s grant then in his 8th year as president traveled to philadelphia to open the centennial international exhibition of industry.
the event celebrated the 100th anniversary of the signing of the declaration of independence with a massive show of the nations progress in science technology and industry.
the exhibition covered 285 acres on the banks of philadelphias schuylkill river and included pavilions from each state and from many foreign countries.
among them colorado and kansas displayed corn 20 feet high and germany displayed a giant artillery piece from the krupp works.
between the pavilions were refreshment stands selling popcorn waffles soda water root beer and german lager bier as well as a fountain built by the sons of temperance which was serving ice water.
the focus was on the great mechanical achievements of the united states symbolized by the giant corliss steam engine that provided power for all the exhibits in machinery hall and that seemed to be without vibration or noise because its boiler was outside the building as well as by the many mowers reapers sewing machines typewriters fans for ventilating mines and the pullman sleeping cars.
most of all the fair told the world that the united states had arrived as a manufacturing and technological giant.
the event represented a cross section of the nation in 1876 both as it was and as it wanted to be filled with new inventions including alexander graham bells new telephone which bell demonstrated to chapter 26 most immigrants had come from europe and unwillingly from africa.
after 1980 most new immigrants came from latin america and asia.
between 1980 and 2000 2 million people came to the united states from europe mostly from former soviet states 5 7 million people came from asia 4 million people came from mexico 2 8 million people came from other parts of central america and the caribbean 1 million came from south america 600 000 came from africa and 250 000 came from canada.
by any counting they were reshaping the country.
immigrants moved to every part of the united states.
meatpacking plants in kansas potato farms in maine and agribusiness in southern indiana all depended on recent immigrants who were willing to do hot dirty and generally low paying work.
the majority of immigrants however settled in relatively few areas especially the states of california texas florida new jersey illinois and new york.
by 2000 californias population was 27 percent foreign born as a result of a major influx of new immigrants and a modest white exodus.
28 1 28 2 283 chapter 6 creating a nation 173 6 2 thinking historically james madison vs patrick henry madison said he wanted a strong national government because while a political faction might capture a particular state there was far less chance of such a group capturing the national government.
thus he saw a strong national government as the best means of protecting liberty.
in opposing adoption of the constitution patrick henry had the opposite fear that a strong national government would not only be distant from the people but would lead inevitably to a loss of the rights of conscience trial by jury liberty of the press all your immunities and franchises which were best protected by state and local governments.
thinking critically 1 contextualization looking back over the story of the american revolution and this chapter 28 the reagan revoi 1 283 28 2 thinking historically a changing world economy 283 robert reich was a respected economist in the 1980s and would serve as secretary of labor in the 1990s.
as reagan s term came to a close reich looked at the reagan tax cuts which he argued had certainly shifted money toward the rich.
however he also said that there were larger forces at work that were reshaping the world s economy and that the real issue was that the united states could not control its economy.
in 1991 reich published the work of nations in which he said we are living through a transformation that will rearrange the politics and economics of the coming century there will no longer be national economies at least as we have come to understand that concept.
trade finance indeed the whole job market of the planet reich insisted had become a single worldwide economy in which national policies mattered much less than in the past.
all that will remain rooted within national borders reich said are the people who comprise a nation.
in the new world reich believed some were going to be much better off and others worse off.
he argued that people found themselves in one of three quite different economic categories.
those who were employees in the older industries auto or steel workers for example found themselves with declining prospects.
well paying jobs that had been secure were disappearing as manufacturing moved to other countries.
a second group of workers those who provided direct services from selling hamburgers to health care workers to teachers would keep their jobs since such services were hard to export but would find their futures relatively flat.
and finally in the third category those reich called symbolic analysts the scientists inventors developers and money managers would do quite well indeed better than ever before.
for example reich noted in 1960 the chief executive of one of america s 100 largest nonfinancial corporations earned on average 190 000 or about 40 times the wage of his average factory worker.
after taxes the chief executive earned only 12 times the factory worker s wages.
by the end of the 1980s however the chief executive earned on average more than 2 million 93 times the wages of his rarely her average factory worker.
after taxes the chief executive s compensation was about 70 times that of the average factory worker.
clearly the reagan tax cuts had something to do with the change but not everything.
for reich the larger issue was the shift from a national american economy to a unified world economy all americans used to be in roughly the same economic boat.
most rose or fell together as the corporations in which they were employed the industries comprising such corporations and the national economy as whole became more productive or languished.
but national borders no longer define our economic fates.
we are now in different boats one sinking rapidly the industrial workers one sinking more slowly service workers and the third rising steadily that of managers and inventors.
in the economy that reich described americans would compete not with each one another but with people in the same sort of work around the world.
not everyone agreed with reich but it was hard to look at the nation at the end of the 1980s and not conclude that some indeed were sinking and others were rising quite spectacularly.
source robert b reich the work of nations preparing ourselves for 21st century capitalism new york vintage books 1991 p 7 and 208 thinking critically 1 comparison how does reich s economic analysis compare to either defenders or critics of reagan s economic policies.
2 contextualization how does reich help place the changing american economy of the 1980s in an international context.
kill the villain gordon gekko gave a greed is good speech based on boeskys berkeley talk which became a symbol of an era.
it was not only a few high flyers who got into trouble in the late 1980s however.
throughout much of the 1970s the down jones industrial average had hovered just under 1 000 that is the average value of a share on the list was 1 000 see chapter review does the constitution created in philadelphia in 1787 embody or contradict the goals of the revolution.
chapter 28 the reagan isiiaabiiaiiisiiiiiiiiissii bill clinton here surrounded by an enthusiastic crowd of supporters was enormously effective as a political campaigner.
chapter 23 living in a world at war 233 23 2 233 23j april that made the prices of goods and services in march 1942 permanent.
known as general max the regulation did help control costs and inflation.
the national war labor board negotiated a settlement between union and management at bethlehem republic youngstown and inland steel companies that limited wage increases to cost of living.
known as the little steel agreement the u s steel company was big steel the agreement became a norm throughout american industries.
although there had been several strikes in the months just before the war most of organized labor took a no strike pledge for the duration of the war in return for a government policy that required industries to maintain labor contracts and union membership.
wartime prosperity in spite of restrictions on wage increases more americans were employed and earned more money than ever before in their lives or the nations history during world war ii.
wartime rationing limited some goods.
people needed ration stamps to purchase their monthly allotment of meat coffee tires and gasoline and new cars were simply not available.
housing was very hard to find thus many lived in cramped quarters while extended families often moved in together.
nevertheless americans who could remember the great depression found themselves with previously undreamed of opportunity.
laura briggs a young farm woman from idaho remembered we and most other farmers went from a tarpaper shack to a new frame house with indoor plumbing and a hot water heater it was just so modern we couldnt stand it a shipyard worker in portsmouth virginia said i felt like something had come down from heaven.
i went from forty cents an hour to two seventy five an hour t he war completely turned my life around by december 1944 macys department stores reported the highest volume of sales in their history.
national leaders worried about a combination of prosperity and complacency.
one pentagon officer said that americans have never been bombed they have little appreciation of the horrors of war in december 1943 fdr told his cabinet that he sometimes thought one of the best things that could happen would be to have a few german bombs fall here to wake us up but other than isolated and utterly unsuccessful enemy efforts to fire on the oregon coast and new yorks long island the continental united states was never bombed or shot at which was a dramatically different experience from that of britain or russia or of course italy germany and japan.
letters home from those doing the fighting were censored and even if they had not been many soldiers did not want to discuss the horrors of war.
sometimes complacency had a high cost.
when two inmates escaped from auschwitz and brought stories of the holocaust to the united states many simply refused to believe that such things were possible.
in the summer of 1943 given detailed reports of the nazi death camps supreme court justice felix frankfurter simply responded i am unable to believe you it was simply too horrible to contemplate.
the degree to which traditional anti semitism played a role in some peoples responses to the news about nazi death camps the degree to which people such as frankfurter simply could not believe what they were hearing and the extent to which other urgencies of the war led people to focus elsewhere has been debated ever since the war.
for whatever reason or probably many reasons few americans took the stories of the emerging holocaust seriously until the end of the war demonstrated their awful truth.
initially the administration wanted to raise taxes to pay most of the wars cost immediately but in the end taxes covered about 45 percent while loans covered the rest.
nevertheless taxes increased significantly during the war.
the revenue act of 1942 raised 7 billion in new taxes.
in 1939 only 4 million of the richest americans paid income tax.
the 1942 law brought 13 million new tax payers into the system.
the government also began payroll tax withholding in 1943 requiring employers to deduct taxes and pay them directly to the government before issuing paychecks.
the rapid increases in wages and job opportunities coupled with continued appeals to patriotism limited objections to the new and much higher levels of taxation.
670 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 ihe government also borrowed money.
low cost series e bonds were sold allowing many americans to save some of what they were earning and contribute to the war effort.
larger loans were also forthcoming.
commercial banks increased their holdings in u s government debt from 1 billion in 1941 to 24 billion in 1945 in spite of all the borrowing and spending the united states emerged from the war as the one remaining economic powerhouse in the world as the economies of all the other economic leaders suffered much more from the war.
quick review how was the american experience during world war ii different from that of people in europe and asia.
winning a world war north africa europe asia the pacific 1943 1945 23 4 explain the course of the war leading to victory in europe and then the pacific.
while many americans prospered during world war ii for those in the military especially those in combat world war ii was a combination of long waits boredom and occasional moments of sheer terror pain and heroism.
the war in europe 1943 1945 in late 1942 the russians insisted that it was time for their western allies to open a second front and attack germany and german occupied france directly to take the pressure off of russia.
but churchill remembering the terrible british losses of world war i would not agree.
instead britain and america kept bombing germany and allied troops landed at oran algeria in november 1942 to attack german forces in north africa a huge diversion as far as stalin was concerned but it was the beginning of some victories that lifted spirits among the allies.
in january 1943 roosevelt went to casablanca in north africa to meet with churchill becoming the first president since wilson to travel outside of the western hemisphere and the first since lincoln to visit u s troops in the field.
they agreed on several things that they would continue to bomb germany that after north africa they would invade italy not the coast of france and that while the united states would continue to supply britain and russia a third of new forces and supplies would go to the pacific.
at a press conference at the end of the meeting fdr also said that the allies would accept only unconditional surrender from germany italy and japan there would be no intermediate peace negotiations.
then in february 1943 the russian army and the russian winter defeated the nazi troops at stalingrad and the tide of war began to change.
the russian army known as the red army which had been retreating and defending went on the offensive.
the german wehrmacht the military machine that had been undefeated in europe since 1939 started retreating.
in the summer of 1943 american and british units began the attack on what was known as fortress europe the nazi controlled territory at the heart of the continent.
on july 10 1943 u s canadian and british forces having sent coded messages that lured the germans and italians into defensive positions on the northern part of the sicily instead landed on the south coast of the island.
u s forces under general george patton made rapid progress across the island taking palermo on the north coast on july 22 the effort was bolstered by welcoming crowds who helped them and shouted down with mussolini italys king victor emmanuel iii dismissed mussolini and had him arrested but german units in italy continued to fight.
allied forces continued a long slow and bitter battle up the italian peninsula attacking salerno in september 1943 sustaining a ng battle around monte cassino making a fresh landing on the beaches at anzio outside of rome in january 1944 and finally taking control of rome itself in june 1944.
23 1 i 23 2 233 23 4 chapter 29 a new world ordj 29 1 operation desert storm code name for the successful offensive against iraq by the united states and its allies in the 1991 persian gulf war.
north american free trade agreement nafta agreement reached in 1993 by canada mexico and the united states to substantially reduce barriers to trade.
bush announced this will not stand the united states negotiated with hussein but quickly began military planning if negotiations failed.
bush gained the support of syria egypt and saudi arabia in insisting that iraq must leave kuwait.
in november the un security council authorized the use of force if negotiations did not succeed.
while there was significant opposition in the united states to any intervention congress authorized the use of force though in the senate the vote was a close 52 47 on january 17 1991 the u s led operation desert storm began.
an air war showered missiles and bombs on the iraqi forces in kuwait and destroyed communications and electrical systems in iraq.
on february 24 u s marines from bases in saudi arabia landed in kuwait and in 100 hours of battle drove the iraqi forces out of the country.
kuwait was reestablished as an independent country and a close u s ally.
fearing unnecessary carnage and not wanting a u s occupation of iraq proper bush then halted all military operations.
the war was over.
it seemed an easy military victory but it was not without costs.
within iraq rebellions broke out against husseins rule.
while bush hoped they would succeed he was not willing to intervene or to try to topple hussein fearing that the united states would be caught in a long term land war in iraq.
he did however take action to protect the kurdish minority in a new autonomous region within northern iraq announcing a no fly zone in which the united states would shoot down any iraqi planes over that area but opposition forces in the rest of the country expecting u s aid that never came were slaughtered by husseins troops.
a u s boycott of iraq led to widespread suffering within the country.
finally the staging of u s troops in saudi arabia site of the holiest places in the muslim world stirred anger among devout muslims who hated the idea of non muslims in that region.
among those who were angry was osama bin laden a saudi who founded al qaeda a terrorist organization to retaliate against both saudi arabia and the united states.
meanwhile closer to home bush decided in december 1989 that panamas dictator manuel noriega had to be removed.
noriega had received cia support to oppose communists in the region but he had also become rich through drug trafficking and had become a brutal dictator.
when his party lost a presidential election in may 1989 noriega annulled the election.
knowing that the carter era treaty meant that the panama canal was going to be returned to panama bush took no chances.
on december 20 a u s assault team landed in panama and took control of the country.
they restored the democratically elected president of panama guillermo endara and eventually arrested noriega as a drug dealer and imprisoned him in florida.
the bush team also made other international efforts that had mixed results.
the administration negotiated a north american free trade agreement nafta that would eliminate tariffs between the united states and canada and mexico but senate confirmation of the treaty was slow in coming.
into somalia a nation in northeast africa threatened by famine and chaos the united states sent 28 000 peacekeeping troops but could not effect large scale changes.
to the surprise of many of its own citizens yugoslavia which had been relatively stable since the end of world war ii disintegrated into ethnic hostility between its eastern orthodox serbian roman catholic croatian and bosnian muslim communities.
in response to the new crisis in yugoslavia the united states supported a un peacekeeping mission which was ineffective and an arms embargo.
even with the cold war over the world remained a confusing and dangerous place.
education legislation and the supreme court in his inaugural address george bush angered the outgoing ronald reagan by saying that it was time to make kinder the face of the nation and gentler the face of the world.
he also continued the reagan assault on big government insisting 842 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present that the new kindness must come from a thousand points of light emerging from local nongovernmental groups around the country rather than from federal government programs.
bush called himself an education president where reagan sought to abolish the department of education and reduce the federal governments role in education bush convened the nation s governors at an education summit in charlottesville virginia in the fall of 1989 to address the challenges in american public schools.
the plan that emerged from bushs partnership with the governors who were led by arkansas governor bill clinton was called america 2000 it sought to improve the nation s schools by setting new national standards for all students.
bush also focused efforts on two other pieces of legislation that would have far reaching results.
he supported the clean air act that toughened air quality standards and pollution controls.
it would effect huge changes in industry and begin to shift more attention to environmental issues.
he also led the fight for the americans with disabilities act ada that passed congress in 1990 the ada outlawed discrimination in employment public services and public accommodations for people with disabilities.
it not only transformed the face of american buildings that now had to provide wheelchair ramps elevators and appropriate lavatories for those with physical disabilities but also put in motion pervasive changes in hiring practices and services that would benefit all those with disabilities including those who were deaf and blind.
bushs first appointment to the supreme court david souter drew little controversy.
souter turned out to be a more liberal judge than many expected probably including bush especially when he voted to affirm the courts roe v wade decision in 1992 when thurgood marshall retired bush stirred considerable controversy by nominating clarence thomas.
thomas like marshall was an african american but while marshall had been known as mr.
civil rights and was probably the most liberal member of the court in many years thomas was known as an unusually conservative republican.
in his confirmation hearings thomas was accused of sexual harassment by anita hill a black law professor and former member of thomass staff.
hill offered explicit testimony as to what thomas had said and done which was highly embarrassing to thomas and his supporters.
hill was attacked in turn by conservatives and thomas called the assault a high tech lynching for uppity blacks but when he was confirmed by the narrowest of senate votes 52 to 48 many women concluded that the male senators did not take sexual harassment seriously.
while thomas took his seat on the court more women ran for and won elective office the following year than in any previous time increasing their numbers in the senate the house and state legislatures.
race from rodney king to o j.
simpson in march 1991 rodney king an african american failed to stop for police on the foothill freeway near san fernando california.
los angeles police department lapd officers gave chase for 8 miles and finally arrested king.
when king resisted arrest four police officers beat him as he lay on the ground.
a nearby resident used a home video camera to record the arrest and beating and the video was quickly distributed around the nation.
people were outraged.
although king had resisted arrest the officers had clearly continued to beat him long after he was subdued.
the four officers on the video were arrested.
their attorneys argued that they could not get a fair trial in los angeles and the trial was moved to mostly rural simi county california.
the result of the move was that the officers faced an all white jury unlikely in los angeles county.
in april 1992 the jury found three of the officers clean air act passed by congress in 1990 as amendments to an earlier act required substantial restrictions on air pollution.
americans with disabilities act ada legislation that significantly improved options for people with disabilities.
the supreme court s 1973 roe v wade decision stating that the right to privacy guaranteed in the constitution protects a woman s right to choose an abortion remained controversial and impacted american politics for decades to come most of all in terms of the appointment every new supreme court justice.
not guilty and deadlocked on the fourth.
the acquittal released pent up anger in the black community in los angeles.
riots lasting 4 days resulted in 53 deaths 2 300 injuries and 1 billion in property damage.
black and latino rioters targeted whites and asians in their neighborhoods perhaps especially korean storeowners.
a video from the riot showed a white truck driver being pulled out of his cab and beaten.
only the intervention of other blacks who got the driver to a hospital saved his life.
for many the arrest of king the trial and the riot that followed illustrated just how deeply lines were still drawn between races in the united states in the 1990s.
while the events around king got the headlines scholars and activists debated the state of race relations.
some observed that despite what happened much had changed since the 1950s when blacks were legally barred from white schools white bus seats and all white polling places in many places.
orlando patterson a harvard sociologist wrote relations between ordinary afro americans and euro americans are in fact the best they have ever been although still far from ideal other scholars were less sure noting that events like the beating of rodney king and data about the educational experience of many black and latino students confirmed that much had not changed.
andrew hacker wrote that a huge racial chasm remains and there are few signs that the coming century will see it closed in 1994 another crisis illustrated the depth of the racial divide in the united states.
simpson a celebrated african american hall of fame former football star was arrested in june after his divorced wife nicole brown who was white and her white friend ron goldman were found stabbed to death just outside her condominium in an exclusive neighborhood of los angeles.
when the police issued a warrant for simpsons arrest he and a friend fled in simpsons white bronco down the artesia freeway while perhaps 100 000 americans watched on tv.
simpson eventually surrendered and his trial continued for most of the next year.
the evidence against simpson seemed strong but black and white americans saw it differently.
in one poll 63 percent of whites thought he would get a fair trial while 69 percent of blacks thought he would not.
the trial was a media circus.
simpsons lead attorney johnnie cochran a tough african american trial lawyer proved that the investigation of simpson by the los angeles police was filled with racist assumptions although he did not prove simpsons innocence.
when in october 1995 a jury acquitted simpson of the murder charge a majority of blacks agreed with the verdict and celebrations broke out in black communities while most whites were stunned.
regardless of whoever killed brown and goldman the simpson trial showed that americans of different races were deeply divided in how they viewed the criminal justice system in the 1990s.
economic troubles and the election of 1992 bushs greatest political failure was his inability to manage the u s economy.
after 1990 the economy went into a serious recession.
during 1991 and 1992 at t fired 100 000 workers gm fired 74 000 and two major airlines pan am and eastern went bankrupt throwing more out of work.
people blamed the president.
with his preoccupation with foreign policy bush seemed out of touch a perception that did not help his political standing.
bushs economic problems became an even worse political liability when he decided in the face of the rapidly increasing government debt that he needed to raise taxes in spite of his promise not to do so.
when the top tax bracket was increased from 28 to 31 5 percent the new york post headline said read my lips i lied conservative republicans never forgave bush.
with the republican party in not quite open revolt and the nations economy in trouble democrats smelled victory in the 1992 election.
arkansas governor bill clinton soon emerged as a democratic front runner.
when clinton lost the new hampshire primary he called himself the comeback kid and campaigned harder than ever.
clinton demonstrated a combination of strengths and of weaknesses.
844 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present 29 1 president bush future president clinton and independent candidate ross perot debated in the lively 1992 presidential campaign.
he was brilliant.
even though he grew up in poverty he excelled in school and won scholarships to georgetown university was awarded a rhodes scholarship to oxford and then went on to yale law school.
at yale he also met and married fellow student hillary rodham.
he was as charismatic on the campaign trail as john f kennedy had been.
as one of the founders of the democratic leadership council he was a moderate who distanced himself from his partys more liberal members.
clinton also had his weaknesses.
the explanations he gave for his rumored womanizing draft dodging and one time marijuana smoking were never convincing and he earned the name slick willie but he was a tough campaigner who would not quit.
he won the democratic nomination asked tennessee senator al gore a fellow baby boomer to be his running mate and in spite of a personally chaotic style kept his campaign focused.
a sign in the clinton campaign headquarters reading its the economy stupid said it all.
an independent candidate also entered the race eccentric billionaire h ross perot.
perot described the deficit as being like a crazy aunt we keep down in the basement.
all the neighbors know shes there but nobody wants to talk about her he said that bushs nafta treaty would produce a giant sucking sound of american jobs leaving the country.
although given virtually no chance of winning perot was the most popular third party candidate in many years.
bush was challenged for the republican nomination by conservative commentator pat buchanan known as the pit bull of the right bush easily defeated buchanan for the nomination but the attack weakened the president.
the conservative dominance of the 1992 republican convention especially the vocal role of religious conservatives like buchanan alienated many more moderate voters.
throughout the fall campaign the president seemed disengaged.
it was not a close contest.
clinton won almost 45 million votes to bushs 39 million.
surprisingly perot won almost 20 million votes hurting bush more than clinton.
democrats retained control of the senate 57 to 43 and the house 258 to 176.
29j quick review how did george h w.
bush s foreign policy concerns evolve over the course of his presidency.
chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 323 11 3 whaling in the pacific ocean in february 1849 the owners of the whaling ship minerva from new bedford massachusetts received a letter from its captain.
the communication reported that after hunting whales in the pacific he had stopped in san francisco for supplies and to recruit more sailors but the excitement there in relation to the discovery of gold made it impossible to prevent the crew from running away.
three of the crew in attempting to swim ashore were drowned and the ships company soon became too much reduced to continue the whaling voyage the minerva thus joined dozens of other whaling ships abandoned in san francisco harbor while their crews sought wealth in the california gold fields.
some sailors no doubt found fortunes in the gold fields that had eluded them at sea and some ship owners lost substantial sums when their ships were abandoned but in general the whaling industry was a source of wealth to some americans while supporting many others and contributing to the growth of the american economy.
the golden age of the american whaling industry began after the war of 1812 and continued until the outbreak of the civil war in 1861 during these years hundreds of american ships moved from their earlier and safer whale hunts in the atlantic to 2 3 and 4 year voyages to the pacific ocean.
whale oil which burned brighter than any other fuel available at the time was used for lamps across the globe.
whale products provided oil for the industrial revolution as well as the bone for the hoop dresses and corsets that were the height of womens fashion.
despite british efforts to launch their own whaling fleets by the 1830s four fifths of all the whaling ships in the world were american.
the owners and captains of most american whaling ships were mostly men of old new england english stock many of them quakers but there were exceptions.
a few african americans including paul cuffee and absalom f boston became captains clipper ships like the famous flying cloud made the trip from new york to san francisco in record speed 89 days in one case while slower whaling ships traveling from new bedford and other atlantic ports into the pacific often took 2 or 3 years.
during the 1830s and 1840s american sailing ships projected american influence into the pacific ocean region as never before.
324 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 and cuffee became a ship owner.
the crews white and black came from almost every corner of the globe pacific islanders west indians south americans or portuguese.
whaling was one of the few occupations in which blacks were paid the same as whites.
even a runaway slave could admit as john thompson did in 1840 i am a fugitive slave from maryland 1 thought i would go on a whaling voyage as being a place where i stood least chance of being arrested by slave hunters by some estimates 10 percent of those who worked on whaling ships were black.
nevertheless most sailors in the whaling business were white men like ishmael the fictional narrator of herman melville s 1851 novel moby dick though like the fictional ishmael the real world whites served as part of racially diverse crews.
few women served on whaling ships.
there were occasional stories of women who hid their gender and embarked with the crew not easy in the close quarters of a small ship on a long voyage.
some captains also took along their wives and children and some crew members said they appreciated having a woman on board who might know more medicine than the men and who could soothe an angry captain.
whaling ships also explored parts of the world unknown to previous generations of americans.
the first americans to enter japan were whaling sailors.
almost a decade before commodore perrys famous voyage to open up japan in 1853 54 the manhattan entered tokyo harbor in 1845 to return shipwrecked japanese sailors.
the superior was the first whaling ship to enter the arctic ocean off the coast of alaska in 1848 u s whaling ships explored much of the south pacific sailed off the coast of australia and explored antarctica.
as a result of the many whaling ships that anchored there honolulu and san francisco became major american ports rivaling new bedford boston and nantucket.
the navy and diplomacy across the pacific while many american whaling ships had been sailing the pacific since 1815 the 1848 treaty of guadalupe hidalgo added a string of pacific ports especially san francisco to the united states.
indeed the push for pacific ocean ports had been part of the driving force behind president polks push for war.
the acquisition of those ports expanded u s interest in the pacific and beyond.
by 1851 daniel webster who had become secretary of state again under president fillmore proclaimed that the united states should command the oceans both oceans all the oceans.
central to the command of the pacific ocean was securing u s influence in hawaii.
in 1778 the british explorer captain james cook was the first european to reach the hawaiian islands but by the mid 19th century the united states had a much larger presence in hawaii.
many protestant missionaries and merchants began arriving in hawaii in the 1820s where they built churches schools and businesses.
missionaries merchants and whalers boosted the hawaiian economy but they also brought alcohol gambling prostitution and disease including venereal diseases that killed many hawaiians and reduced the islanders ability to maintain their independence.
on occasion the united states did protect the native hawaiians.
an american missionary william richards advised king kamehameha ii r 1819 1824 on ways to maneuver among the great powers and play the united states britain and france against each other.
in 1842 secretary of state daniel webster added hawaii to the protections of the monroe doctrine and made it clear that the united states would not tolerate a british or french takeover.
in 1851 webster negotiated a secret treaty with king kamehameha iii that in the event of war hawaii would become a u s protectorate websters priority was securing trading rights and the use of honolulu as a coaling station for u s steamships merchant vessels and warships on their way to trade with china and japan.
just as the united states gained san francisco and influence in hawaii britain was forcing china to open to the west.
china saw itself as the center of the world.
foreigners were barbarians who might be allowed to trade in a limited way through chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 325 a japanese artist captured a u s navy commanded by commodore mathew perry landing in tokyo and demanding that japan open itself to trade with the united states.
kanagawa treaty an 1854 agreement the first between the united states and japan it opened two japanese ports to american commerce protected shipwrecked american sailors and ended japan s 200 years of isolation.
the port of guangzhou but would never be treated as equals.
despite the restrictions american merchants wanted access to more trade with china and american missionaries wanted access to its people.
regardless both were mostly shut out.
losing patience with the chinese the british turned to violence.
in the so called opium war 1839 1842 the british forced china to open its ports to british products including opium from british india and cede hong kong island as a british colony.
following in the footsteps of the british u s ambassador caleb cushing negotiated the treaty of wang hsia in 1844 which gained the united states the same trade rights as the british.
while britain took the lead in china the united states forced the even more isolated empire of japan to open to the west.
the united states wanted japan as another coaling station beyond hawaii on the route to china and wanted to trade with japan for its own sake.
president fillmore sent commodore mathew perry to open up japan and force a weak and semi barbarous people to deal with the united states.
in july 1853 perry led four large warships with nearly 1 000 sailors into tokyo bay and began negotiations.
he returned in march 1854 with an even larger fleet.
perry did everything he could to impress the japanese providing japanese officials with champagne kentucky bourbon and a history of the war with mexico to let them know what happened to those who opposed united states might.
in return the japanese grudgingly agreed to the kanagawa treaty that opened two relatively iso lated ports to the united states.
only in 1858 did japan open more ports and establish formal diplomatic relations with other countries.
britain quickly became a larger economic and military force in japan than the united states.
nevertheless the united states had established a solid presence in japan and china by the late 1850s.
as a result of expansion in the 1840s the nations border was extended to the pacific and u s ships sailed everywhere on that ocean.
the pacific and every nation on its shores including china japan and russian siberia were in much closer contact with the united states than they had been a short time before.
after 1848 the united states was an emerging force in the world.
113 quick review was expansion to other nations hawaii china japan a logical extension of manifest destiny.
how were u s intentions across the pacific different than u s goals in north america.
326 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 conclusion from the late 1830s through the 1840s the united states became a continental power whose territory spanned from the atlantic to the pacific oceans.
a strong belief in the manifest destiny of the united states justified the louisiana purchase of 1803 though the term was not yet in use and supported hoped for territory acquisitions from oregon to texas to california.
manifest destiny reflected the larger belief that the united states was specially chosen by divine will to bring liberty and democracy usually in its jacksonian form to the planet.
while americans discussed manifest destiny the nation experienced hard times in the 1830s.
the financial panic of 1837 brought on by a worldwide glut in trade created economic uncertainty in the cotton growing south and the industrial north.
it took several years for the nations economy to recover.
many americans supported versions of manifest destiny for varied political or economic reasons while others had grave reservations.
whether one supported or opposed slavery played directly into views about expansion which new territories one wanted and how new territories would be used.
military actions that leaders took in the name of manifest destiny led to territorial expansion that spanned the continent to the pacific coast.
during the presidency of james polk texas entered the union as a slave state and after a bloody war from 1846 to 1848 mexico ceded much of what became the american west to the united states including new mexico and aided by the local bear flag revolt california.
while many americans from politicians like john quincy adams to philosophers like henry david thoreau opposed the war with mexico many other americans celebrated the victory and the acquisition of so much new territory.
the united states also ended the joint ownership of the oregon territory with britain and both countries resolved borders that allowed each country to have full control of its share.
the gold rush accelerated the settlement of california with diverse people and it produced enormous amounts of gold but decimated the american indian population in the far west.
winning california from mexico dramatically changed the u s economy not only in terms of gold but also in terms of increased ventures throughout the pacific involving whaling and trade.
the united states now projected manifest destiny across an ocean where it had few rivals.
the united states became the world leader in the production of whale oil established a relationship with hawaii increased its trade with china and forced japan to open itself up to the west.
the intensification of american interest in asia in the 1840s and 1850s reflected the desire of american policy makers to successfully compete with europe for new markets and coincided with the realization of the long standing desire among many americans to create a continental nation that could become a world power.

chapter you learned about the development of foreign policy in the united states under the nations first five presidents.
president washington creates a foreign policy the first u s president knew that the young nation was unprepared for war.
george washington established a policy of isolationism to avoid alliances with other countries which could draw the country into wars abroad.
president adamss dilemma during the presidency of john adams france attacked u s ships.
adams followed washingtons policy of isolationism and kept the united states at peace by securing a treaty with france.
president jeffersons dilemma president thomas jefferson also faced threats at sea.
when peace talks failed he passed the embargo act of 1807 it too was unsuccessful.
president madisons dilemma president james madison offered a trade deal to both france and great britain but the attacks at sea continued.
he finally abandoned isolationism and declared war on great britain.
the war of 1812 ended in a peace treaty with great britain.
president monroes dilemma president james monroe in support of the new latin american states issued a policy called the monroe doctrine.
in it he warned european nations to respect the newly independent colonies.
the monroe doctrine established the united states as a strong nation willing to stand up for its own freedom and that of its neighbors.
wi in this artwork the american eagle holds the olive branch of peace in one talon and the arrows of war in the other.
both are necessary to protect the liberty at the top that americans hold so dear.
i foreign affairs in the young nation 237 reading further tecumseh was one of the greatest american indian leaders.
byall accounts he was an imposing figure.
this portraitwas based on a sketch made during tecumseh s lifetime.
tecumseh the shooting star in the early 1800s american indians in ohio and other parts of the northwest territory faced a critical choice.
white settlers were moving in and taking their land.
the indians could give up their land peacefully and try to live among the settlers.
or they could stand and fight for their way of life.
for one visionary american indian leader the choice was never in doubt.
the shawnee canoes slid swiftly down the wabash river.
they were painted in bright colors the colors of war.
the shawnee were headed for the town of vincennes the capital of the indiana territory.
the date was august 12 1810 the shawnee about 75 of them had come to meet with the governor william henry harrison.
they camped a mile outside of town.
several days later the meeting began at the governors mansion.
the governor had set up tables and chairs on the mansions large porch but the shawnee chief tecumseh said he wanted to sit on the lawn.
as he put it the earth was the most proper place for the indians as they liked to repose rest on the bosom of their mother as everyone took a seat tecumseh remained standing.
he was a tall handsome man with long hair and an athletic body.
everyone would later agree that he had a commanding presence and a gift for words.
in shawnee his name meant shooting star tecumseh faced governor harrison and began to speak.
he described the injustices his people had suffered at the hands of the u s government.
he spoke of unfair treaties and broken promises that had stripped them of their land.
he said the government had persuaded indians to sell land that did not belong to them.
the land he said was never divided but belongs to all and he continued no tribe has the right to sell even to each other much less to strangers.
sell a country.
why not sell the air the great sea as well as the earth.
did not the great spirit make them all for the use of his children.
tecumseh claimed to speak for all american indians.
he said his people wanted to live in peace but they would fight if necessary.
harrison was unmoved by tecumsehs words but he knew he could not ignore the shawnee leader.
he later called him one of those uncommon geniuses which spring up occasionally to produce revolutions and overturn the established order of things he wanted to make sure tecumseh did not stand in the way of u s expansion.
who was tecumseh and how did he become such a powerful figure.
8 chapter 24 other african americans moved west to escape slavery.
in 1864 for example howard bruce and his future wife fled from bondage in missouri.
they went to leavenworth kansas where they settled down.
black families also moved west as pioneer settlers after the civil war.
nancy lewis went to leavenworth as a teenager in 1865 she married a black soldier stationed there.
the two of them later joined a wagon train to colorado where they made their new home.
why kansas.
kansas appealed to migrants because it had lots of land for homesteading.
but it also held a special appeal for many former slaves who saw it as a symbol of freedom.
this idea stemmed from the antislavery struggles of the 1850s.
at the time some kansans had fought to prevent kansas from becoming a slave state.
one southern black man later wrote to the governor of kansas i am anxious to reach your state.
because of the sacredness of her soil washed by the blood of humanitarians for the cause of freedom in the early 1870s black leaders and businessmen began to promote kansas as a destination for migrants.
two important promoters were henry adams and benjamin pap singleton.
adams was a former slave and union soldier.
he favored black migration to the african country of liberia.
but he also backed migration to kansas as a way to get blacks out of the south.
singleton also a former slave was even more involved in the kansas migration.
he gave speeches and printed fliers praising the benefits of kansas.
with partners he formed several black colonies in the state and began to take settlers there.
he would later claim i am the whole cause of the kansas migration.
although this was an exaggeration singleton did play a major role in promoting migration.
by the late 1870s he had helped plant the seeds for the great exodus.
1 l for many exodusters the quickest route to kansas was up the mississippi river.
migrants waited for boats to take them to st louis though many could barely afford the passage.
african americans who made the exodus dreamed of better lives for their children.
these children of black pioneers posed for a photograph near their new home in nebraska.
kansas fever.
in the spring of 1879 interest in kansas suddenly exploded in a mass movement.
rumors began to circulate that the government was offering free land transportation and supplies to migrants who arrived in kansas.
these rumors were false but they sparked great excitement.
kansas fever quickly spread across the south.
many people began to pack up their belongings and head west.
six thousand exodusters moved in the first few months of 1879 as many as 20 000 people had migrated by the end of the year.
they joined some 30 000 blacks who had already gone west during the 1870s.
this mass migration caused a panic among white southerners.
fearing the loss of black farmworkers they tried to prevent the exodusters from leaving.
they blocked roads and warned riverboat captains not to pick up black migrants.
they even threatened to sink boats carrying exodusters.
many migrants were left stranded along the mississippi with no way forward.
others got to st louis but then discovered there was no free transport to kansas.
some of them got stuck there and had to rely on donations of food and clothing to survive.
others returned to the south.
under these circumstances the exodus quickly lost steam.
within a few years it was over.
many of those who did get to kansas were overjoyed though.
when john solomon lewis arrived with his family in 1879 he said it was like a dream come true.
when 1 landed on the soil i looked on the ground and i says this is free ground.
then i looked on the heavens and i says them is free and beautiful heavens.
then i looked within my heart and i says to myself i wonder why i never was free before.
others had a different reaction.
williana hickman could hardly e reve her eyes when she arrived in nicodemus a black settlement on the treeless plains of western kansas in 1878 d where is nicodemus.
i dont see it my husband pointed out various smokes coming out of the ground and said that is icodemus.
the families lived in dugouts in the ground the scenery was not at all inviting and i began to cry life on the plains she t over her disappointment.
within a few years her hushed a managed to build a new life for themselves.
486 chapter 25 the imaginary line on the continent beyond which the countrys population density was less than two persons per square mile.
the 1890 census marked the closing of the frontier.
the new land of opportunity was located in the cities of the northeast and around the great lakes where factories provided thousands of new jobs.
outside the cities even farming was getting to be big business.
in the midwest commercial farmers used new machinery and techniques to grow crops on a larger scale than ever before.
the wildest dream has become reality marveled one writer in 1887.
nothing is too large for belief twenty and even thirty thousand acre farms and a hundred bushels to the acre the new west is a veritable wonderland the gilded age as businesses got bigger so did the fortunes of those who owned or invested in them.
between 1860 and 1892 the number of millionaires in the united states grew from 400 to more than 4 000 the newly rich filled their palace like homes with elaborate decorations and european art and antiques.
in 1873 the great american writer mark twain dubbed this time of showy wealth the gilded age gilded means overlaid with gold.
twains name stuck but it did not describe the lives of most americans.
while wealthy capitalists lived like royalty many workers lived in dismal poverty.
those who were immigrants often faced prejudice and discrimination.
during business downturns many workers lost their jobs.
people were angry about the relationships between some business owners and politicians that resulted in widespread corruption.
as you will learn these conditions eventually sparked protests and calls for reform.
the vanderbilts were one of the wealthiest and most powerful families of the gilded age.
this is the lavishly decorated dining room of their summer home in newport rhode island.
the rise of industry 25 3 improved technology by the 1860s many of the factors necessary for the rapid industrializa tion of the united states were already in place.
machines had taken over much of the work once done by hand.
work had moved from homes to factories.
railroads had begun to connect customers and manufacturers with an efficient transportation system.
after the civil war new inventions and improved technology prompted the growth of new industries.
some of these innovations or new ideas helped businesses to grow and become more efficient.
others made daily life easier for many americans.
the nation s major steel plants in 1900 were located near or in regions with rich deposits of iron and coal.
railroads shipped ore to mills and finished steel to customers.
the age of steel before the civil war the nations railroads ran on iron rails that wore out quickly.
railroad owners knew that rails made of steel a mixture of iron carbon and sometimes other metals were stronger and would last longer.
steel however was difficult and costly to make.
in 1872 a scottish immigrant named andrew carnegie went to england to study a less expensive method of making steel a method invented by henry bessemer.
carnegie owned a company that made iron bridges for railroads.
he knew that his bridges would be better if they were made of steel.
carnegie was so impressed by the bessemer process that he brought it back to the united states.
the day of iron has passed he announced.
steel is king carnegie was right.
within a decade steel was replacing iron in rails locomotives and bridges.
other industries took advantage of steel which was less expensive than iron.
steel nails needles and knives became common household items.
many steel companies competed fiercely to supply steel for such products.
to remain the leader carnegie hired scientists to improve the quality of his companys steel.
he employed good managers to make his steel mill run efficiently.
his recipe for success was adopt every improvement have the best machinery and know the most.
to keep costs low carnegie set out to control every step in the steelmaking process.
he purchased iron mines to supply his ore coalfields to fire his furnaces and railroads to ship his finished steel to customers.
to reduce his competition carnegie also bought up several 492 chapter 25 could not support their families.
to get by wives and children had to work as well usually at even lower wages.
most factory women earned about 1 to 3 per day.
if business was slow wages dropped.
a boss might not pay a new worker anything until she had learned her job.
then he would charge her for maintaining the sewing machine she worked on.
if a worker complained she could easily be replaced with a new one perhaps for less money.
millions of young children worked in mines mills and factories.
a newspaper reported that young boys hired by coal miners to separate lumps of coal from rocks go to work at seven oclock in the morning and work till it is too dark to see any longer.
for this they get 1 to 3 a week they also got curved spines from bending over piles of coal all day.
inside the factories mills and factories were hot in summer and cold in winter.
to keep costs low owners crowded workers together rather than finding additional space.
of all workplace dangers fire claimed the most lives.
in new york tall buildings often lacked fire escapes.
new york citys fire chief wanted buildings to have fire escapes and sprinkler systems that could put out fires quickly.
but factory owners objected to such expenses.
new york city did require that factory doors open outwardly and shall not be locked so workers might escape quickly in a fire.
the law was not enforced however.
in 1910 about 94 percent of all factory doors in the city opened inward instead of outward.
tap in the hallway.
in the sewing room women could barely squeeze by each others machines without catching their clothes in the moving parts.
the chairs often lacked backs to support the sewers while they worked.
with all the machines in use the noise could be deafening.
fire hazards abounded.
the city prohibited smoking but the factory rarely enforced that rule.
workers stuffed leftover fabric into wooden bins where it sat for months just waiting for a spark to set it ablaze.
the buildings only fire protection was a few hundred pails of water scattered throughout its ten floors.
the rise of industry labor union an organization that brings together workers in the same trade or job to fight for better wages and working conditions t strikes often pitted police against labor organizers.
this painting shows a policeman being shot on haymarket square in chicago during a strike of the knights of labor in 1886.
25 7 labor unions as a teenager rose schneiderman found work in a cap factory.
after three years she later wrote it began to dawn on me that we girls needed an organization.
we were helpless no one girl dare stand up for anything alone workers like schneiderman had been forming unions since the 1830s.
these early organizations were labor unions.
they organized workers in the same trade or job to fight for better wages and working conditions.
sometimes workers in these unions went out on strike refusing to work until their employers agreed to meet their demands.
the triangle factory fire ends in tragedy about 5 000 workers from the triangle shirtwaist factory were part of the strike of 1909 their demands included unlocked doors during working hours and safer fire escapes in the asch building.
rather than meet those demands blanck and harris responded by locking the strikers out of the factory and advertising for replacements.
if the union had won we would have been safe said striker rose safran.
but the bosses defeated us and we didnt get the open doors or the better fire escapes because of that defeat 146 workers would die tragically.
the cause of the fire that swept through the triangle shirtwaist factory in 1911 was never known.
but one saturday afternoon people on the eighth floor began to cry fire within minutes the entire floor was a mass of flames escaping workers rushed to the stairs or pushed their way into the two small elevators.
the stairs however were soon ablaze and the elevators stopped running.
on the tenth floor mary alter was warned of the fire by telephone.
owner isaac harris and production manager sam bernstein led some people out onto the roof.
people from nearby buildings stretched ladders between the rooftops to help those on the roof escape.
workers on the ninth floor had no warning.
the fire just appeared.
some women died immediately.
firemen later found them as skeletons bending over sewing machines those who had time to escape found themselves trapped by the locked factory door.
in desperation they rushed to the windows and began to jump.
the crowd that gathered outside the asch building watched in horror as girls began to fall out of the sky ffte streaming back from their hair and dresses and drop to their deaths on the pavement below.
firefighters arrived quickly but had trouble bringing their equipment close to the build 502 chapter 1 to complete their varied diet women gathered edible plants like sweet potatoes wild rice and persimmons.
as they wore simple short deerskin skirts they didnt have to spend much time making clothing.
instead they had time to fashion rings earrings arm rings and hairpins from stones shells feathers pearls bones and clay.
chapter you read about the first people to settle in north america and the adaptations they made to the environments they found there.
migration routes of the first americans scientists believe that ancestors of american indians migrated to america from asia across a land bridge during the last ice age.
as their descendants traveled east and south they adapted to the challenges of living in many different environments.
how american indians viewed the environment wherever they settled american indians had a special relationship with the world around them.
they believed they were part of nature and they treated the environment with respect.
adaptations to the local environment depending on where they lived american indians ate different food built different kinds of houses and clothed themselves in different ways.
they also practiced many kinds of crafts making such things as jewelry fine baskets and animal masks.
american indians built the first towns and villages in north america and they were the continents first farmers.
languages and lifestyles american indians living in different cultural regions developed distinctive ways of life that were suited to their environments climate and natural resources.
scientists study these ways of life by examining the artifacts americas first people left behind.
this drawing by john white one of the first english colonists in north america shows the village life of the secotan people who lived in north carolina.
the first americans 19 reading further digging up the past this serpent mound in ohio is more than a quarter of a mile long and about 3 feet high.
scholars believe it was built between 1 000 and 1 500 years ago.
as a boy growing up in southern illinois in the 1960s tim pauketat loved to explore.
there were ancient arrowheads to be found and he collected them.
one day as he rode in his father s delivery truck he saw a great flat topped pyramid.
to tim it looked 100 feet tall all built of earth.
he was instantly hooked on the mysterious mounds of cahokia.
mysteries surround the mounds of cahokia kuh ho key uh.
as an adult tim pauketat would help solve some of them.
the first mystery was who built the mounds.
tens of thousands of mounds have been discovered in the nations interior.
some mounds were shaped as tremendous snakes or birds.
others were cone shaped.
but the great mound of cahokia was the most enormous of all.
more massive than the pyramids of egypt it rose 10 stories high and contained 25 million cubic feet of earth.
early settlers pushing west in the 1700s first discovered the mounds.
surely they thought a lost race of superior beings had built the magnificent mounds.
the settlers believed that the american indians who lived in the area could never have been capable of building such awesome earthworks.
popular books and poems were written about the lost race that had built a great civilization and then vanished.
the mystery gripped the public as they looked to europe asia and africa for ancient mound builders.
some claimed that the mound builders were vikings others were sure they were phoenicians.
hindus greeks romans persians and the lost tribes of israel were each proven incorrectly to be the lost race of mound builders.
the first american to answer the question scientifically was the third president thomas jefferson.
based on the skeletons and artifacts he found when he dug into a mound jefferson was certain that american indians were the builders.
and yet 100 years later the battle over who built the mysterious mounds still raged.
jefferson was wrong people claimed.
finally in 1881 the smithsonian institution hired archaeologist cyrus thomas to find out who the mound builders really were.
like most people thomas thought the mounds were built by a long lost race.
over seven years thomas and his team unearthed thousands of artifacts.
in the end he disproved his own theory.
the mound builders he declared were indeed early american indians.
but many mysteries remained.
what culture had built the monumental works and why had that culture vanished.
these are the mysteries that tim pauketat got hooked on solving.
20 chapt er 1 cahokia uncovered today tim pauketat teaches archaeology and brings his students to cahokia.
there they dig very carefully looking for clues to the past.
what they and other archaeologists have learned helps us imagine what cahokia might have been like in the year 1150 c e.
at dawn the great chief might have stood atop what was the greatest earth mound in the americas.
as he raised his arms to welcome the sun its first rays would have hit his tall feathered headdress.
slowly the sun would have lit his jewelry made of carved shells and copper and the cape of feathers that hung from his shoulders.
the sun was sacred to the people of cahokia for it made the corn grow.
the mound the great chief called home rose 100 feet from the vast flat plain that is now southern illinois.
we know it as monks mound.
from its top the great chief could look down upon a city of some 20 000 subjects.
just beyond the city thousands more people lived in villages.
altogether the chief ruled what was probably the largest urban area in the world at the time.
he could have seen more than 120 other mounds nearby and more in the distance toward what is now st louis missouri.
a towering wall surrounded the citys center.
to the west was a great circle of upright logs a kind of giant solar calendar that priests used to mark the beginning of spring and fall the equinoxes and winter and summer the solstices.
an artist re created what cahokia may have looked like in 1150 c e.
monks mound can be seen nearthe centertop.
rj t j 3 j li the first americans 21 artifacts found at cahokia include fine pottery arrowheads tools and this figure carved from stone.
a huge plaza stretched out over 50 acres from the base of monks mound.
here hundreds or maybe thousands of people gathered for feasts ceremonies or a wild game of chunkey.
this game of skill daring and high stakes gambling involved two spear throwing players and a wheel shaped stone that was rolled across the hardened flat court.
the object was to land a spear closer to the chunkey disk than an opponent did.
the great chief ruled all this and more.
cahokia was not only a cultural and spiritual center it was a trade center for an area stretching a thousand miles in all directions.
cahokia s sphere of influence was enormous.
the great chief was its most powerful ruler.
the archaeologist s toolkit how did archaeologists figure all this out.
the people of cahokia had no system of writing so they left no written records.
how do we know about the great chief and his welcoming of the sun in 1150 c e.
people who have no written histories have oral histories stories that are passed from one generation to the next.
scholars searched for such a story to explain cahokia but strangely never found one.
in 1539 however spanish explorer hernando de soto ehr nan do day soh toh led an expedition through the southeast looking for treasure.
he didnt find gold or silver but he did find mound builders much like the people of cahokia.
written accounts of the expedition describe the mounds and the powerful sun worshiping rulers who lived atop them.
how do we know the date in the story about the great chief.
to determine the date of a site archaeologists look for what they call black gold charcoal.
with a process called radiocarbon dating a piece of charcoal will reveal the date when the wood it was created from burned.
to discover what life in cahokia was like archaeologists search for artifacts.
when they carefully dug into one small mound at cahokia they discovered a wealth of artifacts along with the remains of a chief.
there were thousands of shell beads fine carvings copper and all the things a chief might need in the next life.
from these artifacts we know what the great chief wore.
in the mound were fine chunkey disks too.
but if it were not for witnesses early french explorers who saw the game played and described it in their journals no one would know what the disks were used for.
determining the population of cahokia is harder.
one estimate was made by counting the number of laborers it took to build the homes walls and especially the mounds of cahokia.
monks mound alone required some 14 million baskets of earth dug by hand carried deposited and pounded firmly in place.
this number led to an estimate of as many as 43 000 people who had lived in the local region.
22 chapter 14 the people s choice jackson entered politics in tennessee serving in both the house and senate.
but he did not become widely known until the battle of new orleans during the war of 1812 his defense of the city made old hickory a national hero.
in 1824 jackson ran for president against three other candidates henry clay william crawford and john quincy adams.
jackson won the most popular votes as well as the most electoral votes.
but he did not have enough electoral votes for a majority.
when no candidate has an electoral majority the house of representatives chooses a president from among the three leading candidates.
clay who had come in fourth urged his supporters in the house to vote for adams.
that support gave adams enough votes to become president.
adams then chose clay to be his secretary of state.
it made sense for adams to bring clay into his cabinet because the two men shared many of the same goals.
jacksons supporters however accused adams and clay of making a corrupt bargain to rob their hero of his rightful election.
they promised revenge in 1828 jacksons supporters used the time between elections to build a new political organization that came to be called the democratic party the name it still uses today.
this new party they promised would represent ordinary farmers workers and the poor not the rich and upper class who controlled the republican party.
in the election of 1828 jacksons supporters worked hard to reach the nations voters.
besides hurling insults at adams they organized parades picnics and rallies.
at these events supporters sang the hunters of kentucky the nations first campaign song and cheered for old hickory.
they wore jackson badges carried jacksonian democracy the idea that the common people should control the government hickory sticks and chanted catchy campaign slogans like adams can write but jackson can fight the result was a great victory for jackson.
but it was also a victory for the idea that the common people should control their government.
this idea eventually became known as jacksonian democracy.
this campaign poster shows the theme of jacksons presidential campaign.
his supporters said that if jackson were elected the government would finally be in the hands of ordinary people not just the rich and upper class.
jackson forever.
the hero of two wars and of orleans.
d h mini kff tb ip ip l 3 hr who coi i o not barter nor bargain for the prssidawsri who although a military chirflaiit.
valued the purity of elections and of the electors more than the office of president itself.
although the greatest in the gift of his countrymen and the highest in point of dignity of any in the world because it should be derived from the psopui no gag caws.
no black cockades.
no reign of terror.
no standing army or navy officers when under the pay of government to browbeat or knock down old revolutionary characters or our representatives while in the discharge of their duty.
to the poffs then and vote for those who will support old hickory and the electoral law.
collection of the new york historical society.
negative 8838 andrew jackson and the growth of american democracy 259 people of every color age and class mobbed the white house to attend a public reception after andrew jackson took the oath of office.
one observer claimed thatthe scene was like the invasion of barbarians into rome.
14 3 the inauguration of andrew jackson on march 4 1829 more than 10 000 people who came from every state crowded into washington d c to witness andrew jacksons inauguration.
the visitors overwhelmed local hotels sleeping five to a bed.
i never saw such a crowd here before observed senator daniel webster.
persons have come five hundred miles to see general jack son and they really seem to think that the country is rescued from some dreadful disaster many of the people flocking into the capital were first time voters.
until the 1820s the right to vote had been limited to the rich and upper class.
until then only white men with property were thought to have the education and experience to vote wisely.
the new states forming west of the appalachians challenged this argument.
along the frontier all men rich or poor educated or not shared the same opportunities and dangers.
they believed they should also share the same rights including the right to vote.
with the western states leading the way voting laws were changed to give the common man the right to vote.
this expansion of democracy did not yet include african americans american indians or women.
still over one million americans voted in 1828 more than three times the number who voted in 1824 many of these new voters did believe they had rescued the country from disaster.
in their view the national government had been taken over by corrupt monied interests that is the rich.
jackson had promised to throw the rich out and return the government to the people.
his election reflected a shift in power to the west and to the farmers shopkeepers and small business owners who supported him.
after jackson was sworn in as president a huge crowd followed him to the white house.
as the crowd surged in the celebration turned into a near riot.
ladies fainted men were seen with bloody noses and such a scene of confusion took place as is impossible to describe wrote an eyewitness margaret bayard smith.
jackson was nearly pressed to death before escaping out a back door.
but it was the people day and the peoples president smith concluded.
and the people would rule ill io er 14 the granger collection new york in this political cartoon titled office hunters for the year 1834 andrew jackson is a puppet master.
he is pulling strings attached to people who wantto be appointed to public offices.
what is the cartoonist s opinion of jackson.
14 4 jackson s approach to governing andrew jackson approached governing much as he had leading an army.
he listened to others but then did what he thought was right.
the kitchen cabinet jackson did not rely only on his cabinet for advice.
he made most of his decisions with the help of trusted friends and political supporters.
because these advisers were said to meet with him in the white house kitchen they were called the kitchen cabinet the rich men who had been used to influencing the government viewed the kitchen cabinet with deep suspicion.
in their eyes the men around the president were not the proper sort to be running the country.
one congressman accused amos kendall jacksons closest adviser of being the presidents lying machine jackson ignored such charges and continued to turn to men he trusted for advice.
the spoils system jacksons critics were even more upset by his decision to replace many republican officeholders with loyal democrats.
most of these civil servants viewed their posts as lifetime jobs.
jackson disagreed.
rotating people in office was more democratic than lifetime service he said because it gave more people a chance to serve their government.
jackson believed that after a few years in office civil servants should go back to making a living as other people do.
jacksons opponents called the practice of rewarding political supporters with government jobs the spoils system.
this term came from the saying to the victor belong the spoils prizes of war.
jacksons opponents also exaggerated the number of republicans removed from office.
only about 10 percent of civil servants were replaced and many deserved to be.
one official had stolen 10 000 from the treasury.
when he begged jackson to let him stay the president said i would turn out my own father under the same circumstances.
civil servant an employee of the government spoils system the practice of rewarding political supporters with government jobs andrew jackson and the growth of american democracy 261 tariff a tax imposed by the government on goods imported from another country secede to withdraw from an organization or alliance 14 5 the nullification crisis andrew jacksons approach to governing met its test in an issue that threatened to break up the united states.
in 1828 congress passed a law raising tariffs or taxes on imported goods such as cloth and glass.
the idea was to encourage the growth of manufacturing in the united states.
higher tariffs meant higher prices for imported factory goods.
american manufacturers could then outsell their foreign competitors.
northern states humming with new factories favored the new tariff law.
but southerners opposed tariffs for several reasons.
tariffs raised the prices they paid for factory goods.
high tariffs also discouraged trade among nations and planters in the south worried that tariffs would hurt cotton sales to other countries.
in addition many southerners believed that a law favoring one region in this case the north was unconstitutional.
based on this belief john c calhoun jacksons vice president called on southern states to declare the tariff null and void or illegal and not to be honored.
jackson understood southerners concerns.
in 1832 he signed a new law that lowered tariffs but not enough to satisfy the most extreme supporters of states rights in south carolina.
led by calhoun they proclaimed south carolinas right to nullify or reject both the 1828 and 1832 tariff laws.
such an action was called nullification.
south carolina took the idea of states rights even further.
the state threatened to secede if the national government tried to enforce the tariff laws.
even though he was from south carolina jackson was outraged.
if one drop of blood be shed there in defiance of the laws of the united states he raged i will hang the first man.
r of them i can get my hands on n n c rs tree 1 can he called on congress to pass the force ill which would allow him to use the federal army to collect tariffs uee j l samc time con8ress passed a compromise bill that lowered tariffs still further.
andftted such fifm ppsition s uth carolina backed down j j ciat on crisis ended.
however the tensions between the in this cartoon john c calhoun who believed states have the right to nullify federal laws is reaching toward a crown.
the crown symbolizes his desire for power.
andrew jackson is pulling on the coat of a calhoun supporter.
he wants to prevent calhoun from trampling on the constitution and destroying the union.
north and the south would increase in the years ahead.
andrew jackson on the left attacks the many headed bank of the united states with a veto stick.
bank president nicholas biddle in the center wears a top hat.
the many heads represent the 24 state directors of the bank.
vice president martin van buren in the center chokes massachusetts and delaware.
14 6 jackson battles the bank of the united states andrew jackson saw himself as the champion of the people and never more so than in his war with the bank of the united states.
the bank was partly owned by the federal government and it had a monopoly on federal deposits.
jackson thought that the bank benefited rich eastern depositors at the expense of farmers and workers as well as smaller state banks.
he felt that the bank stood in the way of opportunity for capitalists in the west and other regions.
he also distrusted the banks president nicholas biddle who was everything jackson was not wealthy upper class well educated and widely traveled.
the banks charter or contract was due to come up for renewal in 1836 jackson might have waited until after his reelection to slay the monster but henry clay who planned to run for president against jackson in 1832 decided to force the issue.
clay pushed a bill through congress that renewed the banks charter four years early.
he thought that if jackson signed the bill the farmers who shared his dislike of banks would not reelect him.
if jackson vetoed the bill he would lose votes from businesspeople who depended on the bank for loans.
what clay had forgotten was that there were many more poor farmers to cast votes than there were rich bankers and businesspeople.
jackson vetoed the recharter bill.
even though the supreme court had held that the bank was constitutional jackson called the bank an unconstitutional monopoly that existed mainly to make the rich richer.
the voters seemed to agree.
in 1832 a large majority elected jackson to a second term.
chapter 14 chapter 14 unlike some american indians who continued to fight white settlement the cherokees tried to work with the u s government to keep their land.
they accepted the terms of treaties that limited their territory.
they also agreed to the governments efforts to civilize them.
they took up farming as their main activity.
they dressed in european clothing.
they went to school and learned to read and write.
they even created a republican form of government with a written constitution.
they embraced the values of american democracy.
they were in the eyes of many americans a model indian people.
the cherokees were not willing to do everything the government wanted though.
they were not willing to sell their land and blend in with other americans.
they wanted to maintain their own identity as a separate cherokee nation.
this meant they were still an obstacle to white settlement and expansion in the south.
the state of georgia in particular found the cherokee position unacceptable.
georgia settlers felt they had a right to cherokee land and they had strong supporters to back up their claim.
one of these supporters was andrew jackson.
the cherokees had been faithful allies of the united states during the war of 1812 they had even fought under jacksons command against other indians.
but jackson did not believe that indians could live alongside white americans.
he wanted them moved out of the way to lands in the west.
as president jackson allowed georgia to put pressure on the indians.
this pressure increased after gold was discovered on cherokee land in 1829 the following year congress passed the indian removal act with jacksons support.
but the president still could not force the cherokees to move.
their land rights were based on a treaty with the government.
they would have to sign another treaty giving up their land.
to the cherokees their homeland was the spiritual as well as the geographical center of their world.
the thought of abandoning it was devastating.
i 4 cherokee chief john ross led his people for more than 30 years.
after losing the battle to preserve their homelands ross helped the cherokees move west.
american indian artist brummet echo hawk depicted the hardships of the removal in his painting trail of tears.
as the soldier moves the marchers along one who did not survive is buried by the roadside.
the removal the cherokee government under chief john ross had worked hard to prevent removal.
it had appealed to the american people to win sympathy for its cause.
it had also taken its case to court asking the justice system to support the cherokees right to their land.
but not all cherokees supported these efforts.
a number of cherokee leaders believed that removal was inevitable.
in 1835 these men signed the treaty of new echota agreeing to give up the land and move west to indian territory.
chief ross and the majority of cherokees were outraged.
they called the treaty illegal and asked congress to cancel it.
but their appeals failed.
everyone would have to go they were told.
some cherokees mainly those who supported the treaty left voluntarily.
but most waited until the deadline of may 1838 at that point an army of 7 000 u s soldiers surrounded cherokee territory.
they forced the cherokees out of their homes and into temporary camps or stockades.
the soldiers came and took us from home one cherokee woman recalled.
they drove us out of doors and did not permit us to take anything with us not even a.
change of clothes many cherokees were held in the camps for months.
conditions were harsh.
one missionary reported that the indians were obliged at night to lie down on the naked ground in the open air exposed to wind and rain and herd ed together.
like droves of hogs some cherokees escaped and fled into the mountains only to be captured by soldiers and returned to the camps.
the march west began in the summer of 1838 it took place in several phases and along several routes.
the first parties set out in june traveling by land and river.
but summer heat and drought conditions caused great suffering.
the government decided to postpone further actions until fall.
in october the removals began again.
the 850 mile journey west took several months.
although some cherokees traveled in wagons or on horseback most went on foot.
one witness wrote even aged females apparently nearly ready to drop into the grave were traveling with heavy burdens attached to the back on the sometimes frozen ground.
with no covering for the feet except what nature had given them as winter took hold conditions worsened.
one wagon driver reported there is the coldest weather in illinois i ever experienced anywhere.
the streams are all frozen over something like eight or twelve inches thick.
we are compelled to cut through the ice to get water for ourselves and the animals.
martin davis in a letter of december 1838 several parties were held up by winter weather unable to go forward for weeks on end.
they suffered from exposure disease and starvation.
these conditions were especially hard on children and the elderly.
one woman recalled that there was much sickness and a great many little children died of whooping cough many cherokees were buried along the trail.
finally in the spring of 1839 the last of the groups arrived in indian territory.
by that time some 4 000 cherokees around a fourth of all those removed had died.
the survivors would call this journey nu no du na tlo hi lu or the trail where they cried the aftermath at first life in indian territory was hard.
the cherokees had no homes and few possessions.
in addition many of the later arrivals had bitter feelings toward the treaty supporters who had moved west before them.
they considered these people traitors.
violence sometimes flared between the newer and older groups of settlers.
gradually however the cherokee people got back on their feet.
they formed a new government and set up farms and businesses.
they also established a good public school system.
john ross continued to lead the cherokees until his death in 1866 today the cherokee nation in oklahoma has around 240 000 citizens.
smaller separate bands of cherokees live in oklahoma and north carolina.
many other americans also have cherokee ancestry.
for all cherokees the trail of tears represents a great tragedy in their history.
but they also take pride in what they have achieved.
as chad smith the current leader of the cherokee nation put it we are not a people of the past.
we are a people of the present and for many centuries we will be a people of the future.
the cherokee heritage is preserved in the lives of modern cherokee people as well as in museums.
in this alabama museum on the site of ancient burial mounds a cherokee guide right explains traditional uses of furs to visitors.
andrew jackson and the growth of american democracy 271 if unit 4 timeline challenge launching the new republic 1789 washington becomes president george washington is inaugurated as the nation s first president.
1791 bank of the united states congress forms the bank of the united states the idea of treasury secretary alexander hamilton a federalist who wanted a strong national government.
1780 at 1794 whiskey rebellion president washington successfully ends the whiskey rebellion a domestic revolt against a tax on whiskey.
1797 adams becomes president john adams a federalist defeats thomas jefferson a republican to become the nation s second president.
1796 washington s farewell address before leaving office in 1797 george washington calls for a foreign policy of isolationism stressing that the united states should not entangle itself in other nations affairs.
1798 alien and sedition acts the controversial alien and sedition acts which target immigrants and traitors are signed into law by president adams.
republicans are outraged by the acts.
lit 4 1801 jefferson becomes president thomas jefferson becomes the nations third president.
jefferson believed in a limited national government.
1812 1815 war of 1812 at madison s request congress declares war against great britain to protect u s sailors at sea and to drive the british out of the northwest.
1829 jackson becomes president andrew jackson becomes president ushering in a new era of government known as jacksonian democracy and extending democratic rights to the common people.
1815 1820 1825 1830.
1835 1840 2j 1809 madison becomes president james madison takes office.
his presidency is characterized by a feeling of national unity.
1823 monroe doctrine president james monroe declares that the western hemisphere is no longer open to european colonization.
1838 1839 trail of tears underthe indian removal act thousands of cherokee indians die when they are forced to leave their homelands and journey to indian territory.
launching the new republic 273 unit 5 an expanding nation 15 manifest destiny and the growing nation 16 life in the west 17 mexicano contributions to the southwest by the 1850s the united states stretched from the atlantic to the pacific.
explorers like lewis and clark who traveled on this river in idaho in 1805 helped the nation expand.
0 unit 5 setting the stage u s territorial acquisitions 1803 1853 ifi z 4 i 130w portia 4 q b r iflshccanada claimed by 0 sacramd sant francisco 30 v ils iisiana jmtory.
i i ew lew york atlantic ocean pacific i ocean 120w formed by jjj independence from great britain in 1783 f purchased from france annexed by treaty with spain annexed by treaty with texas z claimed by orleans u s and spain to u s 1819 181sg 20n g u i i j l c a c w gained by treaty with great britain santa fetrail oregontrail mormontrail annexed by treaty californiatrail after war with mexico old spanish trail purchased from mexico i i present day l 1 b o u n d a ry 100w 90w 80w y w.
800 miles n 400 an expanding nation in this unit you will learn about the growth of the united states from about 1800 to the early 1850s.
in 1800 the united states was bordered by the atlantic ocean to the east and the mississippi river to the west.
farther west lay regions claimed by great britain russia france and spain.
by the 1850s the united states had acquired these lands more than doubling its size and extended its western border to the pacific ocean.
the map on opposite page shows the steps by which the nation s growth took place.
picture yourself moving west along a trail pioneers used the oregon trail or the santa fe trail.
the first half of your journey will cross a vast treeless plain.
on a good day your wagon train might travel 20 miles.
rivers slow you down though as crossing them is dangerous.
several weeks on the trail will bring you to an even greater obstacle the ranges of the rugged rocky mountains.
here your progress will slow from 20 miles per day to 20 or so miles per week.
timing is everything on this part of your journey.
the high mountain passes are open for only a short time each year.
if you reach the mountains too late in the year you may end up trapped by snow which will likely mean your death.
despite such challenges thousands of settlers made this journey in the 1840s and 1850s.
the map on the opposite page shows the nation s pattern of settlement in 1860 as the map below shows the plains and mountains the pioneers crossed remained largely unpopulated by u s citizens although american indians had lived on those lands for thousands of years.
before long however that situation would change.
population density of the united states 1860 fe population density per sq.
km over 160 96 160 32 96 8 32 1 8 under 1 american indians are not included.
an expanding nation 277 chapter 15 manifest destiny and the growing nation how justifiable was u s expansion in the 1800s.
15 1 introduction more than 150 years ago the phrase manifest destiny inspired great hopes and dreams among many americans.
it led to a war with mexico.
and it changed the map of the united states.
manifest destiny means obvious fate john osullivan a new york newspaper editor first used the phrase in 1845 osullivan wrote that it was the united states manifest destiny to overspread and to possess the whole of the continent looking at the land beyond the rocky mountains he argued that americans had a divine right to settle this area and make it their own.
the fact that great britain claimed part of this land a huge area known as oregon made no difference to osullivan.
after all the united states had stood up to great britain in the war of 1812 nor was osullivan impressed by mexicos claims to much of the west.
like many americans of the time he believed that the united states had a duty to extend the blessings of democracy to new lands and peoples.
it was gods plan he wrote for americans to expand their great experiment of liberty when americans began their great experiment in 1776 the idea that the united states might one day spread across the continent seemed like a dream.
by 1848 however the dream was a reality.
in this chapter 2 chapter 2 purpose for making the voyage.
he wanted to find a new route to the east indies that would give spain access to the spice trade with asia.
along the way he also hoped to claim new lands for spain and to spread the catholic faith.
in his log columbus portrays himself as a thoughtful man who cared about the native peoples he met.
but the log also shows that he was driven by the search for gold and other riches.
moving from one island to the next he wrote i do not wish to delay but to discover and go to many islands to find gold finding gold would help justify his voyage and bring wealth and glory to spain.
the quest for riches had disastrous effects on the native population however.
the spanish colonists enslaved native peoples and made them work in mines and on farms.
as the first governor of the west indies columbus began this policy.
in the years that followed millions of american indians died from overwork violence and disease.
this dark history is the subject of another primary source the devastation of the indies a brief account.
the author was bartolome de las casas bahr taw law mey day las ka sas who came to the west indies as a colonist in 1502 like most colonists he hoped to make his fortune in the indies.
but what he saw there changed his mind.
he became a priest instead and spoke out against the cruelty of spanish rule.
he accused the colonists of acting like wild beasts who took pleasure in killing torturing and destroying the native peoples the reason for the spaniards actions he wrote was their greed and ambition the greatest ever seen in the world las casas admired columbus in many ways and did not blame him for all the harm done to the indians.
but he recognized that columbus had helped set these events in motion.
how historians use the sources historians rely on primary sources like columbuss log and the writings of las casas.
they use these sources and other evidence to write a story of the past.
but the stories they tell depend on how they interpret this evidence.
for many years the story of columbus was mostly positive.
he was seen as a man of vision who discovered new lands and expanded european knowledge of the world.
in recent years however views of columbus have grown more negative.
one of the first accounts of columbus as a hero was by washington irving.
in the early 1800s irving went to spain to research the explorers life.
in 1828 he wrote the life and voyages of christopher columbus.
las casas top copied columbus s log preserving itfor history.
his own book told a very different story of the encounter between spanish and indians.
as this 16th century drawing bottom shows the spanish burned or hung indians who resisted them.
european exploration and settlement 43 many paintings like this one portray columbus and his crew as noble heroes this 19th century painting has hung in the u s capitol building since 1847 in this book irving described columbus as a man of great and inventive genius whose ambition was lofty and noble irving admitted that columbus took actions that brought harm to native peoples.
but he excused those actions as errors of the times over a century later the historian samuel eliot morison offered a more balanced view of columbus.
he portrayed columbus as a real person with strengths and weaknesses.
but he argued that his strengths outweighed his flaws.
above all morison pointed to columbuss skill as a sea captain there was no flaw no dark side to the most outstanding of all his qualities his seamanship.
as a master mariner and navigator columbus was supreme in his generation in morisons view the whole history of the americas began with columbuss voyages.
more recently some historians have offered more critical views of columbus.
one of these writers is howard zinn.
in his 2003 book a peoples history of the united states he focused on the harsh treatment of native peoples by the spanish.
columbuss trip to the americas was not a heroic adventure zinn wrote but the start of a european invasion.
it began a history of conquest slavery and death zinn did not deny the importance of columbus and his achievement.
but he emphasized the negative impact.
44 chapter 3 hardenbroeck was born in the netherlands.
in 1659 she moved to new amsterdam the dutch colonial city that later became new york.
unlike most colonists she had a job when she arrived.
she worked as an agent for her cousin a merchant in holland.
hardenbroeck sold goods like cooking oil and vinegar and bought furs to send back to holland.
she quickly established a reputation as a skilled trader.
new amsterdam was a growing trade center at the time.
it reflected the commercial spirit of holland a country that thrived on trade.
the city had an open tolerant feel.
it was a place where people of different religious and national backgrounds could live and do business.
hardenbroeck benefited from this commercial spirit.
she also benefited from the more relaxed dutch attitude toward womens rights.
in holland women could get an education and own property.
they could conduct business on their own.
women did not enjoy such rights in england at the time.
not long after hardenbroeck arrived she married a wealthy merchant.
when he died soon after she inherited his land and business.
in a short time she had become one of the wealthiest citizens in the colony.
a year later hardenbroeck married another trader.
together they continued to expand their business.
they owned a fleet of ships and moved goods from the colonies to europe and the west indies and back.
they also owned a lot of land including a plantation in barbados.
after england took control of new amsterdam in 1664 hardenbroeck maintained good relations with her english rulers.
english law allowed her less freedom to manage her own affairs but her business continued to thrive.
she remained one of the colonys leading citizens until her death in 1691.
margaret hardenbroecktook part in new amsterdam s growing trade in the 1660s.
merchants in this port city bought and sold goods from around the world.
i olaudah equiano olaudah equiano african slave most people came to the colonies of their own free will.
for one group however coming to america was not a choice.
many black africans were captured in their homelands and sold to slave traders.
packed onto ships they were transported to the american colonies.
this journey known as the middle passage was horrific for the enslaved africans.
one man who made this journey was olaudah equiano oh lau duh ek wee ahn oh.
in 1789 he wrote a book about his life the interesting narrative of the life of olaudah equiano or gustavus vassa the african written by himself he described his early life in africa his enslavement and his eventual freedom.
equiano was born in the kingdom of benin in west africa.
his father was a village chief and olaudah was expected to follow in his footsteps.
when he was 11 however he was kidnapped and taken to the coast where he was loaded onto a slave ship.
ihere he was beaten and chained to the deck along with other slaves.
i inquired of these what was to be done with us he wrote.
they gave me to understand we were to be carried to these white peoples country to work for them equiano was relieved since he had believed that the white men meant to kill him.
but his trials were not over.
when the ship was about to set sail the africans were put into cramped quarters below deck.
equiano recalled the closeness of the place and the heat of the climate added to the number in the ship which was so crowded that each had scarcely room to turn himself almost suffocated us.
the shrieks of the women and the groans of the dying rendered the whole a scene of horror almost inconceivable.
olaudah equiano was taken to america on a slave ship like this one.
ship captains tried to pack as many people on board as possible.
many people died from overcrowding and disease.
62 chapt er 3 equiano spent several weeks at sea.
he was first taken to barbados and then to a plantation in virginia.
there after less than a month he was sold to an english naval officer.
equiano traveled the world as this man s servant and after seven years he was able to buy his freedom.
he was relatively fortunate.
hundreds of thousands of africans were brought to america and never knew freedom again.
most of their children were born into slavery too.
matthew lyon indentured servant another large group of people came to the colonies as indentured servants.
in fact around half of all european colonists arrived as indentured workers.
as with enslaved africans some of these people were brought against their will.
some were kidnapped while others were convicts who were transported in chains.
most indentured servants agreed to come voluntarily however and to work for several years to pay off their ship passage.
one of these people was a young irishman named matthew lyon.
lyon was just 14 when he came to the colonies in 1765 under the terms of indenture young people were supposed to work until age 21 but lyon bribed the ship captain to say that he was 18 so when lyon was auctioned to a buyer in new york he was sold for a three year term of service.
lyon was too clever to remain a servant for even that length of time however.
a year into his service he arranged to buy two bulls from a local farmer promising to pay the farmer when he was free.
he then sold the bulls to his master in exchange for his freedom.
at that point lyon went to work for the farmer to pay back his debt.
lyon next got a job at an ironworks in connecticut.
he married the owners niece and they eventually set tled on land to the north that would later become part of vermont.
there lyon joined the green mountain boys a volunteer fighting force set up to protect settlers rights.
in 1775 at the start of the american revolution this force captured fort ticonderoga a british fort in upstate new york.
lyon became an officer and led troops in two more important battles of the revolution.
after the war for independence was won lyon served as a legislator in the new state of vermont.
he would go on to have a long career in politics and government.
from his early days as an indentured servant lyon had worked hard to build a new life in america.
like others who came to the colonies his spirit and determination helped form the new american nation.
the granger collection newyork owners of small businesses such as this colonial plumber boughtthe indentures of workers like matthew lyon.
the growth of the colonies depended on the labor of indentured servants.
the english colonies in north america 63 64 chapter 4 life in the colonies what was life really like in the colonies.
4 1 introduction in 1723 a tired teenager stepped off a boat onto a wharf in philadelphia.
he was an odd looking sight.
not having luggage he had stuffed his pockets with extra clothes.
the young man followed a group of clean dressed people into a quaker meetinghouse where he soon fell asleep.
the sleeping teenager with the lumpy clothes was benjamin franklin.
he had recently run away from his brother jamess print shop in boston.
when he was 12 franklin had signed a contract to work for his brother for nine years.
but after enduring jamess nasty temper for five years franklin packed his pockets and left.
in philadelphia franklin quickly found work as a printers assistant.
within a few years he had saved enough money to open his own print shop.
his first success was a newspaper called the pennsylvania gazette.
in 1732 readers of the gazette saw an advertisement for poor richard s almanac.
an almanac is a book published annually that contains weather predictions planting advice for farmers and information on other useful subjects.
according to the ad poor richard s almanac was written by richard saunders and printed by b franklin.
nobody knew then that author and printer were the same person.
franklin also printed proverbs or wise sayings in his almanacs.
some like these are still remembered today a penny saved is a penny earned.
early to bed early to rise makes a man healthy wealthy and wise.
fish and visitors smell in three days.
poor richard s almanac sold so well that franklin was able to retire at age 42 a man of many talents he spent the rest of his long life as a scientist inventor political leader diplomat and national postmaster.
franklins rise from penniless runaway to wealthy printer was one of many colonial success stories.
in this chapter 28 americans were outraged.
one newspaper called the german attack wholesale murder.
when president wilson protested germany said that the lusitania had been carrying arms.
still germany apologized and offered to pay for damages.
hoping to keep the united states out of the war germany also promised not to attack merchant and passenger ships without warning in the future.
protected by this promise u s manufacturers increased their trade with the allies.
trade with allied countries swelled to 3 2 billion in 1916 while trade with the central powers dropped to 1 million.
americans were not fighting in the war but they had definitely taken sides.
28 8 to make the world safe for democracy after the sinking of the lusitania wilson decided that the united states needed to prepare in case war became necessary.
he worked with congress to get money to improve the army and navy.
still neither wilson nor the country wanted war.
in 1916 wilson won reelection under the slogan he kept us out of war wilson also tried to start peace talks.
but european leaders having lost so many soldiers rejected wilsons call for peace without victory the united states enters the war the germans soon risked war with the united states again.
even though u boats were sinking 50 to 100 british merchant ships per month enough were getting through to keep the allies supplied.
desperate to prevent an allied vie tory the germans decided to cut off british supplies before their own ran out.
in february 1917 germany resumed sinking merchant ships from other countries without warning.
in march u boats torpedoed three u s merchant ships killing many americans.
in fact these ships had been carrying weapons to the allies.
the germans knew that this attack might bring the united states into the war but they hoped to win before america was ready to fight.
it was a fatal mistake.
addressing a special session of congress wilson urged a declaration of war.
america would fight alongside the allies he said not just to protect neutral shipping but because the world must be made safe for democracy congress greeted wilsons speech with applause.
later wilson reflected my message today was a message of death for our young men.
how strange it seems to applaud that.
s ft here woodrow wilson appears before congress to ask for a declaration of war against germany.
although wilson tried to avoid war he felt that continued u boat attacks on merchant ships gave him no choice.
the united states becomes a world power for u s army nearest recruiting station to recruit the necessary men for an army to send to europe the united states resorted to the draft.
all men between the ages of 18 and 45 had to register.
within a few months the army grew from 200 000 men to over 4 million.
americans prepare to fight on april 6 1917 congress declared war.
the allies rejoiced hoping for u s supplies and soldiers.
allied ships were sinking faster than they could be replaced.
to get u s supplies delivered safely convoys of u s warships started escorting cargo vessels protecting them from attack.
u s destroyers also helped the british navy assault u boats.
these strategies dramatically reduced shipping losses.
when the united states entered the war it had only 200 000 soldiers and most of those had limited training.
congress quickly authorized a national draft.
soon 3 million men had been drafted.
another 2 million volunteered.
fighting and winning u s troops who sailed overseas were called the american expeditionary force aef.
as they began arriving in europe in june 1917 aef soldiers soon learned from the allies about trench warfare.
the u s commander general john j pershing hated these terrible conditions for soldiers.
he also realized that trench warfare was not winning the war.
he worked on a plan for driving the germans out of the trenches and forcing them to retreat into open country.
meanwhile russia had dropped out of the war.
with millions of soldiers dead and starvation spreading across the country russians had revolted against their ruler the czar.
russias new government made peace with the germans.
this enabled germany to bring soldiers back from the east swelling their western forces to 3 500 000 men.
the german forces rushed to capture paris before large numbers of americans could arrive from overseas.
they pushed quickly through me village of chateau thierry and a nearby forest called belleau wood.
they were within 50 miles of paris when americans reinforced the t french gradually u s machine guns and artillery enabled the allies to push the germans back.
by the summer of 1918 more than a million americans were in urope.
pershing set his allied offensive into motion.
his plan took i nta several new technologies that had been developed during ar.
an s could advance through trenches.
airplanes could de c c 161 jun re and drop bombs.
carefully coordinating huge umbers of soldiers tanks airplanes and artillery the allies forced the weakened germans back to their own border to an rvo1 f1 c mvas1on of their own country german leaders agreed in four r cease fire on november 11 1918 for the first time in four years the guns were silenced.
had died pnt orr e e world.
more than 9 million people ering the war late the united states had lost 116 000 lives.
566 chapter 29 linking past to present what changes since 1914 have shaped how we live today.
29 1 introduction henry ford was a man with a vision.
he wanted to build a motorcar so low in price that no man making a good salary will be unable to own one the result was the model t a car ford said large enough for the family but small enough for the individual to run and care for to make the model t affordable ford needed a new way to put cars together.
at first workers built model ts by hand a task that took over 12 hours.
to reduce this time ford designed a moving assembly line.
the assembly line moved cars from worker to worker to worker with each worker adding another part.
the time needed to assemble a car dropped to under 6 hours.
with this faster assembly time ford was able to reduce the price of the model t from around 850 in 1908 to 360 by 1916 when ford unveiled his assembly line in 1914 he made a stunning announcement.
he was more than doubling his workers wages to 5 00 a day.
it was a brilliant move.
high pay kept ford s workers on the job.
it also made it possible for them to buy the cars they produced.
by 1918 half of all cars sold in the united states were model t fords.
today the ford motor company is still making motorcars for the multitudes but the world in which the company operates is very dif ferent.
in 1914 the united states was home to just 99 million people.
most people worked on farms or in factories.
people moved slowly by foot horse or rail.
only the fortunate few earned enough money to afford cars.
in contrast the united states today has a population of more than 300 million people.
relatively few work on farms or in factories.
and most families now consider a car once a luxury a necessity.
in this chapter 18 william lloyd garrison above left published a newspaper called the liberator s the 1830s.
his newspaper called for not only an end to slavery but full equality for african americans.
the abolition movement gained public attention through garrison s articles.
braving the disapproval of many northerners garrison demanded the immediate freeing of all slaves.
1 will be as harsh as truth he wrote.
i will not retreat a single inch and i will be heard angry proslavery groups destroyed garrison s printing press and burned his house.
frederick douglass speaks out one day gar rison heard an escaped slave frederick douglass speaking at a meeting of abolitionists.
over six feet tall douglass spoke with a voice like thunder.
when he described the cruel treatment of enslaved children people cried.
when he made fun of ministers who told slaves to love slavery people laughed.
when he finished garrison jumped up and cried shall such a man be held a slave in a christian land the crowd called out no.
no douglass quickly became a leader in the abolitionist movement.
his autobiography published in 1845 was an instant best seller.
a brilliant and independent thinker douglass eventually started his own newspaper north star.
its motto read right is of no sex truth is of no color god is the father of us all and we are all brethren brothers women get involved many women were inspired by religious reform movements to become involved in the fight against slavery.
like other abolitionists they sometimes faced violence.
when a young woman named angelina grimke spoke against slavery an anti abolition mob threw stones at her.
when she kept speaking they burned the building she was speaking in.
angelina and her sister sarah had been raised in a south carolina slaveholding family.
after traveling north and becoming quakers they saw slavery in a new way.
in the 1830s the two sisters began speaking out about the poverty and pain of slavery.
at first they spoke only to other women but soon they were addressing large groups of men and women throughout the north.
the grimkes led the way for other women to speak in public.
some abolitionists like sojourner truth were former slaves.
truth had always been strongly spiritual and had preached throughout the north at religious meetings and on street corners.
when she met douglass and garrison their enthusiasm inspired her to speak out loudly about slavery.
an outstanding speaker truth argued that god would end slavery peacefully.
abolitionists were a minority even in the north.
but their efforts and the violence directed at them helped change northerners attitudes toward slavery.
in addition the antislavery fight helped pave the way for the next great reform movement the struggle for women s rights.
frederick douglass a former slave was an important leader in the abolitionist movement.
through his writings and speeches he waged a fierce campaign against slavery.
an era of reform 345x photograph 2010 museum of fine arts bostor in this painting from about 1850 women are represented in traditional ways shy in the background or serving men.
during the mid 1800s many women began to work to change the way women were viewed.
18 6 equal rights for women women abolitionists were in a strange position.
they were trying to convince lawmakers to make slavery illegal yet they themselves could not vote or hold office.
they worked to raise money for the movement yet their fathers and husbands controlled their money and property.
they spoke out against slave beatings yet their husbands could discipline them however they wanted.
even wealthy women like the grimke sisters started to see that women and slaves had much in common.
what then can woman do for the slave asked angelina grimke when she is herself under the feet of man and shamed into silence the movement begins the organized movement for womens rights was sparked by the friendship between lucretia mott and elizabeth cady stanton.
the two women met in 1840 at the world anti slavery convention in london.
when they arrived they were outraged to discover that women were not allowed to speak at the meeting.
the men who ran the convention made women sit in the balcony behind a curtain.
the mens decision may have backfired because it was in the balcony that mott and stanton met.
at first glance the two women seemed quite different.
mott was 47 years old the mother of four children and an active reformer.
inspired by the grimke sisters and her quaker faith mott had preached against slavery in both white and black churches.
she had also helped prudence crandall try to find students for her school for black girls.
chapter 5 from the colonies.
loyalists saw the tragedy as proof that troops were needed more than ever if only to control patriot hotheads.
one hero came out of this sad event.
he was a boston lawyer named john adams.
like his cousin samuel john adams was a patriot.
but he also believed that every person even the british soldiers had the right to a fair trial.
adams agreed to defend the soldiers even though he knew that his action would cost him friends and clients.
at the murder trial adams argued that the troops had acted in self defense.
the jury found six of the soldiers not guilty.
two of them were found guilty only of manslaughter or causing death without meaning to.
throughout his long life john adams remained proud of his defense of the british soldiers.
he said that upholding the law in this case was one of the best pieces of service i ever rendered to my country paul revere s engraving of five coffins showing the victims of the boston massacre appeared on flyers to remind colonists of british brutality.
5 6 the boston tea party despite the hopes of patriots like sam adams the boston massacre did not spark new protests against british rule.
instead the repeal of the townshend duties led to a period of calm.
true there was still a small duty on tea.
but the tax didnt seem to bother loyalists very much.
patriots knew they could always drink dutch tea that had been smuggled into the colonies without paying duties.
things did not stay peaceful however.
in 1773 a new law called the tea act prompted more protests.
one of them was the incident that became known as the boston tea party.
the tea act the tea act was lord norths attempt to rescue the british east india company.
this large trading company controlled all the trade between great britain and asia.
for years it had been a moneymaker for great britain.
but the american boycott of british tea hurt the company badly.
by 1773 the tea company was in danger of going broke unless it could sell off the 17 million pounds of tea that were sitting in its london warehouses.
the tea act lowered the cost of tea that was sold by the british east india company in the colonies.
as a result even taxed british tea became cheaper than smuggled dutch tea.
the tea act also gave the british east india company a monopoly or complete control over tea sales in the colonies.
from now on the only merchants who could sell the bargain priced tea were those chosen by the company.
lord north may have thought he could persuade americans to buy taxed tea by making it so cheap but colonists weren t fooled.
they saw the tea act as still another attempt to tax them without their consent.
toward independence 95 in addition many merchants were alarmed by the east india companys monopoly over the tea trade.
they wondered what the british government might try to control next.
would there be a monopoly on cloth.
nervous merchants wondered what would happen to their businesses if other goods were also restricted.
tea ships arrive when the british east india companys tea ships sailed into american ports angry protesters kept them from unloading their cargoes.
more than one ship turned back for england still filled with tea.
in boston however the royal governor ordered the british navy to block the exit from boston harbor.
he insisted that three tea ships would not leave until all their tea was unloaded.
on december 16 1773 the sons of liberty decided to unload the tea but not in the way the governor had in mind.
rlhat night about 50 men dressed as mohawk indians boarded the three ships.
one of them george hewes described what happened to protest the tax on tea patriots disguised as american indians threw 342 chests of tea overboard from three british ships.
colonists later called this the boston tea party.
we then were ordered by our commander to open the hatches and take out all the chests of tea and throw them overboard and we immediately proceeded to execute his orders first cutting and splitting the chests with our tomahawks in about three hours from the time we went on board we had thus broken and thrown overboard every tea chest to be found on the ship we were surrounded by british armed ships but no attempt was made to resist us.
6 chapter 19 chapter 6 the declaration of independence what principles of government are expressed in the declaration of independence.
6 1 introduction the battles of lexington and concord marked the start of the fighting that would lead to independence from great britain.
the day after the clashes horseback riders galloped through the colonies with news of the barbarous murders of innocent militiamen.
most americans were deeply shocked.
more urgently than ever they debated what the colonies should do about the trouble with great britain.
the choices were clear enough.
the colonies could declare their independence.
or they could continue with protests and petitions or formal requests.
this second choice would keep the colonies at peace but at what cost to the colonists freedom.
no one was more outspoken in his support for independence than patrick henry of virginia.
after the passage of the intolerable acts henry delivered to the virginia house of burgesses one of the most famous speeches in american history.
there is no longer any room for hope he began.
if we wish to be free we must fight.
our chains are forged.
their clanking may be heard on the plains of boston.
the war is inevitable and let it come then henry spoke to those who treasured peace above freedom gentlemen may cry.
peace peace but there is no peace.
the war is actually begun.
the next gale that sweeps from the north will bring to our ears the clash of resounding arms.
what is it that gentlemen wish.
is life so dear or peace so sweet as to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery.
forbid it almighty god.
i know not what course others may take but as for me give me liberty or give me death.
despite the passionate words of patriots like henry most colonists remained unsure about separating from great britain.
as you will read only after the fighting started did they decide to declare independence.
patrick henry of virginia gave a speech in may 1775 that helped lead the colonies closerto independence.
the declaration of independence was adopted on july 4 1776 this painting shows the committee that drafted the declaration.
the declaration of independence 107 orderly rows of british soldiers marched up breed s hill and eventually defeated the american forces when the colonists ran out of gunpowder.
the fierce fighting proved the british would not easily defeat the colonists.
6 2 the colonists organize an army on may 10 1775 the second continental congress met in philadelphia.
by then new england militia had amassed around boston.
the first question facing congress was who should command this new england army the obvious answer was a new englander.
george washington and the continental army john adams of massachusetts had another idea.
he proposed that congress create a continental army made up of troops from all the colonies.
to lead this army adams nominated a gentleman whose skill and experience as an officer whose great talents and excellent universal character would unite the colonies better than any other person alive.
that man was george washington of virginia who had distinguished himself in the french and indian war.
the delegates agreed.
they unanimously elected washington to be commander in chief of the new continental army.
the battle of bunker hill meanwhile militiamen near boston made plans to fortify two hills that overlooked the city bunker hill and breed s hill.
on the night of june 16 1775 israel putnam led a few hundred men up breed s hill.
in four hours of furious digging they erected a crude fort on the top of the hill.
the fort worried british general william howe who had just arrived from england with fresh troops.
howe ordered an immediate attack.
under a hot june sun some 2 000 british troops formed two long lines at the base of breeds hill.
at howes order the redcoats marched up the slope.
as the lines moved ever closer putnam ordered his men dont fire until you see the whites of their eyes only when the british were almost on top of them did the militiamen pull their triggers.
the red lines broke and fell back in confusion.
the british regrouped and attacked again.
once more the americans stopped their advance.
on their third attack the redcoats finally 8 chapter 20 african americans in the mid 1800s how did african americans face slavery and discrimination in the mid 1800s.
20 1 introduction by 1850 the population of the united states had grown to just over 23 million.
this figure included 3 6 million african americans.
the great majority of african americans lived in slavery.
harriet powers the woman who created the quilt on the opposite page was one of them.
powers was born into slavery in georgia in 1837 like many slaves she grew up hearing bible stories.
in her quilts she used animals and figures from africa and the united states to illustrate those stories along with scenes from her life.
hidden in her images were messages of hope and freedom for slaves.
not all african americans were slaves.
by mid century there were about half a million free blacks as well.
many were former slaves who had escaped to freedom.
whether african americans lived in slavery or freedom discrimination unequal treatment shaped their lives.
throughout the country whites looked down on blacks.
whites ignored the contributions blacks made to american life.
they thought of the united states as their country such racist thinking later prompted african american scholar and reformer w e b du bois to ask harriet powers s quilts are considered the best examples of 1800s southern quilting.
two of her quilts survive.
they are preserved in museums in washington d c and boston massachusetts.
above is a detail from the quilt at left.
2003 museum of fine arts boston your country.
how came it to be yours.
before the pilgrims landed we were here.
here we brought you our three gifts and mingled them with yours a gift of story and song soft stirring melody in an unmelodious land the gift of sweat and brawn physical strength to beat back the wilderness and lay the foundations of this vast economic empire.
the third a gift of the spirit.
in this chapter 20 this photograph shows five generations of a slave family on a south carolina plantation.
slaves often found it difficult to keep their families together.
southern laws did not recognize slave marriages or families and owners could split up families as they wished.
20 8 slave families and communities slavery made community and family life difficult.
legally slave fami lies did not exist.
no southern state recognized slave marriages.
legal control of slave children rested not with their parents but with their masters.
owners could break up slave families at any time by selling a father a mother or a child to someone else.
of all the things they endured slaves most feared being sold away from their loved ones.
most slaves grew up in families headed by a father and mother.
unable to marry legally slaves created their own weddings which often involved the tradition of jumping over a broomstick.
one slave recalled the preacher would say to the man do you take this woman to be your wife he says yes well jump the broom after he jumped the preacher would say the same to the woman.
when she jumped the preacher said i pronounce you man and wife caring for children was never easy.
booker t washingtons mother snatched a few moments for our care in the early morning before her work began and at night after the days work was done.
still parents found time to teach the lessons children would need to survive.
silence around whites was one such lesson.
elijah marrs recalled that mothers were necessarily compelled to be severe on their children to keep them from talking too much obedience was another lesson.
william webbs mother taught him not to rebel against the nen that were treating me like some dumb brute making me work and refusing to let me learn parents also taught their children other essential lessons about caring kindness pride and hope.
they taught them to respect them selves and other members of the slave community especially older slaves.
there is not to be found among any people wrote douglass a more rigid enforcement of the law of respect to elders.
these were the lessons that helped slaves under the most difficult conditions to create loving families and close communities.
in doing so they met the most basic of human needs the need for a place to feel loved respected and safe.
african americans in the mid 1800s 38.
20 9 leisure time activities these simple words capture the constant weariness that slaves endured come day go day god send sunday.
slaves toiled all week in fields that seemed to stretch from one end of the earth to the other but on saturday night and sunday their time was their own.
saturday nights were a time for social events like corn husking or pea shelling parties.
these social events combined work and fun.
one slave recalled ive seen many a corn huskin at ole majors farm when the corn would he piled as high as the house.
two sets of men would start huskin from opposite sides of the heap.
it would keep one man busy just getting the husks out of the way and the corn would be thrown over the huskers head and filling the air like birds.
the women usually had a quilting at those times so they were pert and happy.
in this painting black house servants are shown celebrating a wedding party in the kitchen.
dancing singing and telling tales allowed slaves to temporarily forgettheir harsh conditions.
a quilting bee was one of the rare times when slave women could gather to work and talk.
in those few precious hours they were free to express themselves with needle and cloth.
the quilts they created were not only beautiful but also very much needed as bedding for their families.
after the sewing men joined the party for a quilting feast and dancing.
slaves made music out of almost anything.
stretch cowhides over cheese boxes and you had tambourines one former slave recalled.
saw bones from off a cow knock them together and call it a drum.
or use broom straws on fiddle strings and you had your entire orchestra.
sunday was a day for religion and recreation.
slaves spent their sundays going to church eating hunting fishing dancing singing telling tales naming babies playing games and visiting with friends.
in new orleans hundreds of slaves gathered on sunday afternoons in public spaces to dance sing and talk.
all of these activities helped african americans forget the sorrows of slavery.
386 chapter 21 a dividing nation which events of the mid 1800s kept the nation together and which events pulled it apart.
21 1 introduction in 1860 after one of the strangest elections in the nation s history a tall plainspoken illinois lawyer named abraham lincoln was elected president.
on learning of his victory lincoln said to the reporters covering the campaign well boys your troubles are over mine have just begun within a few weeks it became clear just how heavy those troubles would be.
by the time lincoln took office the nation had split apart over the issue of states rights regarding slavery and was preparing for civil war.
the survival of the united states of america and the fate of 4 million slaves rested in lincolns hands.
the troubles lincoln faced were not new.
the issues dividing the nation could be traced back to 1619 when the first slave ship arrived in virginia.
since that time slavery had ended in half of the united states.
the question was could the nation continue half slave and half free.
for decades americans tried to avoid that question.
many hoped slavery would simply die out on its own.
instead slavery began to expand into new territories and the question could no longer be ignored.
between 1820 and 1860 americans tried to fashion several compromises on the issue of slavery.
each compromise however created new problems and new divisions.
lincoln understood why.
slavery was not simply a political issue to be worked out through compromise.
it was a deeply moral issue.
as lincoln wrote in a letter to a friend if slavery is not wrong nothing is wrong in this chapter you will learn how americans tried to keep the united states united despite their deep divisions over slavery.
some events during this period kept the nation together while others pulled h apart.
you will also find out how americans finally answered the question of whether a nation founded on the idea of freedom could endure half slave and half free.
this portrait of abraham lincoln was taken before he won the presidential election of 1860 by the time he took office just a few months later the nation had divided over the issue of slavery.
in 1850 u s senators debated the issue of whether california should enter the union as a free state or a slave state.
a dividing nation 40 union the united states as one nation united under a single government.
during the civil war the union came to mean the government and armies of the north.
in 1819 the number of slave and free states stood at 11 each.
this balance was threatened when missouri applied for statehood as a slave state.
21 2 confronting the issue of slavery a traveler heading west across the appalachians after the war of 1812 wrote old america seems to be breaking up and moving westward it was true.
by 1819 settlers had formed seven new states west of the appalachians.
in the northwest ordinance of 1787 congress had established a process for forming new states.
besides outlining the steps leading to statehood this law also banned slavery north of the ohio river.
as a result the three western states that were formed north of the river ohio indiana and illinois were free states.
the four states that were formed south of the ohio river kentucky tennessee louisiana and mississippi permitted slavery.
in 1819 alabama and missouri applied to congress for statehood as slave states.
no one in congress questioned admitting alabama as a slave state.
alabama was located far south of the ohio river and was surrounded by other slave states.
congress had another reason for admitting alabama with no debate.
for years there had been an unspoken agreement in congress to keep the number of slave states and free states equal.
the admission of illinois as a free state in 1818 had upset this balance.
by accepting alabama with slavery congress was able to restore the balance between slave and free states.
missouri however was another matter.
questions about missouri some northerners in congress questioned whether missouri should be admitted as a slave state.
most of missouri they observed lay north of the point where the ohio river flows into the mississippi.
on the eastern side of the mississippi slavery was banned north of that point.
should this ban not also be applied west of the mississippi.
this question led to another one.
if missouri were allowed to enter the union as a slave state some asked what would keep slavery from spreading across all of the louisiana territory.
the vision of a block of new slave states stretching from the mississippi to the rocky mountains was enough to give some northerners nightmares.
the tallmadge amendment when the bill to make missouri a state came before congress representative james tallmadge of new york proposed an amendment to the bill.
the amendment said that missouri could join the union but only as a free state.
southerners in congress protested tallmadges amendment.
what right they asked did congress have to decide whether a new state should be slave or free.
according to the theory of states rights favored by many southerners congress had no power to impose its will on a state old or new.
402 chapter 22 the siege of vicksburg the town of vicksburg was located on a bluff above a hairpin turn in the mississippi river.
the city was easy to defend and difficult to capture.
whoever held vicksburg could with a few well placed cannons control movement along the mississippi.
but even farragut had to admit with fellow officer david porter that ships cannot crawl up hills 300 feet high an army would be needed to take vicksburg.
in may 1863 general ulysses s grant battled his way to vicksburg with the needed army.
for six weeks union gunboats shelled the city from the river while grant s army bombarded it from land.
slowly but surely the union troops burrowed toward the city in trenches and tunnels.
as shells pounded the city people in vicksburg dug caves into the hillsides for protection.
to survive they ate horses mules and bread made of corn and dried peas.
it had the properties of indian rubber said one confederate soldier and was worse than leather to digest low on food and supplies vicksburg surrendered on july 4 1863 the mississippi was now a union waterway and the confederacy was cut in two.
for more than a month union forces bom barded vicksburg with an average of 2 800 shells a day.
forced to eat horses mules dogs and rats the confederates finally surrendered.
problems on the confederate home front as the war raged on life in the south became grim.
because of the blockade imported goods disappeared from stores.
what few items were available were extremely expensive.
unable to sell their tobacco and cotton to the north or to other countries farmers planted food crops instead.
still the south was often hungry.
invading union armies destroyed crops.
they also cut fail lines making it difficult to move food and supplies to southern cities and army camps.
as clothing wore out southerners made do with patches and homespun cloth.
at the beginning of the war mary boykin chesnut had written in her journal of well dressed confederate troops.
by 1863 she was writing of soldiers dressed in rags and tags.
by 1864 southerners were writing letters like this one to soldiers on the battlefront we havent got nothing in the house to eat but a little bit o meal.
i dont want to you to stop lighten them yankees but try and get off and come home and fix us all up some.
many soldiers found it hard to resist such pleas even if going home meant deserting their units.
4 i african american soldiers displayed their courage during their attack on fort wagner.
the 54th massachusetts infantry charged across 200 yards of open beach in their effort to reach the fort.
22 7 fort wagner african americans and the war early in the war abolitionists had urged congress to recruit african americans for the army.
but at first most northerners regarded the conflict as a white mans war congress finally opened the door to black recruits in 1862 about 186 000 african americans many of them former slaves enlisted in the union army.
another 30 000 african americans joined the union navy.
the massachusetts 54th regiment massachusetts was one of the first states to organize black regiments.
the most famous was the 54th massachusetts infantry commanded by colonel robert gould shaw.
two of the 54th infantry s 1 000 soldiers were sons of frederick douglass.
the men of the massachusetts 54th were paid less than white soldiers.
when the black soldiers learned this they protested the unequal treatment by refusing to accept any pay at all.
in a letter to lincoln corporal james henry gooding asked are we soldiers or are we laborers.
we have done a soldier s duty.
why can t we have a soldier s pay.
at lincoln s urging congress finally granted black soldiers equal pay.
after three months of training the massachusetts 54th was sent to south carolina to take part in an attack on fort wagner outside of charleston.
as they prepared for battle the ment of the 54th faced the usual worries of untested troops.
but they also faced the added fear that if captured they might be sold into slavery.
434 chapter 10 fourth amendment searches and seizures the fourth amendment protects people and their belongings from unreasonable searches and seizures a seizure is the act of forcibly taking control of a person or property.
before arresting a person or searching someones home police must show a judge that there is good reason for such action.
the judge then issues a warrant that says exactly who will be arrested or what will be searched.
nowhere in the fourth amendment however does it say that a warrant is required for every government search.
many supreme court cases have held that warrants are not always necessary.
but there must be probable cause or a strong reason for the search.
the fourth amendment also does not define unreasonable search the supreme court provided a definition in 1967 when it held that the search must respect an individuals right to privacy police must follow careful guidelines in searches and seizures of private property.
10 5 legal rights and protections the next four amendments lay out the rights and protections that apply to people who are accused of crimes or are involved in other legal disputes.
fifth amendment legal rights the fifth amendment is the longest amendment in the bill of rights.
it lists five important rights of citizens involved with the justice system.
first this amendment gives people who are accused of serious crimes the right to a grand jury hearing.
a grand jury is a group of citizens who hear the governments evidence and decide whether a trial is justified.
if so the grand jury issues an indictment or formal charge.
if not the accused person is released.
second the amendment protects citizens from double jeopardy.
jeopardy means risk.
this protection ensures that a person who is tried for a crime and found not guilty cannot be tried again for that same crime.
third the amendment prohibits self incrimination.
this means that police cannot force people to say things that might be used against them in a trial.
today police are required to remind people of their right to remain silent before they start to question them.
they must also warn people that anything they do say can be used against them at a trial.
this reminder is known as the miranda warning after the case in which the supreme court defined this requirement.
warrant an order from a judge that authorizes police or other officials to take a certain action such as searching someones property double jeopardy putting a person on trial more than once for the same crime self incrimination giving testimony that can be used against oneself the bill of rights 189 due process the concept that the government must follow clear rules and act reasonably as it carries out the law defendant a person who is required to defend himself or herself in a legal action.
an example is an accused person who is put on trial for a crime.
the protection against self incrimination also applies to a defendant testifying in court.
defendants may refuse to answer questions that might damage their case.
this refusal is called taking the fifth.
next the fifth amendment says that a person cannot be deprived of life liberty or property without due process of law the government must follow clear rules and act reasonably as it carries out the law.
this concept is known as due process.
for example the supreme court has held that every person should be presumed innocent until proven guilty.
in addition the government must prove its case against a defendant beyond a reasonable doubt finally the fifth amendment says that the government cannot take someones private property for public use without just compensation just compensation means that the government must pay a fair price when it takes over a persons property for purposes such as building roads or parks.
sixth amendment criminal trial rights the sixth amendment lists a number of rights that are designed to provide accused persons with fair trials.
it begins with the right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial jury the right to a speedy trial means that people cannot be kept in jail for long periods before being judged at a trial.
speedy trials also ensure that witnesses testify while their memories of events are still fresh.
public means that trials may not be held in secret.
citizens have a right to attend trials to make sure that justice is being done.
an accused person also has the right to be judged by a jury of people who live in his or her area.
the jury must be impartial which means that jurors are not prejudiced influenced against the defendant.
courts have also said that prosecutors cannot exclude potential jurors based on their race or gender.
monica goodling was an official in the administration of president george w bush.
in 2007 she took the fifth amendmentto avoid testifying before congress about the dismissal of several u s attorneys until she was granted immunity.
390 chapter 11 11 5 thomas jefferson and the republican party alexander hamiltons success in getting his plans through congress alarmed thomas jefferson and his fellow republicans.
in jeffersons view almost everything hamilton did in the name of putting the united states on the path to greatness was instead a step down the road to ruin.
the two men held very different views on almost everything.
personal background jefferson was born in virginia to an old and respected family.
one of ten children he was gifted with many talents.
as a boy he learned to ride hunt sing dance and play the violin.
later he carried a violin with him in all his travels.
jefferson was also a gifted student.
when he entered college at age 16 he already knew greek and latin.
he seemed to know something about almost everything.
he once wrote that not a sprig of grass is uninteresting to me this curiosity would remain with him all his life.
with land inherited from his father jefferson set himself up as a virginia tobacco planter.
like other planters he used slaves to work his land.
once he was established as a planter jefferson entered virginia politics.
asa politician he lacked the ability to make stirring speeches.
instead jefferson wrote eloquently with a pen.
his words in the declaration of independence and other writings are still read and admired today.
view of human nature jeffersons view of human nature was much more hopeful than hamiltons.
he assumed that informed citizens could make good decisions for themselves and their country.
i have so much confidence in the good sense of man jefferson wrote when revolution broke out in france that i am never afraid of the issue outcome where reason is left free to exert her force jefferson had great faith in the goodness and wisdom of people who worked the soil farmers and planters like hint self.
state a problem to a ploughman farmer and a professor he said and the former will decide it often better than the latter views on government republicans favored democracy over any other form of government.
they had no patience with the federalists view that only the best people should rule.
to republicans this view came dangerously close to monarchy or rule by a king.
republicans believed that the best government was the one that governed the least.
a small government with limited powers was most likely to leave the people alone to enjoy the blessings of liberty.
to keep the national government small they insisted on a strict construction or interpretation of the constitution.
the constitution they insisted meant exactly what it said no more and no less.
any addition to the powers listed in the document such as the creation of a national bank was unconstitutional and dangerous.
along with advocating for a weak national government republicans favored strong state governments.
state governments they argued were closer to the people and the people could control them more easily strong state governments could also keep the national government from growing too powerful.
views on the economy like most americans in the 1790s jefferson was a country man.
he believed that the nation s future lay not with federalist bankers and merchants in big cities but with plain republican farmers.
those who labor in the earth he wrote are the chosen people of god if ever he had a chosen people.
republicans favored an economy based on agriculture.
they opposed any measures such as the national bank designed to encourage the growth of business and manufacturing.
in their view the national bank was not only unconstitutional but against farmers.
while the bank was happy to loan money to businesspeople to build factories and ships it did not make loans to farmers to buy land.
agriculture according to thomas jefferson was the most important part of the economy.
he believed farming was the best occupation because it kept people out of corrupt cities.
strict construction a narrow interpretation of the constitution meaning that congress has only those powers specifically given in the constitution political developments in the early republic 213 views on great britain and france another topic over which republicans and federalists had heated arguments was the french revolution.
most americans favored the revolution until it turned violent and led to war.
as you have read most federalists then turned against the new french republic and sided with great britain.
for this change of heart a republican newspaper called the federalists british bootlickers implying that they were weak and eager to please the british.
despite the violence of the revolution most republicans continued to support france.
while regretting the bloodshed they argued that the loss of a few thousand aristocrats was a small price to pay for freedom.
for their loyalty to france republicans were scorned in a federalist newspaper as man eating blood drinking cannibals in 1793 the french government sent edmond genet zhuh nay to the united states as its new official representative.
genet preferred to be called citizen genet french revolutionaries adopted this title to emphasize the equality of all people.
his mission was to convince americans that they should join france in its war against great britain.
republicans welcomed citizen genet as a conquering hero.
large crowds cheered him as he traveled about the country.
in philadelphia the nations temporary capital a great banquet was held in his honor.
when genet formally presented himself to president george washington he expected another warm and enthusiastic reception.
washington however did not want to be drawn into war with great britain.
his response to genet was cool and dignified.
genet began making speeches against the president.
these attacks on washington brought thousands of genets supporters into philadelphias streets.
day after day recalled vice president john adams the protesters threatened to drag washington out of his house and compel the government to declare war in favor of the french revolution.
this was too much even for jefferson.
calling genet hotheaded.
disrespectful and even indecent toward the president secretary of state jefferson asked the french government to recall its troublesome representative.
edmond genet the french representative to the united states attempted to convince americans to join the french in their war with britain.
after genet insulted president washington he was ordered to leave the country.
here secretary of state jefferson presents genet to the president in 1793 chapter 11 116 the presidency of john adams when the framers of the constitution created the electoral college they imagined that the electors would simply choose the two best leaders for president and vice president.
that was how the nations first two presidential elections worked.
by the third election in 1796 however it was clear that political parties had become part of the election process.
the republicans supported thomas jefferson for president that year.
his support came mainly from farmers in the south and west.
the federalists supported john adams who appealed to lawyers merchants ship owners and businesspeople in the north.
when the electoral votes were counted john adams was elected president by just three votes.
jefferson came in second making him vice president.
the nations new top two leaders were political leaders from opposing parties.
sedition the crime of encouraging rebellion against the government the alien and sedition acts at first president adams tried to work closely with jefferson.
party violence adams found made such efforts useless meanwhile federalists in congress passed four controversial laws known as the alien and sedition acts.
they argued that these laws were needed as protection against foreigners who might threaten the nation.
in fact the real purpose of the alien and sedition acts was to make life difficult for the federalists rivals the republicans.
three of the laws the alien acts were aimed at aliens or noncitizens.
the first law lengthened the time it took for an immigrant to become a citizen with the right to vote from 5 to 14 years.
since most immigrants voted republican jefferson saw this law as an attack on his party.
the other two alien acts allowed the president to either jail or deport aliens who were suspected of activities that threatened the government.
although these laws were never enforced they did frighten a number of french spies and troublemakers who then left the country.
the fourth law known as the sedition act made sedition encouraging rebellion against the government a crime.
its definition of sedition included printing uttering or publishing any false scandalous and malicious hateful writing against the government congress or the president.
alexander hamilton approved of this law believing that it would punish only those who published lies intended to destroy the government.
instead the sedition act was used to punish republican newspaper editors who insulted president adams in print.
one for example called him old querulous whiny bald blind crippled toothless adams twenty five people were arrested under the new law.
ten of them were convicted of printing seditious opinions.
john adams a federalist was elected the second president of the united states by only 3 votes in the electoral college.
thomas jefferson a democratic republican who had 68 votes to adams s 71 became vice president.
political developments in the early republic 215 nullify to refuse to recognize a federal law.
this action by a state is called nullification.
states rights theory the theory that rights not specifically given to the federal government by the constitution remain with the states the virginia and kentucky resolutions republicans viewed the sedition act as an attack on the rights of free speech and free press.
since the federal government was enforcing the act republicans looked to the states to protect these freedoms.
thomas jefferson and james madison drew up a set of resolutions or statements opposing the alien and sedition acts and sent them to state legislatures for approval.
they argued that congress had gone beyond the constitution in passing these acts.
states therefore had a duty to nullify the laws that is to declare them to be without legal force.
only two states virginia and kentucky adopted the resolutions.
the arguments put forward in the virginia and kentucky resolutions were based on the states rights theory of the constitution.
this theory holds that rights not specifically given to the federal government remain with the states.
of these one of the most important is the right to judge whether the federal government is using its powers properly.
when no other states approved the virginia and kentucky resolutions the protest died.
the states rights theory however was not forgotten.
it would be raised and tested again in the years ahead.
the imew national capital in 1800 the federal government moved to the city of washington in the district of columbia.
most of the governments buildings were still under construction.
president adamss wife abigail described the new presidents house as a castle in which not one room or chamber is finished she used the large east room for hanging laundry as it was not fit for anything else.
in this political cartoon a devil and a lion symbolizing great britain encourage a federalist editor represented by a hedgehog to cross out important phrases from america s great documents.
liberty weeps at benjamin franklin s tomb.
chapter 23 families churches and communities also banded together to build schools and colleges for black children.
because of these efforts literacy among african americans rose rapidly.
when slavery ended in 1865 only 5 percent of african americans could read.
by 1900 more than 50 percent could read and write.
chapter 24 the flight to canada in desperation the nez perce headed for the one place where they might still live free canada.
for the next three months chief joseph led the u s army on a chase of more than 1 000 miles through rugged mountain country.
although greatly outnumbered his warriors won several battles.
the chase ended less than 40 miles from the canadian border.
forced to surrender chief joseph spoke his heart in these words i am tired of fighting.
our chiefs are killed.
the old men are all dead it is cold and we have no blankets.
the little children are freezing to death.
my people some of them have run away to the hills and have no blankets no food no one knows where they are hear me my chiefs.
i am tired my heart is sick and sad.
from where the sun now stands i will fight no more forever.
after their surrender in 1877 chief joseph and his followers were sent to a barren reservation in oklahoma.
there they began to fall sick and die.
soon they had a cemetery just for babies with more than a hundred graves.
chief joseph begged the government to allow his people to join the rest of the nez perce in lapwai.
although some did go to lapwai others including chief joseph were sent to the colville reservation in washington in 1885 they never went back to their homeland.
when chief joseph died in 1904 the doctor listed the cause of death as a broken heart tensions in the west i 4 as settlers moved west they seized more and more land from the american indians who lived and hunted there.
here we see an american indian village near fort laramie in what is now wyoming.
24 3 new interest in the west settlers had been gradually forcing american indians from their land ever since the first colonists arrived in north america.
still by the start of the civil war the west was populated mostly by indians and huge herds of buffalo.
then in 1862 congress passed two laws that stirred new interest in the west the homestead act and the pacific railway act.
homesteader a farmer who is given a plot of public land or homestead in return for cultivating it transcontinental railroad a railroad that crosses a continent subsidy money or other things of value such as land that a government contributes to an enterprise considered to benefit the public the homestead act the homestead act offered farmers 160 acres of public land in the west for free.
all the farmer or homesteader had to do was clear the land and farm it for five years.
at the end of that time the homesteader received ownership of the land.
the impact of the new law was enormous.
year after year the promise of free land drew hopeful homesteaders westward.
between 1860 and 1910 the number of farms in the united states tripled from 2 million to more than 6 million.
i i the pacific railway act the pacific railway act called for the building of a transcontinental railroad to link the atlantic and pacific coasts.
this huge construction project was given to two railroad companies the union pacific and the central pacific.
to help the railroad companies pay for the project congress gave them subsidies in the form of sections of free land for every mile of track they laid.
the railroads could sell this land to settlers later.
the government also loaned the two companies more than 60 million.
472 chapter 24 vigilantes handed out quick justice.
a suspected murderer might be arrested tried convicted and hanged all in the same day.
if asked about their methods the vigilantes pointed out that there were no courts or jails nearby.
no miner had time to waste guarding criminals.
when the easy to find gold or silver was gone most miners moved on.
just seven years after its birth for example gila city was a ghost town.
all that remained wrote browne were three chimneys and a coyote mining changes the west in many ways mining was destructive.
it damaged the land and displaced many american indians.
but most americans saw mining as a source of wealth and opportunity.
some boomtowns like reno and denver survived to become prosperous cities.
mining also opened up the wests mountains and deserts to other settlers.
some were businesspeople who invested in the heavy equipment needed to extract hard to find ore from western mountains.
others were farmers and ranchers.
these were the people who would turn territories into new western states.
24 6 ranchers and cowboys a third group of western settlers consisted of ranchers and the cowboys who tended their herds of cattle.
at the end of the civil war millions of longhorn cattle roamed the texas plains.
the cattle earned their name from their impressive horns which could measure more than seven feet from tip to tip.
the market for all this beef was the crowded cities of the east.
cattle worth 3 a head in texas might be sold for 50 in new york or chicago.
the problem was how to transport the cattle to the cities.
this challenge was complicated by the presence of indians and stampeding buffalo herds.
the extermination of the buffalo the railroads made the ranchers task much easier.
as the railroads moved onto the great plains buffalo hunters followed.
the hunters killed huge numbers of buffalo for their hides and bones which were shipped by rail for sale in the east.
the plains indians who depended on the buffalo for food were horrified by the slaughter.
so were some other americans.
in 1874 congress passed a bill outlawing the killing of more buffalo than could be used for food.
but president grant refused to sign the bill into law.
general philip sheridan supported grants decision.
you ought to give each hunter a medal he said.
let them kill skin and sell until the buffalo are exterminated wiped out.
then your prairies can be covered with cattle and the cowboy.
by 1880 the buffalo had all but vanished.
with their foodgone t e plains indians had little choice but to move to reservations.
the plains were now open to ranchers and their cattle.
cowboys like nat love moved out west to herd cattle.
many cowboys dreamed of getting their own herd and making their fortune in the rapidly growing cattle empire.
tensions in the i dodge city kansas was a wild cow town.
when cowboys reached the end of the drive they were ready for adventure.
the long drive the railroads also solved the ranchers transportation problem.
in 1867 joseph mccoy built a stockyard next to the railroad in abilene kansas.
a stockyard is a large holding pen where cattle are kept temporarily.
that summer cowboys herded a few thousand cattle from texas to the abilene stockyard in what they called the tong drive there the cattle were loaded into boxcars and shipped east.
over the next 20 years cowboys drove more than 5 million cattle to abilene and other cow towns beside the rails.
being a cowboy was dangerous and low paying work.
still life on the trail attracted many young adventurers.
most were texans.
about a third were of mexican or african american heritage.
rarely however were black cowboys promoted to trail boss.
jim perry for example was an expert rider roper and trail cook.
prejudice against blacks he believed was the only reason he was not the boss of his own team.
during the long drive cowboys worked 17 hours a day seven days a week for three to four months.
much of the work was boring except for moments of terror when a herd stampeded.
by the time they reached the end of the trail most cowboys were ready for rowdy fun including drinking gambling and brawling.
that made the cow towns wild noisy and often dangerous places.
the most notorious cow town was dodge city kansas.
an eastern newspaper described it as a wicked little town between 1872 and 1878 64 victims of gunfights were buried on the hill above the town.
later several graves were dug up to make way for a new school.
the gravediggers turned up a fine collection of skeletons most still wearing their cowboy boots.
to this day the dodge city cemetery is known as boot hill.

chapter 25 the gay rights movement advances during the 1970s and 1980s gay men and lesbians began to fight openly for civil rights.
while the gay rights movement suffered a setback during the early 1980s in the face of conservative opposition and the aids crisis by the late 1980s and early 1990s a new surge of gay activism was under way in the country direct action groups sprang up throughout the country calling for an end to anti gay discrimination.
although several speakers at the 1992 republican national convention condemned gay activism these speakers were unable to slow the pace of change.
by the year 1993 seven states and 110 communities had outlawed such discrimination.
a gay rights march in washington d c october 1987 1 terms names for each term or name below write a sentence explaining its significance.
aids acquired immune pay equity jesse jackson antonia coello novello deficiency syndrome l douglas wilder lauro cavazos main idea using your notes use a chart like the one below to list some of the social problems of the reagan and bush years and how the government responded to them.
critical thinking predicting effects how might improvements in the educational system help solve other social problems.
think about the impact education might have on health related problems the impact that education might have on urban problems the impact that education might have on unemployment 4 summarizing identify the political and economic contributions of women to american society in the 1980s.
5 comparing compare the political gains and losses experienced by various groups during the reagan and bush administrations.
forming generalizations why might a widening gap between the richest and poorest citizens of a country be a cause for concern about that countrys future.
choose one issue and write other responses the government might have made.
the conservative tide geography spotlight from rust belt to sun belt migration within the united states led to changing demographic patterns.
many americans left the north central and northeast regions which came to be called the rust belt because many of their aging factories had been closed.
these people moved to the south and southwest which became known as the sun belt due to their warm climate.
in the postwar decades the sun belt experienced an increase in job opportunities that attracted many new residents.
people also appreciated that these areas typically had a lower cost of living.
and with the widespread availability of air conditioning living in these states became more practical.
as people move from state to state and from region to region they gradually transform the balance of political and economic power in the nation.
each census in recent times has recorded how certain states have gained population and others have lost population.
if the gains or losses are large enough a state s representation in the u s house of representatives will increase or decrease commensurately.
the movement from the rust belt to the sun belt has caused a shift in political power within the united states.
regional exchanges between 1970 and 1975 the population center of the united states which had generally moved westward for 17 decades suddenly moved southward as well.
the arrows show the net number of americans who migrated and their patterns of migration in the early 1970s.
the west gained 311 000 from the northeast plus 472 000 from the north central region for a total of 783 000 people.
however it also lost 75 000 people to the south.
during the 1980s and 1990s the southward and westward shift continued.
below housing development near danville california 1990 846 chapter 13 main idea summarizing a how did schools change during the 1920s.
the public schools met another challenge in the 1920s teaching the children of new immigrant families.
the years before world war i had seen the largest stream of immigrants in the nation s history close to 1 million a year.
unlike the earlier english and irish immigrants many of the new immigrants spoke no english.
by the 1920s their children filled city classrooms.
determined teachers met the challenge and created a large pool of literate americans.
a taxes to finance the schools increased as well.
school costs doubled between 1913 and 1920 then doubled again by 1926 the total cost of american education in the mid 1920s amounted to 2 7 billion a year.
expanding news coverage widespread education increased literacy in america but it was the growing mass media that shaped a mass culture.
newspaper circulation rose as writers and editors learned how to hook readers by imitating the sensational stories in the tabloids.
by 1914 about 600 local papers had shut down and 230 had been swallowed up by huge national chains giving readers more expansive coverage from the big cities.
mass circulation magazines also flourished during the 1920s.
many of these magazines summarized the week s news both foreign and domestic.
by the end of the 1920s ten american magazines including reader s digest founded in 1922 and time founded in 1923 boasted a circulation of over 2 million each.
radio coivies of age although major magazines and newspapers reached big audiences radio was the most powerful communications medium to emerge in the 1920s.
americans added terms such as airwaves radio audience and tune in to their everyday speech.
by the end of the high school enrollment 1910 1940 source historical statistics of the united states skillbuilder interpreting graphs what was the approximate increase in the number of high school students between 1920 and 1930.
447 history video did you know babe ruth decade the radio networks had created something new in the united states the shared national experience of hearing the news as it happened.
the wider world had opened up to americans who could hear the voice of their president or listen to the world series live.
america chases new heroes and old dreams during the 1920s many people had money and the leisure time to enjoy it.
in 1929 americans spent 4 5 billion on entertainment much of it on ever changing fads.
early in the decade americans engaged in new leisure pastimes such as working crossword puzzles and playing mahjong a chinese game whose playing pieces resemble dominoes.
in 1922 after explorers opened the dazzling tomb of the egyptian pharaoh tutankhamen consumers mobbed stores for pharaoh inspired accessories jewelry and furniture.
in the mid 1920s people turned to flagpole sitting and dance marathons.
they also flooded athletic stadiums to see sports stars who were glorified as superheroes by the mass media.
main idea analyzing effects why did radio become so popular.
sports heroes of the 1920s new york yankees slugger babe f smashed home run after home run during the 1920s.
when this legendary star hit a record 60 home runs in 1927 americans went wild.
although the media glorified sports heroes the golden age of sports reflected common aspirations.
athletes set new records inspiring ordinary americans.
when poor unknown athletes rose to national fame and fortune they restored americans belief in the power of the individual to improve his or her life.
gertude ederle in 1926 at the age of 19 gertrude ederle became the first woman to swim the english channel.
here an assistant applies heavy grease to help ward off the effects of the cold channel waters.
andrew rube foster a celebrated pitcher and team manager andrew rube foster made his greatest contribution to black baseball in 1920 when he founded the negro national league.
although previous attempts to establish a league for black players had failed foster led the league to success earning him the title the father of black baseball helen wills helen wills dominated womens tennis winning the singles title at the u s open seven times and the wimbledon title eight times.
her nickname was little miss poker face x historic flights 1919 1932 lindbergh s flight america s most beloved hero of the time wasn t an athlete but a small town pilot named charles a lindbergh who made the first nonstop solo flight across the atlantic.
a handsome modest minnesotan lindbergh decided to go after a 25 000 prize offered for the first nonstop solo transatlantic flight.
on may 20 1927 he took off near new york city in the spirit of st louis flew up the coast to newfoundland and headed over the atlantic.
the weather was so bad lindbergh recalled that the average altitude for the whole second 1 000 miles of the atlantic flight was less than 100 feet.
after 33 hours and 29 minutes lindbergh set down at le bourget airfield outside of paris france amid beacons searchlights and mobs of enthusiastic people.
paris threw a huge party.
on his return to the u s new york showered lindbergh with ticker tape the president received him at the white house and america made him its idol.
in an age of sensationalism excess and crime lindbergh stood for the honesty and bravery the nation seemed to have lost.
the novelist f scott fitzgerald a fellow minnesotan caught the essence of lindbergh s fame.
a personal voice f scott fitzgerald in the spring of 1927 something bright and alien flashed across the sky.
a young minnesotan who seemed to have nothing to do with his generation did a heroic thing and for a moment people set down their glasses in country clubs and speakeasies and thought of their old best dreams.
quoted in the lawless decade lindbergh s accomplishment paved the way for others.
in the next decade amelia earhart was to undertake many brave aerial exploits inspired by lindbergh s example.
the roaring life of the 1920s 449 entertainment and the arts despite the feats of real life heroes america s thirst for entertainment in the arts and on the screen and stage seemed unquenchable in the 1920s.
even before the introduction of sound movies became a national pastime offering viewers a means of escape through romance and comedy.
the first major movie with sound the jazz singer was released in 1927 walt disney s steamboat willie the first animated film with sound was released in 1928 by 1930 the new talkies had doubled movie attendance with millions of americans going to the movies every week.
q both playwrights and composers edward hoppers of music broke away from the european traditions of the 1920s.
eugene night windows o neill s plays such as the hairy ape forced americans to reflect upon 1928.
modern isolation confusion and family conflict.
fame was given to jewish composer george gershwin when he merged popular concert music with american jazz thus creating a new sound that was identifiably american.
painters appealed to americans by recording an america of realities and dreams.
edward hopper caught the loneliness of american life in his canvases of empty streets and solitary people while georgia o keeffe produced intensely colored canvases that captured the grandeur of new york.
j main idea making inferences why were americans so delighted by movies in the 1920s.
writers of the 1920s the 1920s also brought an outpouring of fresh and insightful writing making it one of the richest eras in the country s literary history.
sinclair lewis the first american to win a nobel prize in literature was among the era s most outspoken critics.
in his novel babbitt lewis used the main character of george f babbitt to ridicule americans for their conformity and materialism.
a personal voice sinclair lewis 66 a sensational event was changing from the brown suit to the gray the contents of his pockets.
he was earnest about these objects.
they were of eternal importance like baseball or the republican party.
they included a fountain pen and a silver pencil.
which belonged in the righthand upper vest pocket.
without them he would have felt naked.
on his watch chain were a gold penknife silver cigar cutter seven keys.
and incidentally a good watch.
last he stuck in his lapel the boosters club button.
with the conciseness of great art the button displayed two words boosters pep 99 babbitt it was f scott fitzgerald who coined the term jazz age to describe the 1920s.
in this sick of paradise and the great gatsby he revealed the negative side of the period s gaiety and freedom portraying wealthy and attractive people leading imperiled lives in gilded surroundings.
in new york city a brilliant group of writers routinely lunched together at the algonquin hotel s round table.
among the best known of them was dorothy parker a short story writer poet and essayist.
parker was famous for her wisecracking wit expressed in such lines as i was the toast of two continents greenland and australia.
chapter 25 texas test practice use the passage and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 1.
that system of republican government has never failed us but for a time we failed the system.
we asked things of government that government was not equipped to give.
we yielded authority to the national government that properly belonged to states or to local governments or to the people themselves.
we allowed taxes and inflation to rob us of our earnings and savings and watched the great industrial machine that had made us the most productive people on earth slow down and the number of unemployed increase ronald reagan second inaugural address 1985 1 the passage suggests that president ronald reagan supported which point of view.
a there should be an end to all social welfare programs.
b the role of the federal government should be reduced.
c the role of the federal government should be increased.
d the federal government should raise taxes.
2 which of the following events signaled the end of the cold war.
f operation desert storm g iran contra scandal h collapse of the soviet union j protests at tiananmen square use the graph and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 3 gross federal debt source u s dept.
of the treasury 3 the graph shows that during the reagan and bush years the gross federal debt a stayed the same.
b greatly increased.
c greatly decreased.
d did not exist.
4 which of the following was not a goal of the conservative movement of the 1980s.
f strengthen the national defense g reduce government regulations h promote family values and patriotic ideals j el increase taxes 71 test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials interact with history writesmart think about the issues you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter and explore the issues below use the annotation tools in your ebook to record your thoughts.
explore the issues how can immigrants gain access to the services they need.
what skills do newcomers need.
how might immigrants respond to help from an outsider.
ley o f pied 1898 hawaii is annexed by the united states.
l900 mckinley is reelected.
i1903 s the wright brothers achieve the first successful airplane flight.
419101 the appearance of haileys comet causes wide spread panic.
19121 woodrow wilson is elected president.
1900 1910 1905 workers revolt in 11908 oil is 19121 qing 1 1901 the gt petersburg russia.
discovered dynasty in china commonwealth of in persia.
is overthrown.
australia is founded.
19141 panama canal opens.
immigrants and urbanization 253 teks3c 3d the new immigrants main idea why it matters now terms names immigration from europe asia the caribbean and mexico reached a new high in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
this wave of immigration helped make the united states the diverse society it is today.
one american s taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes about immigration to the united states.
in 1871 14 year old fong see came from china to gold mountain the united states.
fong see stayed worked at menial jobs and saved enough money to buy a business.
despite widespread restrictions against the chinese he became a very successful importer and was able to sponsor many other chinese who wanted to enter the united states.
fong see had achieved the american dream.
however as his great granddaughter lisa see recalls he was not satisfied.
a personal voice lisa see he had been trying to achieve success ever since he had first set foot on the gold mountain.
his dream was very american he wanted to make money have influence be respected have a wife and children who loved him.
in 1919 when he traveled to china he could look at his life and say he had achieved his dream.
but once in china he suddenly saw his life in a different context.
in america was he really rich.
could he live where he wanted.
did americans care what he thought.
the answers played in his head no no no.
ellis island angel island melting pot nativism chinese exclusion act gentlemens agreement on gold mountain despite fong see s success he could not upon his death in 1957 be buried next to his caucasian wife because california cemeteries were still segregated.
through the golden door driven by a sense of optimism millions of immigrants entered the united states in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
some known as birds of passage intended to immigrate temporarily to earn money to take back home many others believed that they would find a better life in america free of the challenges they faced back home such as famine land shortages or persecution chapter to answer the following questions.
changing ways of life pages 434 439 1 why was heavy funding needed to enforce the volstead act.
2 explain the circumstances and outcome of the trial of the biology teacher john scopes.
the twenties woman pages 440 443 3 in what ways did flappers rebel against the earlier styles and attitudes of the victorian age.
4 what key social economic and technological changes of the 1920s affected womens marriages and family life.
education and popular culture pages 446 451 5 how did high schools change in the 1920s.
6 how did the literature of the 1920s reflect the characteristics and issues of the period.
the harlem renaissance pages 452 457 7 what do the great migration and the growth of the naacp and unia reveal about the african american experience in this period.
8 what were some of the important themes treated by african american writers in the harlem renaissance.
critical thinking using your notes create a concept web like the one below and fill it in with trends in popular culture that emerged in the 1920s and continue to influence american society today.
new attitudes and fashion chapter 26 main idea analyzing causes a what factors accounted for bushs decline in popularity.
the election of 1992 after the u s victory in the persian gulf war in 1991 republican president george bush s popularity had climbed to an 89 percent approval rating.
shortly after the war ended however the nation found itself in the grips of a recession.
in early 1992 bush s approval rating nose dived to 40 percent.
in his run for reelection president bush could not convince the public that he had a clear strategy for ending the recession and creating jobs.
throughout the presidential race bill clinton campaigned as the candidate who would lead the nation out of its economic crisis.
so did a third party candidate texas billion aire h ross perot.
perot targeted the soaring federal budget deficit as the nation s number one problem.
a budget deficit occurs when the federal government borrows money to meet all its spending commitments.
it s time perot declared in his usual blunt style to take out the trash and clean up the barn.
election day results however demonstrated that clinton s center of the road strategy had the widest appeal.
though clinton won he captured only 43 percent of the popular vote.
bush received 38 percent while perot managed an impressive 19 percent.
a new democrat bill clinton won the presidency in part by promising to move away from traditional democratic policies.
he also emphasized the need to move people off welfare and called for growth in private business as a means to economic progress.
in office clinton worked to move the democratic party toward the political center by embracing both liberal and conservative programs.
according to an ally clinton hoped to modernize liberalism so it could sell again.
by doing so he sought to create a new and more inclusive democratic party.
main idea analyzing causes si what factors led to the defeat of clintons health care plan.
william jefferson clinton 1946 born in hope arkansas at the beginning of the baby boom bill clinton had wanted to be president most of his life.
as a college student in the 1960s he had opposed the vietnam war and pulled strings to avoid being drafted.
after studying in england as a rhodes scholar and graduating from yale law school clinton returned to arkansas.
he taught at the university of arkansas school of law and dived into politics becoming governor in 1979 at the age of 32 moderate reform and economic boom president clinton demonstrated his willingness to pursue both liberal and conservative policies on health care the budget deficit crime and welfare.
health care reform clinton had pledged to create a plan to guarantee affordable health care for all americans especially for the millions of americans who lacked medical insurance.
once in office clinton appointed first lady hillary rodham clinton a skilled lawyer and child welfare advocate to head the team creating the plan.
the president presented the health care reform bill to congress in september 1993 congress debated the plan for a year.
intense lobbying and republican attacks on the plan for promoting big government sealed its doom.
in the end congress never even voted on the bill.
s hillary rodham clinton explains the hearth care reform plan to a senate subcommittee.
the united states in today s world injured victims after the april 1995 bombing of the alfred p murrah federal building in oklahoma city oklahoma.
balanced budget and an economic boom president clinton was more successful in his efforts to reduce the federal budget deficit.
clinton and the republican controlled congress agreed in 1997 on legislation to balance the federal budget by the year 2002 the bill cut spending by billions of dollars lowered taxes to win republican support and included programs aimed at helping children and improving health care.
a year later clinton announced that for the first time in nearly 30 years the federal budget had a surplus.
that is the government took in more than it spent.
surpluses were used in part to pay down the nation s debt which had soared to around 5 5 trillion.
perhaps the most effective tool in generating a surplus was the booming economy.
about the time clinton took office the economy rebounded.
unemployment fell and the stock market soared to new heights.
as a result the government s tax revenues rose and fewer people received public aid.
these factors helped slash the federal debt.
reforming welfare clinton and the congressional republicans cooperated to reform the welfare system.
in 1996 a bill was proposed to place limits on how long people could receive benefits.
it also put an end to a 61 year federal guarantee of welfare and instead gave states block grants set amounts of federal money they could spend on welfare or for other social concerns.
although liberal democrats feared the effects of eliminating the federal safety net for the poor the president backed the bill.
over the next few years states moved millions of people from welfare to jobs.
because of the strong economy the transition was more successful than some had been predicting.
crime and terrorism the improved economy along with enlargement of police forces combined to lower crime rates in the 1990s.
however fears were raised among americans by acts of violence and terrorism around the country.
a shocking crime occurred april 1999 when two students at columbine high school in colorado killed 12 students and a teacher and wounded 23 others and then shot themselves.
americans were appalled at copycat crimes that began to occur.
some called for tougher gun control while others argued that exposure to violent imagery should be curtailed.
violence had pervaded television news throughout the decade.
in 1993 terrorists had exploded bombs in the world trade center in new york city.
this was closely followed by a 1995 blast that destroyed a nine story federal office building in oklahoma city killing 168 children women and men.
timothy mcveigh an american veteran of the gulf war was found guilty in the oklahoma bombing.
he was executed in 2001 the first use of the federal death penalty in 38 years.
although american embassies and military targets abroad were subject to sporadic and deadly terrorist attacks during the decade the u s was in no way prepared for a devastating attack that took place on its own soil on the morning of september 11 2001 m main idea summarizing what acts of terrorism targeted americans in the decade preceding 2001.
862 chapter 14 j 1932 the bonus army arrives in washington d c 1932 rankim delano roosevelt is elected president.
1933 century of progress exposition begins.
1933 thetwenty first amendment ends prohibition.
119331 more than 13 million americans are unemployed.
women serve soup and slices of bread to unemployed men in an outdoor breadline in los angeles california during the great depression.
1932 1932 ibn sa ud becomes king of newly united saudi 1932 from prison mohandas k gandhi leads a protest against british policies in india.
1933 adolf hitler takes power in germany.
1933 japan withdraws from the league of nations.
1934 the great depression begins 463 as the prosperity of the 1920s ended severe economic problems gripped the nation.
why it matters now the great depression has had lasting effects on how americans view themselves and their government.
terms names price support speculation credit buying on margin e smith black tuesday dow jones great depression industrial hawley smoot average tariff act oneamericansstory taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the causes of the 1929 stock market crash.
gordon parks shown here in 1968 discussing the movie version of his autobiographical gordon parks the well known photographer author and filmmaker was a 16 year old high school student in the fall of 1929 he supported himself as a busboy at the exclusive minnesota club where prosperous club members spoke confidently about the economy.
parks too looked forward to a bright future.
then came the stock market crash of october 1929 in his autobiography parks recalled his feelings at the time.
a personal voice gordon parks i couldnt imagine such financial disaster touching my small world it surely concerned only the rich.
but by the first week of november i was without a job.
all that next week i searched for any kind of work that would prevent my leaving school.
again it was were firing not hiring.
i went to school and cleaned out my locker knowing it was impossible to stay on.
a piercing chill was in the air as i walked back to the rooming house a choice of weapons the crash of 1929 and the depression that followed dealt a crushing blow to the hopes and dreams of millions of americans.
the high flying prosperity of the 1920s was over.
hard times had begun.
economic troubles on the horizon as the 1920s advanced serious problems threatened economic prosperity.
though some americans became wealthy many more could not earn a decent living.
important industries struggled and farmers grew more crops and j raised more livestock than they could sell at a profit.
both consumers and farmers were steadily going deeper into debt.
as the decade drew to a close these slippages in the economy signaled the end of an era.
chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era 85 w 75w the thirteen colonies to the 1700s massachusetts plymouth 1620 mass.
bay 1630 economic activities new england colonies massachusetts.
shipbuilding shipping fishing lumber rum meat products new hampshire.
ship masts lumber fishing trade shipping livestock foodstuffs connecticut.
rum iron foundries shipbuilding rhode island snuff livestock middle colonies new york.
furs wheat glass shoes livestock shipping shipbuilding rum beer snuff delaware trade foodstuffs new jersey trade foodstuffs copper pennsylvania flax shipbuilding southern colonies virginia tobacco wheat cattle iron maryland.
tobacco wheat snuff north carolina.
naval supplies tobacco furs south carolina.
rice indigo silk georgia.
indigo rice naval supplies lumber geography skillbuilder region which colonies are noted for their industrial activity such as building rather than agricultural activity.
new england colonies j middle colonies southern colonies other british possessions i french possessions spanish possessions 0 100 200 miles 0 100 200 kilometers the date provided for each colony indicates the date of the first permanent settlement.
review unit 29 ships the acts spurred a boom in the colonial shipbuilding industry and helped support the development of numerous other colonial industries.
colonial governments whatever their form of charter by the mid 1700s most colonies were similar in the structure of their governments.
in nearly every colony a governor appointed by the crown served as the highest authority.
the governor presided over an advisory council usually appointed by the governor and a local assembly elected by landowning white males.
the governor had the authority to appoint and dismiss judges and oversee colonial trade.
in addition to raising money through taxes the colonial assembly initiated and passed laws.
the governor could veto any law but did so at a risk because in most colonies the colonial assembly not the crown paid the governor s salary.
using this power of the purse liberally the colonists influenced the governor in a variety of ways from the approval of laws to the appointment of judges.
growing spirit of self determination the colonies were developing a taste for self government that would ultimately create the conditions for rebellion.
nehemiah grew a british mercantilist voiced one of the few early concerns when he warned his compatriots about the colonies growing self determination in 1707 main idea analyzing effects what effects did the navigation acts have on both britain and its colonies.
a personal voice nehemiah grew the time may come.
when the colonies may become populous and with the increase of arts and sciences strong and politic forgetting their relation to the mother countries will then confederate and consider nothing further than the means to support their ambition of standing on their own legs.
quoted in the colonial period of american history aside from a desire for more economic and political breathing room however the colonies had little in common that would unite them against britain.
in particular the northern and southern colonies were developing distinct societies based on sharply contrasting economic systems.
assessment 1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
john smith jamestown joint stock companies indentured servant puritan john winthrop king philip s war william penn quaker mercantilism navigation acts main idea using your notes identify the effects of each of the causes listed in the chart below.
cause effect virginia colonists need labor to grow tobacco puritans are persecuted in england william penn acquires pennsylvania parliament passes the navigation acts critical thinking 3 evaluating in your judgment what were the benefits and drawbacks of using indentured servants for labor in virginia.
support your judgment with references to the text.
think about the labor demands of growing tobacco the characteristics and cost of indentured servants the causes and consequences of bacons rebellion predicting effects reread nehemiah grews prediction for the colonies in the personal voice above.
how do you think the british government would respond to his prediction.
what issues do you see arising as potential sources of tension between the colonies and great britain.
hapter 1 exploration and the colonial era the colonies come of age main idea why it matters now j j terms names even though both northern and southern colonies prospered many colonists began to question british authority.
regional differences between northern and southern colonies have survived in the culture and politics of the modern united states.
triangular trade middle passage enlightenment benjamin franklin great awakening jonathan edwards french and indian war william pitt pontiac proclamation of 1763 oneamerican s storyj h taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on developments in the colonies during the 18th century.
in 1773 philip vickers fithian left his home in princeton new jersey for the unfamiliar world of virginia.
fithian a theology student had agreed to tutor the children of robert carter iii and his wife at their magnificent brick manor house.
in fithian s journal of his one year stay there he recalled an evening walk along the property.
a personal voice philip vickers fithian we strolld down the pasture quite to the river admlr ing the pleasantness of the evening the delightsome prospect of the river hills huts on the summits low bottoms trees of various kinds and sizes cattle sheep feeding some near us others at a great distance on the green sides of the hills.
journal letters of philip vickers fithian the shirley plantation house in virginia is representative of many old southern mansions.
built in 1723 it was the birthplace of ann hili carter the mother of civil war general robert e lee.
plantations or large farms like the carters played a dominant role in the south s economy which had come to rely heavily on agriculture.
the development of this plantation economy led to a largely rural society in which enslaved africans played an unwilling yet important role.
a plantation economy arises in the south while there were cities in the south on the whole the region developed as a rural society of self sufficient plantations.
plantations sprang up along the rivers making it possible for planters to ship their goods directly to the northern colonies and europe without the need for public dock facilities.
because plantation owners produced much of what they needed on their property they did not often need shops bakeries and markets.
review unit 31 plantations specialized in raising a single cash crop one grown primarily for sale rather than for livestock feed.
in maryland virginia and north carolina planters grew tobacco.
planters in south carolina and georgia harvested rice and later indigo for blue dye as cash crops.
life in a diverse southern society in addition to english settlers thousands of german immigrants as well as scots and scots irish settled in the south.
women in southern society as in the north endured second class citizenship.
for the most part they could not vote preach or own property.
while small farmers made up the majority of the southern population prosperous plantation owners controlled much of the south s economy as well as its political and social institutions.
at the bottom of southern society were enslaved africans.
in the 18th century southerners turned increasingly to slavery to fill the labor needs of their agricultural economy.
by 1690 about 13 000 slaves were working in the southern colonies.
by 1750 the number of slaves had increased to around 200 000 the middle passage during the 17th century africans had become part of a transatlantic trading network described as the triangular trade.
this term refers to a trading process in which goods and enslaved people were exchanged across the atlantic ocean.
for example merchants carrying rum and other goods from the new england colonies exchanged their merchandise for enslaved africans.
africans were then transported to the west indies where they were sold for sugar and molasses.
these goods were then sold to rum producers in new england and the cycle began again.
the voyage that brought africans to the west indies and later to north america was known as main idea summarizing describe the social structure of southern society.
stowage of the british slave ship brookes under the regulated slave trade attof uaa.
r r plan of lower otck with the stowage of 294 slaves f these seiko stowed under the shelves as shewn in figure s afiovrc j sb the middle passage after the middle leg of the transatlantic trade triangle.
extreme cruelty characterized this journey.
in the ports of west africa european traders branded africans for identification and packed them into the dark holds of large ships.
on board a slave ship africans were beaten into submission and often fell victim to diseases that spread rapidly.
some committed suicide by jumping overboard.
nearly 13 percent of the africans aboard each slave ship perished during the this plan and section of the british slave ship brookes was published in london around 1790 by a leading british antislavery advocate named thomas clarkson.
the image effectively conveys the degradation and inhumanity of the slave trade which reduced human beings to the level of merchandise.
i tr h mtwino the atmast fi aothttmal su rouflo the wmm or sims of tmt lower otck st meah of flatforme m shelve heamofoallrh naohrch outttsfow b0 tht h wmaho k t wihafeohlt hh htxf t zht ottwcrk tmt caim ans aar lu under the beam.
chapter 7 jp texas test practice use the quotation and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 1.
the chinese.
ask for fair treatment.
since the first restriction law was passed the united states has received as immigrants more than two million austro hungarians two million italians and a million and a half russians and finns.
each of these totals is from five to seven times the whole amount of chinese immigration of all classes during thirty years of free immigration.
the question is not now of the admission of laborers but whether other chinese who are entitled to come under both law and treaty shall receive the same courtesies as people of other nations and shall be relieved from many harassing regulations.
they must no longer be detained photographed and examined as if they were suspected of crime.
ng poon chew from the treatment of the exempt classes of chinese in the united states 1 the information in the passage supports which one of the following points of view.
a european immigration should be restricted.
b chinese laborers should be allowed to immigrate.
c all immigrants are treated like criminals.
d chinese immigrants and european immigrants should be treated the same.
use the cartoon and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 2.
2 the cartoon suggests that boss tweed the large figure at left f was solely responsible for stealing the peoples money.
g did not steal the peoples money.
h had help from his associates in stealing the peoples money.
j was loyal to his associates.
test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials interact with history vwritesmart think about the issues you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter 20 jn y.
m t i j 4k a i.
montana w 7 j wyoming dakota i llchigah colorado new mexico iowa nebraska k ilk illinois vermont x new york indiana 0h pennsylvania n jnn west jvir nl l maryland virginia ij kentucky k 7 fc nti northv.
i carolina tennessee i oklahoma arkansas sou.
kansas missouri miss.
georgia caj l na 1 pacific coast paths midwest paths atlantic coast paths year round work migrant base areas texas la.
250 alabama 500 miles florw 250 500 kilometers the map above shows the three major streams of migrant worker movements in the 1960s.
thinking critically connect to history 1 analyzing patterns retrace the movement of migrant workers in the three regions.
why do you think migrant workers have to keep moving.
connect to today 2 creating a database pose a historical question about the relationship between crops and planting seasons.
for example what types of crops are harvested in michigan during the fall.
then research and create a database that answers this and other such questions.
i atlantic coast le some workers along the atlantic coast stream ain in florida others travel as far north as new ipshire and new york like the workers shown harvesting onions.
there they work from march ugh september.
due to the winters migrant ters in most of the midwest and atlantic regions find work for only six months out of the year.
the new frontier and the great society the great society main idea why it matters now terms names the demand for reform helped create a new awareness of social problems especially on matters of civil rights and the effects of poverty.
reforms made in the 1960s have had a lasting effect on the american justice system by increasing the rights of minorities.
lyndon baines johnson economic opportunity act great society medicare and medicaid immigration act of 1965 warren court reapportionment taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the programs of the great society and decisions of the warren court.
one american s story in 1966 family finances forced larry alfred to drop out of high school in mobile alabama.
he turned to the job corps a federal program that trained young people from poor backgrounds.
he learned to operate construction equipment but his dream was to help people.
on the advice of his job corps counselor he joined vista volunteers in service to america often called the domestic peace corps.
both the job corps and vista sprang into being in 1964 when president lyndon b johnson signed the economic opportunity act.
this law was the main offensive of johnson s war on poverty and a cornerstone of the great society.
vista assigned alfred to work with a community of poor farm laborers in robstown texas near the mexican border.
there he found a number of children with mental and physical disabilities who had no special assistance education or training.
so he established the robstown association for retarded people started a parents educa tion program sought state funds and created a rehabilitation center.
at age 20 larry alfred was a high school dropout job corps graduate vista volunteer and in robstown an authority on people with disabilities.
alfred embodied johnson s great society in two ways its programs helped him turn his life around and he made a difference in people s lives.
a vista volunteers worked in a variety of capacities.
this woman is teaching art to young pupils.
lbjs path to power by the time lyndon baines johnson or lbj as he was called succeeded to the presidency his ambition and drive had become legendary.
in explaining his frenetic energy johnson once remarked that s the way i ve been all my life.
my daddy used to wake me up at dawn and shake my leg and say lyndon every boy in town s got an hour s head start on you.
from the texas hills to capitol hill a fourth generation texan johnson grew up in the dry texas hill country of blanco county.
the johnsons never knew great wealth but they also never missed a meal.
686 chapter 26 native americans continue legal battles as the nation debated its immigrant policies the ancestors of america s original inhabitants continued to struggle.
the end of the 20th century found most members of this minority enduring extremely difficult lives.
in 2007 about 25 percent of native americans lived below the poverty line more than two times the poverty rate for white americans.
furthermore native americans endured suicide rates and alcoholism rates that were considerably higher than that of the general population.
in the face of such hardships native americans strived to improve their lives.
throughout the 1990s dozens of tribes attained greater economic independence by establishing thriving gaming resorts.
although controversial for promoting gambling reservation gaming 27 billion a year industry by 2008 provided native americans with much needed money for jobs education social services and infrastructure.
over the past decades native americans have used the courts to attain greater recognition of their tribal ancestry and land rights.
in 1999 for example the u s supreme court ruled that the chippewa indians of minnesota retained fishing and hunting rights on some 13 million acres of land that were guaranteed to them in an 1837 treaty.
across the nation a number of other tribes have had similar land rights affirmed.
america in a new millennium as the 21st century begins americans face both new problems and old ones.
environmental concerns have become a global issue and have moved to center stage.
furthermore poverty remains a problem for many americans in the late 20th century as does the increasing threat that terrorist acts pose to americans at home and abroad.
it is clear that the new century america faces will bring changes but those changes need not deepen divisions among americans.
with effort and cooperation the change could foster growth and tolerance.
the 20th century brought new ways of both destroying and enriching lives.
what will the 21st bring.
much will depend on you the dreamers the decision makers and the voters of the future.
1 terms names urban flight for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
gentrification hurricane katrina proposition 187 main idea using your notes demography is the study of statistics about human populations.
use a table like the one below to summarize the demographic changes occurring in the united states.
demographic changes urban distribution age ethnic and racial makeup critical thinking 3 hypothesizing as urban problems become more common in the suburbs how might the residents of suburbs respond.
base your answer on existing behavior patterns.
think about the spread of suburbs farther and farther from the city the new ability to telecommute the tax problems that suburbs face comparing and contrasting how was the immigration that occurred in the 1990s and early 2000s similar to and different from earlier waves of immigration.
drawing conclusions how do disagreements over immigration policy reflect the benefits and challenges of a diverse population.
analyzing issues how did physical and human geographic factors impact the levee failure in new orleans after hurricane katrina.
the united states in today s world tracing themes immigration and migration immigrants to the united states have been part of a worldwide movement pushing people away from traditional means of support and pulling them toward better opportunities.
most immigrants have left their homelands because of economic problems though some have fled oppressive governments or political turmoil.
war has often been the deciding factor for people to immigrate to the united states or to migrate within the country.
others have migrated to escape poverty religious persecution and racial violence.
but the chief lure in coming to the united states or migrating within its borders continues to be the opportunity to earn a living.
migrating to the west throughout the 19th century americans continued their movement westward to the pacific ocean.
victory in the war with mexico in 1848 greatly increased the amount of land under american control and thousands of americans moved out west to take advantage of it.
two important consequences emerged from this movement.
first following the discovery of gold in california hundreds of thousands of people from around the world rushed in to strike it rich.
within a year there were enough residents in california to qualify it for statehood.
second americans disagreed over whether the new lands should be open to slavery.
that disagreement fueled the fires that led to the civil war.
adapting to american ways with hope and apprehension millions of foreign immigrants poured into americas pulsing cities during the early 20th century.
bringing with them values habits and attire from the old world they faced a multitude of new experiences expectations and products in the new world.
many native born americans feared that the new immigrants posed a threat to american culture.
instead of the immigrants being allowed to negotiate their existence by combining the old with the new they were pressured to forget their old cultures languages and customs for more american ways.
migrating for jobs throughout the 20th century african americans migrated across the united states.
in the great migration of the early 20th century they left their homes in the rural south.
of the millions of african americans who left most moved to cities usually in the north.
the second migration sparked by world war ii allowed african americans to take industrial jobs many formerly held by whites to support the war effort.
this migration had lasting consequences for the civil rights movement.
many african americans who remained in the south moved to cities where they developed organizations that helped them fight segregation.
in search of a new life in 1964 603 vietnamese lived in the united states.
a decade later as the vietnam war ended hundreds of thousands of vietnamese refugees fled their homeland for other nations including the united states.
vietnamese immigration to america continued and by 1998 there were nearly 1 million vietnamese born persons living in the united states.
the men and women who made this long and arduous journey from vietnam are part of the changing face of u s immigration.
beginning in the 1970s asians and latin americans replaced europeans as the two largest immigrant groups in the united states.
between 1970 and 1990 about 1 5 million europeans journeyed to americas shores.
during that same period roughly 5 6 million latin americans and 3 5 million asians arrived.
this trend has continued.
in 2008 the largest immigrant groups in the united states hailed from mexico the philippines india and china and hong kong respectively.
these most recent arrivals to the united states have come for largely the same reasons greater freedom and economic opportunity and the chance to begin a new life.
wit the united states in today s world chapter 6 page 249 perkins pledged to fight for labor reforms especially those for women.
a pioneer for labor and womens issues she changed her name from fannie to frances believing she would be taken more seriously in her work.
4 mary mcleod bethune a close friend of eleanor roosevelt was a strong supporter of the new deal.
period a performance by the african american singer marian anderson in 1939 when the daughters of the american revolution chose not to allow anderson to perform in their concert hall in washington d c because of her race eleanor roosevelt resigned from the organization.
she then arranged for anderson to perform at the lincoln memorial on easter sunday.
at the concert walter white an official of the naacp noticed one girl in the crowd.
a personal voice walter white her hands were particularly noticeable as she thrust them forward and upward trying desperately to touch the singer.
they were hands which despite their youth had known only the dreary work of manual labor.
tears streamed down the girls dark face.
her hat was askew but in her eyes flamed hope bordering on ecstasy.
if marian anderson could do it the girls eyes seemed to say then i can too.
a man called white a marian anderson sang from the steps of the lincoln memorial on april 9 1939 historical spotlight deportation of mexican americans the president fails to support civil rights despite efforts to promote racial equality roosevelt was never committed to full civil rights for african americans.
he was afraid of upsetting white democratic voters in the south an important segment of his supporters.
he refused to approve a federal antilynching law and an end to the poll tax two key goals of the civil rights movement.
further a number of new deal agencies clearly discriminated against african americans including the nra the ccc and the tva.
these programs gave lower wages to african americans and favored whites.
african americans recognized the need to fight for their rights and to improve conditions in areas that the new deal ignored.
in 1934 they helped organize the southern tenant farmers union which sought to protect the rights of tenant farmers and sharecroppers both white and black.
in the north the union created tenants groups and launched campaigns to increase job opportunities.
in general however african americans supported the roosevelt administration and the new deal generally seeing them as their best hope for the future.
as one man recalled roosevelt touched the temper of the black community.
you did not look upon him as being white black blue or green.
he was president roosevelt.
main idea many mexican americans were long time residents or citizens of the united states.
others came during the 1920s to work on farms in texas california and arizona.
valued for their low cost labor during the good times these migrant workers became the target of hostility during the great depression.
many returned to mexico willingly while others were deported by the united states government.
during the 1930s as many as 400 000 persons of mexican descent many of them u s citizens were deported to mexico.
evaluating evaluate the actions and policies of the roosevelt administration on civil rights.
mexican american fortunes mexican americans also tended to support the new deal even though they received even fewer benefits than african americans did.
large numbers of mexican americans had come to the united states during the 1920s settling mainly in the southwest.
most found work laboring on farms an occupation that was essentially unprotected by state and federal laws.
during the depression farm wages fell to as little as nine cents an hour.
farm workers who tried to unionize 506 chapter 21 background seep essyv.
ferguson on page 290 main idea analyzing effects what were the effects of the supreme court decision plessy v ferguson.
plessy v ferguson during the 1890s a number of other court decisions and state laws severely limited african american rights.
in 1890 louisiana passed a law requiring railroads to provide equal but separate accommodations for the white and colored races.
in the plessy v ferguson case of 1896 the supreme court ruled that this separate but equal law did not violate the fourteenth amendment which guarantees all americans equal treatment under the law.
armed with the plessy decision states throughout the nation but especially in the south passed what were known as jim crow laws aimed at separating the races.
these laws forbade marriage between blacks and whites and established many other restrictions on social and religious contact between the races.
there were separate schools as well as separate streetcars waiting rooms railroad coaches elevators witness stands and public restrooms.
the facilities provided for blacks were always inferior to those for whites.
nearly every day african americans faced humiliating signs that read colored water no blacks allowed whites only.
fly segregation continues into the 20th century after the civil war some african americans tried to escape southern racism by moving north.
this migration of southern african americans speeded up greatly during world war i as many african american sharecroppers abandoned farms for the promise of industrial jobs in northern cities.
however they discovered racial prejudice and segregation there too.
most could find housing only in all black neighborhoods.
many white workers also resented the competition for jobs.
this sometimes led to violence.
apartheid segregation in south africa in 1948 the white government of south africa passed laws to ensure that whites would stay in control of the country.
those laws established a system called apartheid which means apartness the system divided south africans into four segregated racial groups whites blacks coloreds of mixed race and asians.
it restricted what jobs nonwhites could hold where they could live and what rights they could exercise.
because of apartheid the black african majority were denied the right to vote.
in response to worldwide criticism the south african government gradually repealed the apartheid laws starting in the late 1970s.
in 1994 south africa held its first all race election and elected as president nelson mandela a black anti apartheid leader whom the white government had imprisoned for nearly 30 years.
i l segregation required cz3 segregation permitted n l segregation prohibited l no specific legislation or local option these photos of the public schools for white children top and for black children above in a southern town in the 1930s show that separate facilities were often unequal in the segregation era.
u s school segregation 1952 maine geography skillbuilder region in which regions were schools segregated by law.
in which were segregation expressly prohibited.
civil rights 7 thurgood marshall 1908 1993 thurgood marshall dedicated his life to fighting racism.
his father had labored as a steward at an all white country club his mother as a teacher at an all black school.
marshall himself was denied admission to the university of maryland law school because of his race.
in 1961 president john f kennedy nominated marshall to the u s court of appeals.
lyndon johnson picked marshall for u s solicitor general in 1965 and two years later named him as the first african american supreme court justice.
in that role he remained a strong advocate of civil rights until he retired in 1991 after marshall died in 1993 a copy of the brown v board of education decision was placed beside his casket.
on it an admirer wrote you shall always be remembered a developing civil rights movement in many ways the events of world war ii set the stage for the civil rights movement.
first the demand for soldiers in the early 1940s created a shortage of white male laborers.
that labor shortage opened up new job opportunities for african americans latinos and white women.
second nearly one million african americans served in the armed forces which needed so many fighting men that they had to end their discriminatory policies.
such policies had previously kept african americans from serving in fighting units.
many african american soldiers returned from the war determined to fight for their own freedom now that they had helped defeat fascist regimes overseas.
third during the war civil rights organizations actively campaigned for african american voting rights and challenged jim crow laws.
in response to protests president roosevelt issued a presidential directive prohibiting racial discrimination by federal agencies and all companies that were engaged in war work.
the groundwork was laid for more organized campaigns to end segregation throughout the united states.
challenging segregation in court the desegregation campaign was led largely by the naacp which had fought since 1909 to end segregation.
one influential figure in this campaign was charles hamilton houston a brilliant howard university law professor who also served as chief legal counsel for the naacp from 1934 to 1938 the naacp legal strategy in deciding the naacp s legal strategy houston focused on the inequality between the separate schools that many states provided.
at that time the nation spent ten times as much money educating a white child as an african american child.
thus houston focused the organization s limited resources on challenging the most glaring inequalities of segregated public education.
in 1938 he placed a team of his best law students under the direction of thurgood marshall.
over the next 23 years marshall and his naacp lawyers would win 29 out of 32 cases argued before the supreme court.
several of the cases became legal milestones each chipping away at the segregation platform of plessyv.
in the 1946 case morgan v virginia the supreme court declared unconstitutional those state laws mandating segregated seating on interstate buses.
in 1950 the high court ruled in sweatt v painter that state law schools must admit black applicants even if separate black schools exist.
brown v board of education marshall s most stunning victory came on may 17 1954 in the case known as brown v board of education of topeka.
see page 708.
in this case the father of eight year old linda brown had charged the board of education of topeka kansas with violating linda s rights by denying her admission to an all white elementary school four blocks from her house.
the nearest all black elementary school was 21 blocks away.
in a landmark verdict the supreme court unanimously struck down segregation in schooling as an unconstitutional violation of the fourteenth amendment s equal protection main idea developing historical perspective how did events during world war ii lay the groundwork for african americans to fight for civil rights in the 1950s.
702 chapters had over 150 000 members.
20th centu chapter 21 main idea analyzing issues what did the freedom riders hope to achieve.
new volunteers the bus companies refused to carry the core freedom riders any farther.
even though the determined volunteers did not want to give up they ended their ride.
however core director james farmer announced that a group of sncc volunteers in nashville were ready to pick up where the others had left off.
when a new band of freedom riders rode into birmingham policemen pulled them from the bus beat them and drove them into tennessee.
defiantly they returned to the birmingham bus terminal.
their bus driver however feared for his life and refused to transport them.
in protest they occupied the whites only waiting room at the terminal for eighteen hours until a solution was reached.
after an angry phone call from u s attorney general robert kennedy bus company officials convinced the driver to proceed.
the riders set out for montgomery on may 20 arrival of federal marshals although alabama officials had promised kennedy that the riders would be protected a mob of whites many carrying bats and lead pipes fell upon the riders when they arrived in montgomery.
john doer a justice department official on the scene called the attorney general to report what was happening.
a bunch of men led by a guy with a bleeding face are beating the passengers.
there are no cops.
it s terrible.
there s not a cop in sight.
people are yelling.
get em get em.
it s awful.
the violence provoked exactly the response the freedom riders wanted.
newspapers throughout the nation and abroad denounced the beatings.
president kennedy arranged to give the freedom riders direct support.
the justice department sent 400 u s marshals to protect the rid ers on the last part of their journey to jackson mississippi.
in addition the attorney general and the interstate commerce commission banned segregation in all interstate travel facilities including waiting rooms restrooms and lunch counters.
in may 1961 a mob firebombed this bus of freedom riders outside anniston alabama and attacked passengers as they tried to escape.
we will continue our journey one way or another.
we are prepared to die.
jim zwerg freedom rider standing firm with the integration of interstate travel facilities under way some civil rights workers turned their attention to integrating some southern schools and pushing the movement into additional southern towns.
at each turn they encountered opposition and often violence.
integrating ole miss in september 1962 air force veteran james meredith won a federal court case that allowed him to enroll in the all white university of mississippi nicknamed ole miss.
but when meredith arrived on campus he faced governor ross barnett who refused to let him register as a student.
president kennedy ordered federal marshals to escort meredith to the registrar s office.
barnett responded with a heated radio appeal i call on every mississippian to keep his faith and courage.
we will never surrender.
the broadcast turned out white demonstrators by the thousands.
on the night of september 30 riots broke out on campus resulting in two deaths.
it took thousands of soldiers 200 arrests and 15 hours to stop the rioters.
in the months that followed federal officials accompanied meredith to class and protected his parents from nightriders who shot up their house.
civil rights news photos and television coverage of police dogs in birmingham attacking african americans shocked the nation.
heading into birmingham the trouble continued in alabama.
birmingham a city known for its strict enforcement of total segregation in public life also had a reputation for racial violence including 18 bombings from 1957 to 1963 reverend fred shuttlesworth head of the alabama christian movement for human rights and secretary of the sclc decided something had to be done about birmingham and that it would be the ideal place to test the power of nonviolence.
he invited martin luther king jr and the sclc to help desegregate the city.
on april 3 1963 king flew into birmingham to hold a planning meeting with members of the african american community.
this is the most segregated city in america he said.
we have to stick together if we ever want to change its ways.
after days of demonstrations led by shuttlesworth and others king and a small band of marchers were finally arrested during a demonstration on good friday april 12th.
while in jail king wrote an open letter to white religious leaders who felt he was pushing too fast.
a personal voice martin luther king jr i guess it is easy for those who have never felt the stinging darts of segregation to say wait but when you have seen vicious mobs lynch your mothers and fathers at whim when you have seen hate filled policemen curse kick brutalize and even kill your black brothers and sisters.
when you see the vast majority of your twenty million negro brothers smothering in the air tight cage of poverty.
when you have to concoct an answer for a five year old son asking.
daddy why do white people treat colored people so mean.
then you will understand why we find it difficult to wait.
letter from a birmingham jail on april 20 king posted bail and began planning more demonstrations.
on may 2 more than a thousand african american children marched in birmingham.
police commissioner eugene bull connor s men arrested 959 of them.
on may 3 a second children s crusade came face to face with a helmeted police force.
police swept the marchers off their feet with high pressure fire hoses set attack dogs on them and clubbed those who fell.
tv cameras captured all of it and millions of viewers heard the children screaming.
continued protests an economic boycott and negative media coverage finally convinced birmingham officials to end segregation.
this stunning civil rights victory inspired african americans across the nation.
it also convinced president kennedy that only a new civil rights act could end racial violence and satisfy the demands of african americans and many whites for racial justice.
main idea chronologic01 order what events led to desegrega tion in birmingham.
712 chapter 15 qthe water force spins the blades of the turbine.
i once it passes through the turbine the water reenters the river.
before 1930 most homes in the area had no electricity.
women wash clothes outside this homestead near andersonville tennessee in 1933 their estate was submerged when the norris dam filled.
norris dam located on the clinch river a tributary of the tennessee river the norris dam is named after senator george w norris of nebraska.
norris was a progressive leader who called for government involvement in the development of the power potential of the tennessee river.
thinking critically 1 analyzing distributions locate the dams on this map.
why do you think they might have been placed in these particular areas.
2 creating a model create a 3 d model of a dam.
before you begin pose a historical question your model will answer.
think about environmental changes caused by the construction of a dam.
research web links the new deal si chapter 21 main idea analyzing causes what were some of the causes of urban rioting in the 1960s.
background see islam on page 9 main idea synthesizing why did some americans find malcolm xs views alarming.
rights act into law one of the worst race riots in the nation s history raged through the streets of watts a predominantly african american neighborhood in los angeles.
thirty four people were killed and hundreds of millions of dollars worth of property was destroyed.
the next year 1966 saw even more racial disturbances and in 1967 alone riots and violent clashes took place in more than 100 cities.
the african american rage baffled many whites.
why would blacks turn to violence after winning so many victories in the south.
they wondered.
some realized that what african americans wanted and needed was economic equality of opportunity in jobs housing and education.
even before the riots in 1964 president johnson had announced his war on poverty a program to help impoverished americans.
but the flow of money needed to fund johnson s great society was soon redirected to fund the war in vietnam.
in 1967 dr king proclaimed the great society has been shot down on the battlefields of vietnam.
new leaders voice discontent the anger that sent rioters into the streets stemmed in part from african american leaders who urged their followers to take complete control of their communities livelihoods and culture.
one such leader malcolm x declared to a harlem audience if you think we are here to tell you to love the white man you have come to the wrong place.
african american solidarity malcolm x born malcolm little went to jail at age 20 for burglary.
while in prison he studied the teachings of elijah muhammad the head of the nation of islam or the black muslims.
malcolm changed his name to malcolm x dropping what he called his slave name and after his release from prison in 1952 became an islamic minister.
as he gained a following the brilliant thinker and engaging speaker openly preached elijah muhammad s views that whites were the cause of the black condition and that blacks should separate from white society.
malcolm s message appealed to many african americans and their growing racial pride.
at a new york press conference in march 1964 he also advocated armed self defense.
va y playr malcolm x 1925 1965 malcolm xs early life left him alienated from white society.
his father was allegedly killed by white racists and his mother had an emotional collapse leaving malcolm and his siblings in the care of the state.
at the end of eighth grade malcolm quit school and was later jailed for criminal behavior.
in 1946 while in prison malcolm joined the nation of islam.
he developed a philosophy of black superiority and separatism from whites.
in the later years of his life he urged african americans to identify with africa and to work with world organizations and even progressive whites to attain equality.
although silenced by gunmen malcolm x is a continuing inspiration for many americans.
a personal voice malcolm x concerning nonviolence it is criminal to teach a man not to defend himself when he is the constant victim of brutal attacks.
it is legal and lawful to own a shotgun or a rifle.
we believe in obeying the law.
t he time has come for the american negro to fight back in self defense whenever and wherever he is being unjustly and unlawfully attacked.
quoted in eyewitness the negro in american history the press gave a great deal of publicity to malcolm x because his controversial statements made dramatic news stories.
this had two effects.
first his call for armed self defense frightened most whites and many moderate african americans.
second reports of the attention malcolm received awakened resentment in some other members of the nation of islam.
civil rights ballots or bullets.
in march 1964 malcolm broke with elijah muhammad over differences in strategy and doctrine and formed another muslim organization.
one month later he embarked on a pilgrimage to mecca in saudi arabia a trip required of followers of orthodox islam.
in mecca he learned that orthodox islam preached racial equality and he worshiped alongside people from many countries.
wrote malcolm i have prayed.
with fellow muslims whose eyes were the bluest of blue whose hair was the blondest of blond and whose skin was the whitest of white.
when he returned to the united states his attitude toward whites had changed radically.
he explained his new slogan ballots or bullets to a follower well if you and i don t use the ballot we re going to be forced to use the bullet.
so let us try the ballot.
because of his split with the black muslims malcolm believed his life might be in danger.
no one can get out without trouble he confided.
on february 21 1965 while giving a speech in harlem the 39 year old malcolm x was shot and killed.
black power in early june of 1966 tensions that had been building between sncc and the other civil rights groups finally erupted in mississippi.
here james meredith the man who had integrated the university of mississippi set out on a 225 mile walk against fear.
meredith planned to walk all the way from the tennessee border to jackson but he was shot by a white racist and was too injured to continue.
martin luther king jr of the sclc floyd mckissick of core and stokely carmichael of sncc decided to lead their followers in a march to finish what meredith had started.
but it soon became apparent that sncc and core members were quite militant as they began to shout slogans similar to those of the black separatists who had followed malcolm x when king tried to rally the marchers with the refrain of we shall overcome many sncc workers bitter over the violence they d suffered during freedom summer began singing we shall overrun.
police in greenwood mississippi arrested carmichael for setting up a tent on the grounds of an all black high school.
when carmichael showed up at a rally later his face swollen from a beating he electrified the crowd.
stokely carmichael 1968.
the slogan black power became the battle cry of militant civil rights activists.
a personal voice stokely carmichael this is the twenty seventh time i have been arrested and i aint going to jail no more.
we been saying freedom for six years and we aint got nothin.
what were gonna start saying now is black power.
quoted in the civil rights movement an eyewitness history black power carmichael said was a call for black people to begin to define their own goals and to lead their own organizations king urged him to stop using the phrase because he believed it would provoke african americans to violence and antagonize whites.
carmichael refused and urged sncc to stop recruiting whites and to focus on developing african american pride.
black panthers later that year another development demonstrated the growing radicalism of some segments of the african american community.
in oakland california in october 1966 huey newton and bobby seale founded a political party known as the black panthers to fight police brutality in the ghetto.
the party advocated self sufficiency for african american communities as well as full employment and decent housing.
members maintained that african americans should be exempt from military service because an unfair number of black youths had been drafted to serve in vietnam.
j main idea analyzing motives why did some leaders of sclc disagree with sncc tactics.
720 1 main idea making inferences jy why was the public reaction to the black panthers mixed.
vocabulary polarization separation into opposite camps dressed in black leather jackets black berets and sunglasses the panthers preached self defense and sold copies of the writings of mao zedong leader of the inese communist revolution.
several police shootouts occurred between the panthers and police and the fbi conducted numerous investigations of group members sometimes using illegal tactics.
even so many of the panthers activities the establishment of daycare centers free breakfast programs free medical clinics assis tance to the homeless and other services won support in the ghettos.
jey 1968 a turning point in civil rights martin luther king jr objected to the black power movement.
he believed that preaching violence could only end in grief.
king was planning to lead a poor people s march on washington d c however this time the people would have to march without him.
kings death dr king seemed to sense that death was near.
on april 3 1968 he addressed a crowd in memphis where he had gone to support the city s striking garbage workers.
i may not get there with you but we as a people will get to the promised land.
he added i m not fearing any man.
mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the lord.
the next day as king stood on his hotel balcony james earl ray thrust a high powered rifle out of a window and squeezed the trigger.
king crumpled to the floor.
reactions to kings death the night king died robert f kennedy was campaigning for the democratic presidential nomination.
fearful that kings death would spark riots kennedy s advisers told him to cancel his appearance in an african american neighborhood in indianapolis.
kennedy attended anyway making a plea for nonviolence.
a personal voice robert f kennedy for those of you who are black considering the evidence that there were white people who were responsible you can be filled with bitterness with hatred and a desire for revenge.
we can move in that direction as a country in great polarization black people amongst black white people amongst white filled with hatred toward one another.
or we can make an effort as martin luther king did to understand and comprehend and to replace that violence that stain of bloodshed that has spread across our land with an effort to understand with compassion and love.
a eulogy for dr martin luther king jr despite kennedy s plea rage over king s death led to the worst urban rioting in united states history.
over 100 cities exploded in flames.
the hardest hit cities included baltimore chicago kansas city and washington d c then in june 1968 robert kennedy himself was assassinated by a jordanian immigrant who was angry over kennedy s support of israel.
the poor people s campaign went ahead but without king s eloquence and leadership it failed to clearly express its goals and ended in disaster.
the sclc and its role in the civil rights movement declined.
civil rights legacy of the civil rights movement on march 1 1968 the kerner commission which president johnson had appointed to study the causes of urban violence issued its 200 000 word report.
in it the panel named one main cause white racism.
said the report this is our basic conclusion our nation is moving toward two societies one black one white separate and unequal.
the report called for the nation to create new jobs construct new housing and end de facto segregation in order to wipe out the destructive ghetto environment.
however the johnson administration ignored many of the recommendations because of white opposition to such sweeping changes.
so what had the civil rights movement accomplished.
historical spotlight shirley chisholm african american women such as shirley chisholm exemplified the advances won in the civil rights movement.
in 1968 chisholm became the first african american woman in the united states house of representatives.
in the mid 1960s chisholm served in the new york state assembly representing a district in new york city.
while there she supported programs to establish public day care centers and provide unemployment insurance to domestic workers.
in 1972 chisholm gained national prominence by running for the democratic presidential nomination.
despite the fact that she never won more than 10 of the vote in the primaries she controlled 152 delegates at the democratic convention in miami.
civil rights gains the civil rights movement ended de jure segregation by bringing about legal protection for the civil rights of all americans.
congress passed the most important civil rights legislation since reconstruction including the civil rights act of 1968 which ended discrimination in housing.
after school segregation ended the numbers of african americans who finished high school and who went to college increased significantly.
this in turn led to better jobs and business opportunities.
another accomplishment of the civil rights movement was to give african americans greater pride in their racial identity.
many african americans adopted african influenced styles and proudly displayed symbols of african history and culture.
college students demanded new black studies programs so they could study african american history and literature.
in the entertainment world the color bar was lowered as african americans began to appear more frequently in movies and on television shows and commercials.
in addition african americans made substantial political gains.
by 1970 an estimated two thirds of eligible african americans were registered to vote and a significant increase in african american elected officials resulted.
the number of african americans holding elected office grew from fewer than 100 in 1965 to more than 7 000 in 1992 many civil rights activists went on to become political leaders among them reverend jesse jackson who sought the democratic nomination for president in 1984 and 1988 vernon jordan who led voter registration drives that enrolled about 2 million african americans and andrew young who has served as un ambassador and atlanta s mayor.
unfinished work the civil rights movement was successful in changing many discriminatory laws.
yet as the 1960s turned to the 1970s the challenges for the movement changed.
the issues it confronted housing and job discrimination educational inequality poverty and racism involved the difficult task of changing people s attitudes and behavior.
some of the proposed solutions such as more tax monies spent in the inner cities and the forced busing of schoolchildren angered some whites who resisted further changes.
public support for the civil rights movement declined because some whites were frightened by the urban riots and the black panthers.
by 1990 the trend of whites fleeing the cities for the suburbs had reversed much of the progress toward school main idea evaluating jy what were some accomplishments of the civil rights movement.
722 chapter 8 pages 290 291 and read the historic decisions of the supreme court feature.
reread the quote by justice henry b brown and evaluate it to determine if it is a credible source.
follow the steps above and make a chart to organize your information.
1 identify and learn the background of the author of the source.
who was henry b brown.
what do you know about the author.
2 consider when in relation to the event the source was created.
what is the historical context for this source.
what other national events may have influenced the justices on the supreme court.
when where and why was the source created.
3 look at the language the author uses.
what do words and phrases such as undoubtedly and it could not have been intended tell you about the authors point of view or frame of reference.
what bias does it show.
4 consider if the information can be corroborated and determine the usefulness of the source.
what source could confirm or disprove the facts or ideas about this supreme court case.
how useful is this source.
does it have any limitations.
if so what.
301 sk2 unit k jf 7 chapter to answer the following questions.
a new deal fights the depression pages 488 494 1 how did franklin roosevelt change the role of the federal government during his first hundred days.
2 summarize the reasons why some people opposed the new deal.
the second new deal takes hold pages 495 501 3 in what ways did the new deal programs extend federal aid.
4 how did the wagner act help working people.
the new deal affects many groups pages 504 509 5 summarize the impact the new deal had on various ethnic groups.
6 why did many urban voters support roosevelt and the democratic party.
culture in the 1930s pages 510 514 7 what purpose did movies and radio serve during the great depression.
8 explain how the new deal programs supported artists and writers in the 1930s.
the impact of the new deal pages 515 519 9 list five new deal agencies that are still in place today.
10 what benefits did the tennessee valley authority provide.
what negative impact did it have.
thinking critically using your notes copy the web below and fill it in with actions that americans took to end the economic crisis of the 1930s.
developing historical perspective what federal pro grams instituted in the 1930s and later discontinued might be of use to the nation today.
explain and support your opinion in a paragraph or two.
522 chapter assessment terms names for each term or name below write a sentence explaining its connection to the civil rights movement.
1 brown v board of education of topeka 2 rosa parks 3 martin luther king jr 4 student nonviolent coordinating committee 5 freedom rider 6 civil rights act of 1964 7 fannie lou hamer 8 de facto segregation 9 malcolm x 10 black power 1954 brawn v board of education of topeka 1955 1956 boycott 1957 1957 school desegregation crisis in arkansas 1958 1957 southern christian leadership conference sclc is formed to carry on nonviolent crusades 1961 freedom riders begin a bus ride through the south to protest segregation.
main ideas use your notes and the information in the chapter 11 the first world war 1914 1920 fein.
i h 1 mfh unit project in this unit you will read about important changes in the nation and the world that helped the united states to assume a major global role.
use your knowledge of historical eras the units content and the major characteristics of history to identify the eras in this unit.
then create a webpage that describes the defining characteristics of each era.
the statue of liberty by francis hopkinson smith a tsu.
v a ws s 1 y a.
7 b section 1 the origins of progressivism main idea political economic and social change in late 19th century america led to broad progressive reforms.
section 2 women in public life main idea as a result of social and economic change many women entered public life as workers and reformers.
section 3 teddy roosevelt s square deal main idea as president theodore roosevelt worked to give citizens a square deal through progressive reforms.
section 4 progressivism under taft main idea taft s ambivalent approach to progressive reform led to a split in the republican party and the loss of the presidency to the democrats.
section 5 wilson s new freedom strong reform agenda as a progressive leader.
a 1916 suffrage parade.
usa world 18961 william mckinley is elected president.
william mckinley.
is reelected.
119001 1901 mckinley is assassinated theodore roosevelt becomes president.
1904j theodore roosevelt is elected president 1900 1889 eiffel tower 1 d ofto 1 i opens for visitors.
1898 marie 5 1899 boer war curie discovers in south africa radium.
1901 u t commonwealth of australia is created.
304 chapter 17 the united states in world war ii 1941 1945 chapter 9 vocabulary temperance refraining from alcohol consumption main idea analyzing motives 4 why did the prohibition movement appeal to so many women.
women and children.
intellectuals questioned the dominant role of large corporations in american society.
political reformers struggled to make government more responsive to the people.
together these reform efforts formed the progressive movement which aimed to restore economic opportunities and correct injustices in american life.
even though reformers never completely agreed on the problems or the solutions each of their progressive efforts shared at least one of the following goals protecting social welfare promoting moral improvement creating economic reform fostering efficiency protecting social welfare many social welfare reformers worked to soften some of the harsh conditions of industrialization.
the social gospel and settlement house movements of the late 1800s which aimed to help the poor through community centers churches and social services continued during the progressive era and inspired even more reform activities.
the young men s christian association ymca for example opened libraries sponsored classes and built swimming pools and handball courts.
the salvation army fed poor people in soup kitchens cared for children in nurseries and sent slum brigades to instruct poor immigrants in middle class values of hard work and temperance.
in addition many women were inspired by the settlement houses to take action.
florence kelley became an advocate for improving the lives of women and children.
she was appointed chief inspector of factories for illinois after she had helped to win passage of the illinois factory act in 1893 the act which prohibited child labor and limited women s working hours soon became a model for other states.
promoting moral improvement other reformers felt that morality not the workplace held the key to improving the lives of poor people.
these reformers wanted immigrants and poor city dwellers to uplift themselves by improving their personal behavior.
prohibition the banning of alcoholic beverages was one such program.
prohibitionist groups feared that alcohol was undermining american morals.
founded in cleveland in 1874 the woman s christian temperance union wctu spearheaded the crusade for prohibition.
members advanced their cause by entering saloons singing praying and urging saloonkeepers to stop selling alcohol.
as momentum grew the union was transformed by frances willard from a small midwestern religious group in 1879 to a national organization.
boasting 245 000 members by 1911 the wctu became the largest women s group in the nation s history.
wctu members followed willard s do everything slogan and began opening kindergartens for immigrants visiting inmates in prisons and asylums and working for florence kelley 1859 1932 the daughter of an antislavery republican congressman from pennsylvania florence kelley became a social reformer whose sympathies lay with the powerless especially working women and children.
during a long career kelley pushed the government to solve americas social problems.
in 1899 kelley became general secretary of the national consumers league where she lobbied to improve factory conditions.
why kelley pointedly asked while campaigning for a federal child labor law are seals bears reindeer fish wild game in the national parks buffalo and migratory birds all found suitable for federal protection but not children in the 1890s carry nation worked for prohibition by walking into saloons scolding the customers and using her hatchet to destroy bottles of liquor.
307 historical spotlight anti saloon league quietly founded by progressive women in 1895 the anti saloon league called itself the church in action against the saloon whereas early temperance efforts had asked individuals to change their ways the anti saloon league worked to pass laws to force people to change and to punish those who drank.
the anti saloon league endorsed politicians who opposed demon rum no matter which party they belonged to or where they stood on other issues.
it also organized statewide referendums to ban alcohol.
between 1900 and 1917 voters in nearly half of the states mostly in the south and the west prohibited the sale production and use of alcohol.
individual towns city wards and rural areas also voted themselves dry suffrage.
the wctu reform activities like those of the settlement house movement provided women with expanded public roles which they used to justify giving women voting rights.
sometimes efforts at prohibition led to trouble with immigrant groups.
such was the case with the anti saloon league founded in 1895 as members sought to close saloons to cure society s problems tension arose between them and many immigrants whose customs often included the consumption of alcohol.
additionally saloons filled a number of roles within the immigrant community such as cashing paychecks and serving meals.
creating economic reform as moral reformers sought to change individual behavior a severe economic panic in 1893 prompted some americans to question the capitalist economic system.
as a result some americans especially workers embraced socialism.
labor leader eugene v debs who helped organize the american socialist party in 1901 commented on the uneven balance among big business government and ordinary people under the free market system of capitalism.
a personal voice eugene v debs competition was natural enough at one time but do you think you are competing today.
many of you think you are competing.
against whom.
against oil magnate john d rockefeller.
about as i would if i had a wheelbarrow and competed with the santa fe railroad from here to kansas city.
debs his life writings and speeches though most progressives distanced themselves from socialism they saw the truth of many of debs s criticisms.
big business often received favorable treatment from government officials and politicians and could use its economic power to limit competition.
journalists who wrote about the corrupt side of business and public life in mass circulation magazines during the early 20th century became known as muckrakers milk rak r.
the term refers to john bunyan s pilgrim s progress in which a character is so busy using a rake to clean up the muck of this world that he does not raise his eyes to heaven.
in her history of the standard oil company a monthly serial in mcclure s magazine the writer ida m tarbell described the company s cutthroat methods of eliminating competition.
mr rockefeller has systematically played with loaded dice tarbell charged and it is doubtful if there has been a time since 1872 when he has run a race with a competitor and started fair.
fostering efficiency many progressive leaders put their faith in experts and scientific principles to make society and the workplace more efficient.
in defending an oregon law that limited women factory and laundry workers to a ten hour day lawyer louis d brandeis paid little attention to legal argument.
instead he focused on data produced by social scientists documenting the high costs of long working hours for both the individual and society.
this type of argument the brandeis brief would become a model for later reform litigation within industry frederick winslow taylor began using time and motion studies to improve efficiency by breaking manufacturing tasks into simpler parts taylorism became a management fad as industry reformers applied these scientific management studies to see just how quickly each task could be performed 8 chapter 27 golden state with much cleaner air.
other states are playing their part as well in the nation s ongoing conservation effort.
however there is still much to be done especially about water pollution.
one indicator is data collected by the environmental protection agency for the first decade of the 2000s which showed that beach closings mostly due to unsafe levels of water pollution were at historically high levels.
social action groups and private citizens not all action has been through government.
advocacy groups such as the marine conservation institute and oceana advocate for ocean and marine life conservation and protection.
private groups such as the nature conservancy and local land trusts have raised money to purchase forest and watershed lands and keep them pristine.
in texas several entrepreneurs created the fossil rim wildlife center a 1 700 acre wildlife sanctuary for more than 50 animal species.
private citizens also help.
private citizens can conserve resources such as water land plants and animals and protect them for future generations.
people can choose energy efficient appliances to help reduce energy and water use.
water management is a critical issue in some states where the demand exceeds the supply.
in such cases water ecosystems must be protected and managed carefully.
another way to become involved is by contributing money and time to conservation efforts.
some individuals join advocacy groups or non profits that work for land and water conservation or support political candidates who support their beliefs.
in texas 97 percent of the land is privately owned.
the governor s office issued a report outlining specific programs designed to help landowners with conservation efforts on their land.
one example is the texas parks and wildlife department s private lands and habitat program which provides support to individual landowners in helping them conserve wildlife habitats found on their property.
many states have wildlife departments such as the texas parks and wildlife department to address issues such as land use wildlife education and conservation.
critical thinking predicting effects do you think the united states eventually will engage in greater domestic exploration of its natural resources to meet its growing energy needs.
why or why not.
forming generalizations what role do you think the government and private citizens should have in managing the environment.
analyzing effects what are two effects of population growth and distribution on the physical environment.
think about energy use manufacturing supply and demand of resources 4 hypothesizing is it possible for political leaders to address issues of conservation and balance economic progress simultaneously.
support your answer with details from the text.
issues for the 21st century teks25c 25d globalization and cultural diffusion how does american pop culture spread to other countries around the world.
in 1851 louise amelia knapp smith clappe wrote letters to her sister in massachusetts to describe her life in the gold mining camps near san francisco.
each letter took over three months to deliver.
today olivia can sit down at a computer in san antonio and update her blog about hollywood movies.
once she publishes her article online akili in kenya and hisako in japan can read her thoughts and share their own ideas about popular culture instantaneously.
technological advances and new inventions have changed the way people communicate ideas.
historical perspective smartphones allow people to have wireless internet access from almost any location.
in the 1940s when computers first came into use they took up huge rooms and required fans or elaborate air conditioning systems to cool the parts that provided them with power.
in the years since the parts that power computers have become miniaturized and have become much more powerful.
today not only can personal computers perform operations more quickly than the first giant computer did but they are also affordable for many people.
the development of inexpensive personal computers has made it possible for ordinary families to use the latest technology.
the numbers alone demonstrate the influence of computer technology on modern life.
in 1984 only 8 2 percent of households in the united states had a personal computer.
by 2003 more than 60 percent owned one.
by 2011 that number had grown to nearly 76 percent and nearly 72 percent were logging onto the internet both at home and at work.
what s more nearly every business in the nation from hospitals to accounting firms and airports has implemented computer systems to handle many daily operations.
technology and daily life the internet has linked computer users around the world.
developed in the late 1960s by the u s department of defense the internet soon spread to universities.
in the 1990s it boomed in popularity among the general public.
now millions of americans use the internet daily for activities that range from working to shopping for groceries to getting the news.
cellular phones have also transformed communication by allowing people to carry their phones anywhere.
in 1985 about 340 000 americans were cell phone subscribers.
in 2012 the pew research center noted that 88 of adults in the united states owned a cell phone.
the invention of tablets and smartphones has expanded access to music maps email news businesses and social networks from any location.
918 chapter assessment war on terrorism the united states created the department of homeland security and passed new laws to fight terrorism.
global involvement the united states has been involved in international organizations and treaties to address various global issues.
civil rights in the 21st century african americans hispanic americans women and other groups continue to work for their civil rights in the 21st century.
immigration immigrants who have entered the united states legally and illegally have changed the country s demographic patterns.
main ideas use your notes and the information in the chapter 3 the growth of a young nation 1833j great britain abolishes slavery in the empire.
1845 the great potato famine begins in ireland.
118481 karl marx s the communist manifesto is published.
andrew jackson martin van buren william henry harrison john tyler william henry harrison dies zachary taylor millard fiimore zachary taylor dies h jr review unit 111 teks 12b 21c the jeffersonian era main idea why it matters now terms ft names during the presidencies of thomas jefferson james madison and james monroe the country grew in both size and prestige.
todays democratic party traces its roots to jefferson and the democratic republicans.
democratic republicans jeffersonian republicanism marbury v madison john marshall judicial review louisiana purchase impressment james monroe monroe doctrine bneamerican sstor r i s5r 1 p jr j i.
r i j ji ll j taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the major events of the jefferson madison and monroe administrations.
patrick gass was among those who took part in the famous lewis and clark expedition.
setting out in 1804 this expedition traveled overland from st louis missouri to the pacific.
along the way gass kept a journal in which he took notes on people places and the dramatic events he witnessed.
gass described one of those events in his journal entry for may 14 1805 a personal voice patrick gass this forenoon we passed a large creek on the north side and a small river on the south.
about 4 in the afternoon we passed another small river on the south side near the mouth of which some of the men discovered a large brown bear and six of them went out to kill it.
they fired at it but having only wounded it it made battle and was near seizing some of them but they all fortunately escaped and at length succeeded in dispatching it.
these bears are very bold and ferocious and very large and powerful.
the natives say they have killed a number of their brave men 99 patrick gass a journal of the voyages and travels of a corps of discovery the journey gass undertook with lewis and clark helped lay the foundations for expansion.
the explorers brought back to the new government reports about the vast regions that lay to the west.
meanwhile other americans continued to shape the government in their growing nation.
jeffersons presidency the election of 1800 pitted thomas jefferson a leader of the democratic republicans sometimes shortened to republicans against president john adams and his federalist party.
it was a hard fought struggle.
each party hurled wild charges at the other.
democratic republicans called adams a tool of the chapter be considered trailblazers in progressive reform.
how did their actions impact american society.
support your 5 answers.
think about the efforts of those who supported prohibition the leadership of william uren and robert la follette florence kelleys appointment as chief inspector of factories for illinois evaluating evaluate the impact of progressive era reforms including initiative referendum recall and the passage of the seventeenth amendment.
analyzing effects how were management innovations applied in progressive era workplaces and how did they impact labor and productivity.
2 chapter 27 a global economy computer technology has not only improved how americans work but has also dramatically altered how they live.
millions of citizens now buy everything from flowers to books to stock online.
technology has helped to build a more global economy one in which countries around the world are linked through business.
via the internet companies on different continents do business as though they are in the same city.
trade and investments among nations have expanded and the economies of various countries are more closely linked.
this increased trade has led to globalization connecting the cultures and economies of the world more quickly than ever before.
globalization connects cultures around the world.
globalization and trade expanded and improved transportation communication and technology systems allow for better distribution of goods services and ideas around the world.
economic globalization has opened up the traditional marketplaces for acquiring raw materials and creating and distributing goods and services.
businesses choose more diverse geographic locations to source the different aspects of production and distribution.
stronger transportation systems and instantaneous communication systems allow access for these goods more quickly and economically taking away barriers that existed in the past.
computers have changed not just industries but also the lives of individual workers.
technology has given people access to far more information than ever before which has improved productivity in many industries.
workers share information through computer networks.
laptops and cell phones have enabled increasing numbers of people to work at home or in multiple locations.
communication and technology advances allow many large companies to outsource various tasks such as support services.
for example a company in florida may outsource technology support for customers to telephone operators in india.
benefits and challenges globalization has allowed people around the world to have access to materials goods and services they may not have had in the past.
but with each change comes challenges as well as benefits.
in the united states people have different opinions about economic globalization as businesses build factories in different countries and outsource work to employees abroad.
people worry about job loss as domestic companies move their factories and hire workers abroad to take advantage of lower wages and costs.
others feel globalization creates jobs as new international markets increase exports and new workers are needed to create products.
regardless globalization affects the economy of countries around the world as imports and exports are affected through these transactions.
cultural diffusion just as globalization has impacted the economies of the world as countries interact through business it has also affected their cultures.
in our global market citizens interact more frequently with one another.
in doing so they share their culture and influence each other in their beliefs behaviors and actions.
this has led to social globalization and cultural diffusion.
issues for the 21st century i cultural diffusion describes the way cultural practices diffuse or spread from one community to another and how cultures borrow traits such as beliefs ideas and material objects from one another.
with increased contact comes increased diffusion.
in today s world of instantaneous communication cultural diffusion is constant.
cultural diffusion is not a new concept.
people of various cultures have interacted with each other for centuries as people have journeyed done business and moved around the world.
the united states has always drawn business people travelers and immigrants from other lands.
in doing so people have brought and shared their foods languages traditions and values.
today you can find ethiopian chinese brazilian and french restaurants in the united states.
likewise american fast food restaurants can be found in places such as australia india and argentina.
for example mcdonald s has restaurants in more than 100 countries and starbucks has opened coffee shops in 37 countries.
tools such as videos digital photography cell phones and the internet allow for people around the world to share and expand upon popular culture.
popular culture popular culture is a collection of ideas attitudes and images that are part of a mainstream culture heavily influenced by and spread through the media.
pop culture can include movies music fashion and values that are popular in a particular culture.
technology has made the spread of pop culture more dramatic.
in the 1920s new media such as radio and movies were able to reach a growing share of the nation s population.
the radio helped break down barriers that had once separated country folk from city folk.
increasingly people all across the country were sharing the same information and enjoying the same pastimes creating a shared culture.
printed materials and television also helped spread pop culture.
today the internet is a driving force spreading popular culture around the world.
people around the world can hear the same news and listen to the same music.
they can hear the same advertisements and buy the same products.
not only can individuals receive the information but they can help create and share it as well.
the internet and media sources such as radio movies and social media sites have spread american pop culture quickly.
young people around the world can be found listening to american music wearing american fashions and watching american movies.
movies can be seen made and distributed around the world providing viewers the opportunity to experience different cultures and to have a shared global experience.
the spread of hip hop to look at how cultural diffusion can permeate the global market examine the spread of hip hop around the world.
originating in new york city in the 1970s hip hop usually includes rap music deejaying graffiti painting and hip hop dancing.
hip hop quickly took hold of popular american culture in new york city and spread through the country.
globalization allowed the hip hop culture to spread even farther as youth around the world identified with the themes and styles of hip hop.
american movies such as wild style introduced people as far as japan to the new style of dance and music in the 1980s.
in the 1990s global media companies saw an opportunity and began marketing hip hop related items to other countries.
these included music movies clothing and dance.
soon the hip hop culture had become popular on six continents.
920 chapter 3 the growth of a young nation main idea analyzing causes how did wildcat banks contribute to the panic of 1837.
successors deal with jacksons legacy when jackson announced that he would not run for a third term in 1836 the democrats chose vice president martin van buren as their candidate.
the newly formed whig party ran three regional candidates against him.
with jackson s support however van buren easily won the election.
the panic of 1837 along with the presidency however van buren inherited the consequences of jackson s bank war.
many of the pet banks that accepted federal deposits were wildcat banks that printed bank notes wildly in excess of the gold and silver they had on deposit.
such wildcat banks were doomed to fail when people tried to redeem their currency for gold or silver.
by may 1837 many banks stopped accepting paper currency.
in the panic of 1837 bank closings and the collapse of the credit system cost many people their savings bankrupted hundreds of businesses and put more than a third of the population out of work.
harrison and tyler in 1840 van buren ran for reelection against whig party candidate william henry harrison who was known as tippecanoe for a battle he won against native americans in 1811 the whigs blamed van buren for the weak economy and portrayed harrison the old war hero as a man of the people and van buren as an aristocrat.
harrison won the election but died just a month after his inauguration.
john tyler harrison s vice president became president.
a strong minded virginian and former democrat tyler opposed many parts of the whig program.
he halted hopes for significant whig reforms.
the democrat and whig parties went on to dominate national politics until the 1850s.
the new politicians appealed more to passion than to reason.
they courted popularity in a way that john quincy adams and his predecessors never would have.
thus the style of politics in america had changed drastically since the 1790s.
political speeches became a form of mass entertainment involving far more americans in the political process.
also the west was playing an increasing role in national politics.
that trend would continue as more americans moved to places like texas and california.
1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
henry clay missouri compromise john quincy adams american system andrew jackson jacksonian democracy c calhoun trail of tears john tyler main idea using your notes in a chart like the one shown write newspaper headlines that tell the significance of each date.
dates headlines 1815 1820 1828 1832 1837 1838 critical thinking 3 evaluating in what ways do you think the missouri compromise and the nullification crisis of 1832 might be considered important milestones in american history.
think about the expansion of slavery into the west calhouns nullification theory jacksons reaction to south carolinas actions analyzing causes what factors set the stage for the indian removal act of 1830 and the trail of tears.
think about u s expansion to the west removal treaties jacksons response to worcester v georgia review unit tracing themes states rights the power struggle between states and the federal government has caused controversy since the country s beginning.
at its worst the conflict resulted in the civil war.
today state and federal governments continue to square off on jurisdictional issues.
in 1996 the supreme court ruled that congressional districts in texas and north carolina that had been redrawn to increase minority representation were unconstitutional.
in 2000 the supreme court agreed to hear another case in the ongoing since 1979 dispute between the federal government and the state of alaska over who has authority to lease offshore land for oil and gas drilling.
constitutional conflicts between states rights and federal jurisdiction are pictured here.
as you read see how each issue was resolved.
constitutional convention issue the constitution tried to resolve the original debate over states rights versus federal authority.
at the constitutional convention in philadelphia delegates wanted to create a federal government that was stronger than the one created by the articles of confederation.
but delegates disagreed about whether the federal government should have more power than the states.
they also disagreed about whether large states should have more power than small states in the national legislature.
the convention compromised the constitution reserves certain powers for the states delegates other powers to the federal government divides some powers between state and federal governments and tries to balance the differing needs of the states through two houses of congress.
nullification issue the state of south carolina moved to nullify or declare void a tariff set by congress.
in the cartoon above president andrew jackson right is playing a game called bragg.
one of his opponents vice president john c calhoun is hiding two cards nullification and anti tariff behind him.
jackson is doing poorly in this game but he eventually won the real nullification dispute.
when congress passed high tariffs on imports in 1832 politicians from south carolina led by calhoun tried to nullify the tariff law or declare it void.
jackson threatened to enforce the law with federal troops.
congress reduced the tariff to avoid a confrontation and calhoun resigned the vice presidency.
chapters on nearly 400 campuses.
youths opposing the war did so for several reasons.
the most common was the belief that the conflict in vietnam was basically a civil war and that the u s military had no business there.
some said that the oppressive south vietnamese regime was no better than the communist regime it was fighting.
others argued that the united states could not police the entire globe and that war was draining american strength in other important parts of the world.
still others saw war simply as morally unjust.
the antiwar movement grew beyond college campuses.
small numbers of returning veterans began to protest the war.
folk singers such as pete seeger joan baez phil ochs and the trio peter paul and mary used music as a popular protest vehicle.
the number one song in september 1965 was eve of destruction in which singer barry mcguire stressed the ironic fact that young men could be drafted at age 18 but had to be 21 to vote.
perhaps the most popular antiwar song of the time was i feel like i m fixin to die rag by country joe and the fish.
written by bandleader joe mcdonald a vietnam veteran this song sarcastically encouraged young men politicians businesses and even parents to give their whole hearted support to the war.
from protest to resistance by 1967 the antiwar movement had intensified with no sign of slowing down.
we were having no effect on u s policy recalled one protest leader so we thought we had to up the ante.
in the spring of 1967 nearly half a million protesters of all ages gathered in new york s central park.
shouting burn cards not people.
and hell no we won t go.
hundreds tossed their draft cards into a bonfire.
a woman from new jersey told a reporter so many of us are frustrated.
we want to criticize this war because we think it s wrong but we want to do it in the framework of loyalty.
historical spotlight ballad of the green berets not every vietnam era pop song about war was an antiwar song.
at the top of the charts for five weeks in 1966 was the ballad of the green berets by staff sergeant barry sadler of the u s army special forces known as the green berets fighting soldiers from the sky fearless men who jump and die men who mean just what they say the brave men of the green beret.
the recording sold over a million copies in its first two weeks of release and was billboard magazines song of the year.
difficult decisions resist the draft or serve your country.
as the fighting in vietnam intensified young men of draft age who opposed the war found themselves considering one of two options register with the draft board and risk heading off to war or find a way to avoid military service.
ways to avoid service included medical and educational deferments.
but a great many men did not qualify for these.
the choices that remained such as fleeing the country going to jail or giving in and joining the ranks came with a high price.
once a decision was made there was no turning back.
1 imagine you oppose the war and are called to serve in vietnam.
what decision would you make.
would you feel guilty if you avoided the draft.
if you chose to serve how would you view those who did not serve your country.
2 do you think more young men would have been willing to serve had this been a different war.
others were more radical in their view.
david harris who would spend 20 months in jail for refusing to serve in vietnam explained his motives.
a personal voice david harris theoretically i can accept the notion that there are circumstances in which you have to kill people.
i could not accept the notion that vietnam was one of those circumstances.
and to me that left the option of either sitting by and watching what was an enormous injustice or finding some way to commit myself against it.
and the position that i felt comfortable with in committing myself against it was total noncooperation i was not going to be part of the machine.
quoted in the war within draft resistance continued from 1967 until president nixon phased out the draft in the early 1970s.
during these years the u s government accused more than 200 000 men of draft offenses and imprisoned nearly 4 000 draft resisters.
although some were imprisoned for four or five years most won parole after 6 to 12 months.
throughout these years about 10 000 americans fled many to canada.
in october of 1967 a demonstration at washington s lincoln memorial drew about 75 000 protesters.
after listening to speeches approximately 30 000 demonstrators locked arms for a march on the pentagon in order to disrupt the center of the american war machine as one organizer explained.
as hundreds of protesters broke past the military police and mounted the pentagon steps they were met by tear gas and clubs.
about 1 500 demonstrators were injured and at least 700 arrested.
war divides the nation by 1967 americans increasingly found themselves divided into two camps regarding the war.
those who strongly opposed the war and believed the united states should withdraw were known as doves.
feeling just as strongly that america should unleash much of its greater military force to win the war were the hawks.
despite the visibility of the antiwar protesters a majority of american citizens in 1967 still remained committed to the war.
others while less certain about the proper u s role in vietnam were shocked to see protesters publicly criticize a war in which their fellow americans were fighting and dying.
a poll taken in december of 1967 showed that 70 percent of americans believed the war protests were acts of disloyalty.
a firefighter who lost his son in vietnam articulated the bitter feelings a number of americans felt toward the antiwar movement.
a personal voice im bitter its people like us who give up our sons for the country.
the college types the professors they go to washington and tell the government what to do.
but their sons they dont end up in the swamps over there in vietnam.
theyre deferred because theyre in school.
or they get sent to safe places.
what bothers me about the peace crowd is that you can tell from their attitude the way they look and what they say that they dont really love this country a firefighter quoted in working class war main idea evaluating do you think it was right for the government to imprison draft resisters.
this sign reflects the view of many americans that the antiwar protests undermined the war effort in vietnam.
main idea responding to antiwar posters americans who supported the government s vietnam policy developed their own slogans support our men in vietnam and evaluating america love it or leave it ej what were the key issues that johnson remains determined throughout the turmoil and division divided america.
that engulfed the country during the early years of the war president johnson remained firm.
attacked by doves for not withdrawing and by hawks for not increasing military power rapidly enough johnson was dismissive of both groups and their motives.
he continued his policy of slow escalation.
a personal voice lyndon b johnson there has always been confusion frustration and difference of opinion in this country when there is a war going on.
you know what president roosevelt went through and president wilson in world war i he had some senators from certain areas.
that gave him serious problems until victory was assured.
we are going to have these differences.
no one likes war.
all people love peace.
but you cant have freedom without defending it quoted in no hail no farewell however by the end of 1967 johnson s policy and the continuing stalemate had begun to create turmoil within his own administration.
in november defense secretary robert mcnamara a key architect of u s escalation in vietnam quietly announced he was resigning to become head of the world bank.
it didn t add up mcnamara recalled later.
what i was trying to find out was how the war went on year after year when we stopped the infiltration from north vietnam or shrunk it and when we had a very high body count and so on.
it just didn t make sense.
ir as it happened mcnamara s resignation came on the threshold of the most tumultuous year of the sixties.
in 1968 the war and johnson s presidency would take a drastic turn for the worse.
assessment 1 terms names for each of the following write a sentence explaining its significance.
draft students for a free speech movement new left democratic society sds dove hawk main idea using your notes re create the tree diagram below on your paper.
then fill it in with examples of student organizations issues and demonstrations of the new left.
critical thinking developing historical perspective imagine it is 1967 do you think you would ally yourself with the hawks or the doves.
give reasons that support your position.
4 evaluating do you agree that antiwar protests were acts of disloyalty.
why or why not.
analyzing visual sources this antiwar poster is a parody of the world war i uncle sam poster shown on page 382 which states i want you for the u s army why might the artist have chosen this american character to express the antiwar message.
teks8e 8f 1968 a tumultuous year main idea why it matters now terms names an enemy attack in vietnam two assassinations and a chaotic political convention made 1968 an explosive year.
disturbing events in 1968 accentuated the nations divisions which are still healing in the 21st century.
tet offensive clark clifford robert kennedy eugene mccarthy hubert humphrey george wallace oneamerican sstory 4 taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the major events of 1968 on june 5 1968 john lewis the first chairman of the student nonviolent coordinating committee fell to the floor and wept.
robert f kennedy a leading democratic candidate for president had just been fatally shot.
two months earlier when martin luther king jr had fallen victim to an assassin s bullet lewis had told himself he still had kennedy.
and now they both were gone.
lewis who later became a congressman from georgia recalled the lasting impact of these assassinations.
a personal voice john lewis 66there are people today who are afraid in a sense to hope or to have hope again because of what happened in.
1968 something was taken from us.
the type of leadership that we had in a sense invested in that we had helped to make and to nourish was taken from us.
something died in all of us with those assassinations.
quoted in from camelot to kent state these violent deaths were but two of the traumatic events that rocked the nation in 1968 from a shocking setback in vietnam to a chaotic democratic national convention in chicago the events of 1968 made it the most tumultuous year of a turbulent decade.
john lewis the tet offensive turns the war the year 1968 began with a daring surprise attack by the vietcong on numerous cities in south vietnam.
the simultaneous strikes while ending in military defeat for the communist guerrillas stunned the american public.
many people with moderate views began to turn against the war.
a surprise attack january 30 was the vietnamese equivalent of new years eve the beginning of the lunar new year festivities known in vietnam as tet.
748 chapter.
developing historical perspective how did the california gold rush transform the west in the american imagination.
chapter 3 the growth of a young nation european immigrants arriving in new york city from a colored engraving made in 1858 national trades union amid the growing labor unrest in the 1830s the trade unions in different towns began to join together to expand their power.
journeymen s organizations from several industries united in 1834 to form the national trades union.
the national trade union movement faced fierce opposition from bankers and owners.
in addition workers efforts to organize were at first hampered by court decisions declaring strikes illegal.
in 1842 however the massachusetts supreme court supported the workers right to strike in the case of commonwealth v hunt.
the workplace was not the only area of american life that experienced unrest in the mid 19th century.
indeed a series of religious and social reform movements went hand in hand with these economic changes.
1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
market revolution samuel f b morse strike national trades union free enterprise lowell textile mills immigration commonwealth v hunt entrepreneurs main idea using your notes create a time line like the one below on which you label and date important developments in manufacturing during the early 19th century.
1807 write a paragraph explaining which development was most important and why.
critical thinking analyzing issues do you think the positive effects of mechanizing the manufacturing process outweighed the negative effects.
why or why not.
think about changes in job opportunities for unskilled laborers changes in employer employee relationships working conditions in factories the cost of manufactured goods analyzing primary sources a 20th century historian said of the 1820s it was the miraculous machinery of the times.
which made it obvious that things were getting better all the time how do you think the people you have read about in this chapter 3 individualism the characteristic of rugged individualism is one that many americans point to with pride.
in tocquevilles words as social conditions become more equal the number of persons increases who although they are neither rich enough nor powerful enough to exercise any great influence over their fellow creatures have nevertheless acquired or retained sufficient education and fortune to satisfy their own wants.
they owe nothing to any man they expect nothing from any man they acquire the habit of always considering themselves as standing alone and they are apt to imagine that their whole destiny is in their own hands.
tocqueville worried that too much individualism could detract from a vibrant and active civil society.
however he believed that americans willingness to participate in local government and to form political associations could prevent this problem.
populism populism is a political movement that champions the common person over the elite.
tocqueville never uses the word populism in democracy in america because the concept did not exist then as it does now.
however he observed that unlike in europes aristocracies the equality of condition that he found in america made labor a noble pursuit amongst a democratic people where there is no hereditary wealth every man works to earn a living or has worked or is born of parents who have worked.
the notion of labor is therefore presented to the mind on every side as the necessary natural and honest condition of human existence.
not only is labor not dishonorable amongst such a people but it is held in honor the prejudice is not against it but in its favor.
in addition to this respect for labor tocqueville believed that the relatively equal distribution of property found in america compared to other nations helped to explain why the masses felt contempt for the elites.
laissez faire the literal translation of the french term laissez faire is let to do.
this is understood to mean being left alone without interference.
in explaining the continued success of the u s democratic republic tocqueville cited three main factors the laws the manners and customs of the people and something that he referred to as the peculiar and accidental situation in which providence has placed the americans by this tocqueville was referring to the fact that unlike european nations america had few neighbors to interfere with its affairs which allowed democracy to continue relatively unchallenged.
he declared a thousand circumstances independent of the will of man concur to facilitate the maintenance of a democratic republic in the united states.
the americans have no neighbors and consequently they have no great wars or financial crises or inroads or conquest to dread.
the growth of a young nation 151 review chapter 17 i 1943 rommels forces surrender in north africa.
1944 gl bill of rights is passed y i.
pwmdent g cvch is elected fourth term.
i 1945j u s marines take iwo jima.
1945 harry s truman becomes president when roosevelt dies.
1944 on june 6 the allies launch a massive invasion of europe.
i 1945j nazi retreat begins after the battle of the bulge 119451 japan surrenders after atomic bombing of hiroshima and nagasaki.
the united states in world war ii 56 w mobilizing for defense main idea following the attack on pearl harbor the united states mobilized for war.
why itt matters now military industries in the united states today are a major part of the american economy.
terans names george marshall womens auxiliary army corps waac a philip randolph manhattan project office of price administration opa war production board wpb rationing fi taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes about how the united states prepared for war.
american s story as soldiers went off to fight in europe and the pacific many american families were separated by the war effort.
this letter from marine 1st lt leonard isacks expresses the emotions that many soldiers felt when thinking of their loved ones back home.
a personal voice leonard isacks my dear little boys i am writing to you today just a week before christmas eve in the hope that you will get this little note at christmas time.
all of this coming week will be holidays and i can just imagine the fun you will be having i wont be able to give you a christmas present personally this year but i do want you to know that i think of you all the time i know that you would like to give me a xmas present too so i will tell you what you can do and this will be your xmas present to me.
everyday ask mummie if there are any errands that you can do for her and when there are errands to run say sure mummie and give her a big smile from letter from marine 1st lt leonard isacks as the united states began to mobilize for war the isacks like most americans had few illusions as to what lay ahead.
it would be a time filled with hard work hope sacrifice and sorrow.
leonard isackss children at home.
americans join the war effort the japanese had attacked pearl harbor with the expectation that once americans had experienced japan s power they would tremble with fear and shrink from further conflict.
but if americans were trembling it was with rage not fear.
american patriotism drove citizens to incredible acts of bravery and sacrifice on the battlefields of europe and the pacific as well as at home.
uniting under the battle cry remember pearl harbor.
they set out to prove japan wrong.
562 chapter 3 section 5 p 146 and read the passage headed life under slavery.
make a diagram like the one above to identify the topic the most important details and the main idea of the passage.
use what you have learned about identifying the main idea and details in a passage.
1 identify the topic of the passage.
what is this passage about.
2 identify the topic sentence.
which sentence sums up the point of this section.
3 look for details that support the topic.
what details support the main idea.
what do these life under slavery.
details tell you about 153 sk2 m i illl history and 5w3 in 1804 meriwether lewis william clark and the 33 man corps of discovery began a 8 000 mile journey across uncharted territory.
under orders from president thomas jefferson the expedition mapped a route across the louisiana purchase to the pacific ocean.
from st louis missouri they traveled west up the missouri river then across the rocky mountains and to the pacific.
they met native american peoples and cataloged geography plants and animals.
not only was their mission one of history s greatest explorations it also secured an american claim to the pacific coast and helped inspire millions to migrate west.
explore entries from lewis s journal and other primary sources online.
you can find a wealth of information video clips activities and more at 71 j the indian wornon recogntzrd thepoint oj a high jdatn to our right which vhe infer need us was not very cuhtartfeein the summer retreat ofeher nation ok a river beyond the ncountatns which rune to the west.
inter activities underway on the missouri watch the video to see how the corps of discovery sailed up the missouri river to begin their expedition.
i860 usa world h f485l the great h exhibition opens h in london.
148541 charles dickenss hard times is published.
1861 russian serfs emancipated by i czar alexander ii.
chapter 4 the union in peril the underground railroad 1850 1860 lonoflganized.
territory a free states slave states areas with slave population of 50 or more in 1860 routes of the underground railroad station on underground railroad 0 100 200 miles 0 100 200 kilometers l geography skillbuilder 1 movement what does this map tell you about the routes of the underground railroad.
2 place name three cities that were destinations on the underground railroad.
3 location why do you think these cities were destinations.
i s i 4 punai ay slaves arrivirjg t levi coffins farm in indian i alongtfteunderground railroad.
review unit 159 free and slave states and territories 1820 1854 the missouri compromise 1820 1821 the compromise of 1850 jp t free states i territory closed to slavery ej slave states i territory open to slavery the kansas nebraska act of 1854 geography skillbuilder 1 place how did the number of slave states change between 1821 and 1854.
2 region how did the kansas nebraska act affect the amount of land that was open to slavery.
while southerners criticized the book as an attack on the south.
the furor over uncle tom s cabin had barely begun to settle when the issue of slavery in the territories surfaced again.
tension in kansas and nebraska the compromise of 1850 had provided for popular sovereignty in new mexico and utah.
to senator stephen douglas popular sovereignty seemed like an excellent way to decide whether slavery would be allowed in the nebraska territory.
a personal voice stephen a douglas if the people of kansas want a slaveholding state let them have it and if they want a free state they have a right to it and it is not for the people of illinois or missouri or new york or kentucky to complain whatever the decision of kansas may be.
quoted in the civil war by geoffrey c ward the only difficulty was that unlike new mexico and utah the kansas and nebraska territory lay north of the missouri compromise line of 3630 and therefore was legally closed to slavery.
douglas introduced a bill in congress on january 23 1854 that would divide the area into two territories nebraska in the north and kansas in the south.
if passed the bill would repeal the missouri compromise and establish popular sovereignty for both territories.
congressional debate was bitter.
some northern congressmen saw the bill as part of a plot to turn the territories into slave states.
southerners strongly defended the proposed legislation.
after months of struggle the kansas nebraska act became law in 1854 dy kansas the race for kansas was on.
both supporters and opponents of slavery attempted to populate kansas in order to win the vote on slavery in the territory.
by march 1855 kansas had enough settlers to hold an election for a territorial legislature.
however thousands of border ruffians from the slave state of missouri crossed into kansas voted illegally and won a fraudulent majority for the proslavery candidates.
a government was set up at lecompton and promptly issued a series of proslavery acts.
furious over these events abolitionists organized a rival government in topeka in the fall of 1855 it wasn t long before bloody violence surfaced in the struggle for kansas earning the territory the name bleeding kansas violence in the senate violence was not restricted to kansas.
in may senator charles sumner of massachusetts delivered an impassioned speech in the senate entitled the crime against kansas for two days he verbally attacked main idea analyzing events why was the debate over the kansas nebraska act so bitter.
chapter 23 r women in the workplace 1950 2000 working women and percent of labor force 1950 i960 1970 1980 1990 2000 median incomes for working women and men 2000 953 s2 57q 6 670 2 237 33 592 25 532 women men women men women men 1950 1970 2000 skillbuilder interpreting graphs 1 for each year shown what percentage of mens income did women make.
2 about how many more women were working in 1990 than in 1960.
vocabulary ideological concerned with a certain set of ideas main idea analyzing effects what effects did the civil rights and the antiwar movements have n many women.
this 1960s pin displays a slogan used by betty friedan at the national womens political caucus.
women in the workplace in 1950 only one out of three women worked for wages.
by 1960 that number had increased to about 40 percent.
still during this time certain jobs were considered men s work and women were shut out.
the jobs available to women mostly clerical work domestic service retail sales social work teaching and nursing paid poorly.
the country largely ignored this discrimination until president kennedy appointed the presidential commission on the status of women in 1961 in 1963 the commission reported that women were paid far less than men even when doing the same jobs.
furthermore women were seldom promoted to management positions regardless of their education experience and ability.
these newly publicized facts awakened many women to their unequal status in society.
women and activism ironically many women felt the sting move oh little girl of discrimination when they became involved in the civil rights and antiwar movements movements that toted the ideological banner of protecting people s rights.
within some of these organizations such as sncc and sds men led most of the activities while women were assigned lesser roles.
when women protested this arrangement the men usually brushed them aside.
such experiences led some women to organize small groups to discuss their concerns.
during these discussions or consciousness raising sessions women shared their lives with each other and discovered that their experiences were not unique.
rather they reflected a much larger pattern of sexism or discrimination based on gender.
author robin morgan delineated this pattern.
a personal voice robin morgan it makes you very sensitive raw even this consciousness.
everything from the verbal assault on the street to a well meant sexist joke your husband tells to the lower pay you get at work for doing the same job a man would be paid more for to television commercials to rock song lyrics to the pink or blue blanket they put on your infant in the hospital nursery to speeches by male revolutionaries that reek of male supremacy everything seems to barrage your aching brain.
you begin to see how all pervasive a thing is sexism.
quoted in sisterhood is powerful an anthology of writings from the womens liberation movement we have more important issues to talk about here than women s liberation 9 a male antiwar activist an era of social change the womens movement emerges the feminine mystique which captured the very discontent that many women were feeling quickly became a bestseller and helped to galvanize women across the country.
by the late 1960s women were working together for change.
this is not a movement one joins observed robin morgan.
the women s liberation movement exists where three or four friends or neighbors decide to meet regularly on the welfare lines in the supermarket the factory the convent the farm the maternity ward.
the movement experiences gains and losses as the women s movement grew it achieved remarkable and enduring political and social gains for women.
along the way however it also suffered setbacks most notably in its attempt to ensure women s equality in the constitution.
the creation of now the women s movement gained strength with the passage of the civil rights act of 1964 which prohibited discrimination based on race religion national origin and gender and created the equal employment opportunity commission eeoc to handle discrimination claims.
by 1966 however some women argued that the eeoc didn t adequately address women s grievances.
that year 28 women including betty friedan created the national organization for women now to pursue women s goals.
the time has come the founders of now declared to confront with concrete action the conditions which now prevent women from enjoying the equality of opportunity.
which is their right as individual americans and as human beings.
b now members pushed for the creation of child care facilities that would enable mothers to pursue jobs and education.
now also pressured the eeoc to enforce more vigorously the ban on gender discrimination in hiring.
now s efforts prompted the eeoc to declare sex segregated job ads illegal and to issue guidelines to employers stating that they could no longer refuse to hire women for traditionally male jobs.
a diverse movement in its first three years now s ranks swelled to 175 000 members.
a number of other womens groups sprang up around the country too.
in 1968 a militant group known as the new york radical women staged a well publicized demonstration at the annual miss america pageant.
the women threw bras girdles wigs and other women s garbage into a freedom trash can.
they then crowned a sheep miss america.
around this time gloria steinem a journalist political activist and ardent supporter of the women s liberation movement made her voice heard on the subjects of feminism and equality.
steinem s grandmother had served as president of the ohio woman s suffrage association from 1908 to 1911 steinem had inherited her passion and conviction.
in 1971 steinem helped found the national women s political caucus a moderate group that encouraged women to seek political office.
in 1972 she and other women created a new women s magazine ms designed to treat contemporary issues from a feminist perspective.
legal and social gains as the women s movement progressed women began to question all sorts of gender based distinctions.
people protested that a woman s physical playr gloria steinem 1934 gloria steinem became one of the more prominent figures of the womens movement after she and several other women founded ms magazine in 1972 the magazine soon became a major voice of the womens movement.
steinem said that she decided to start the feminist magazine after editors in the mainstream media continually rejected her stories about the women s movement editors who had assumed i had some valuable biological insight into food male movie stars and textured stockings now questioned whether i or other women writers were biologically capable of writing objectively about feminism.
that was the beginning main idea analyzing causes g what prompted women to establish now 778 chapter 4 the union in peril now louisiana state university he poured out his fears for the south.
historical a personal voice william tecumseh sherman 6 this country will be drenched in blood.
t he people of the north.
are not going to let this country be destroyed without a mighty effort to save it.
besides where are your men and appliances of war to contend against them.
you are rushing into war with one of the most powerful ingeniously mechanical and determined people on earth right at your doors.
only in spirit and determination are you prepared for war.
in all else you are totally unprepared 99 quoted in none died in vain mississippi soon followed south carolina s lead as did florida alabama georgia louisiana and texas.
in february 1861 delegates from the secessionist states met in montgomery alabama where they formed the confederate states of america or confederacy.
they also drew up a constitution that closely resembled that of the united states but with a few notable differences.
the most important difference was that it protected and recognized slavery in new territories.
the confederates then unanimously elected former senator jefferson davis of mississippi as president.
the north had heard threats of secession before.
when it finally happened no one was shocked.
but one key question remained in everyone s mind would the north allow the south to leave the union without a fight.
spotlight secession and the border states four slave states maryland kentucky missouri and delaware were undecided about secession.
lincoln believed that these states would be essential to the success of the union if war broke out.
they had large populations numerous factories and strategic access to the ohio river.
moreover maryland nearly surrounded washington d c the seat of government.
lincoln faced a choice free the slaves and make abolitionists happy or ignore slavery for the moment to keep from alienating the border states.
he chose the latter but that did not prevent violent conflicts between secessionists and unionists in maryland kentucky and missouri.
with the intervention of the militia and some political maneuvering in those states legislatures lincoln kept the four border states in the union.
1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
secession harriet tubman dred scott confederacy popular sovereignty harriet beecher stowe stephen douglas jefferson davis underground railroad franklin pierce abraham lincoln i main idea using your notes create a time line like the one below showing the events that heightened the tensions between the north and the south.
select one event and explain its significance.
critical thinking 3 hypothesizing review issues and events in this section that reflect the growing conflict between the north and the south.
do you think there were any points at which civil war might have been averted.
think about the compromise of 1850 the fugitive slave act and the kansas nebraska act the new political parties the supreme courts ruling in the dred scott decision the election of abraham lincoln as president in 1860 evaluating leadership john brown harriet tubman harriet beecher stowe and stephen douglas all opposed slavery.
who do you think had the greatest impact on american history and why.
developing historical perspective how did the tension between states rights and national government authority manifest itself in the events leading up to the civil war.
review unit 165 s is v a dred scott v sandford 1857 origins of the case dred scott s slave master had brought him from the slave state of missouri to live for a time in free territory and in the free state of illinois.
eventually they returned to missouri.
scott believed that because he had lived in free territory he should be free.
in 1854 he sued in federal court for his freedom.
the court ruled against him and he appealed to the supreme court.
the ruling the supreme court ruled that african americans were not and could never be citizens.
thus dred scott had no right even to file a lawsuit and remained enslaved.
legal reasoning the court s decision based primarily on chief justice roger taney s written opinion made two key findings.
first it held that because scott was a slave he was not a citizen and had no right to sue in a united states court.
we think they slaves are not included and were not intended to be included under the word citizens in the constitution and can therefore claim none of the rights and privileges which that instrument provides for and secures to citizens of the united states this could have been the end of the matter but taney went further.
he said that by banning slavery congress was in effect taking away property.
such an action he wrote violated the fifth amendment which guarantees the right not to be deprived of property without due process of law such as a hearing.
thus all congressional efforts to ban slavery in the territories were prohibited.
justices john mclean and benjamin curtis strongly dissented on both points.
they showed that the u s constitution state constitutions and other laws had recognized african americans as citizens.
they also pointed to the clause in the constitution giving congress the power to make all needful rules and regulations to govern u s territories.
in their view this clause gave congress the power to prohibit slavery in the territories.
chief justice roger taney legal sources u s constitution u s constitution article 4 section 2 1789 no person held to service or labor in one state.
escaping into another shall in consequence of any law or regulation therein be discharged from such service or labor.
u s constitution article 4 section 3 1789 the congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the united states.
u s constitution fifth amendment 1791 no person shall be.
deprived of life liberty or property without due process of law.
related cases ableman v booth 1858 the court decided that the fugitive slave act was c stitutional and that laws passed in northern states that prohibited the return of fugitive slaves were unconstitutional.
why it mattered taney s opinion in dred scott had far reaching consequences.
legally the opinion greatly expanded the reach of slavery.
politically it heightened the sectional tensions that would lead to the civil war.
before the court decided dred scott americans widely accepted the idea that congress and the states could limit slavery.
as the dissenters argued many previous acts of congress had limited slavery for example the northwest ordinance had banned slavery in the northwest territory and no one had claimed that those acts violated property rights.
taney s opinion in dred scott however was a major change.
this expansion of slaveholders rights cast doubt on whether free states could prevent slave owners from bringing or even selling slaves into free areas.
as a result dred scott intensified the slavery debate as no single event had before.
in going beyond what was needed to settle the case before him taney s ruling became a political act and threw into question the legitimacy of the court.
further taney s opinion took the extreme proslavery position and installed it as the national law.
it not only negated all the compromises made to date by pro and antislavery forces but it seemed to preclude any possible future compromises.
historical impact it took four years of bitter civil war to find out if taney s opinion would stand as the law of the land.
it would not.
immediately after the civil war the federal government moved to abolish slavery with the thirteenth amendment 1865 and then to extend state and national citizenship with the fourteenth amendment 1868 to z a ll persons born or naturalized in the united states.
the wording of these amend contemporary newspaper article describing the dred scott case.
ments was expressly intended to nullify dred scott.
these amendments meant that dred scott would no longer be used as a precedent an earlier ruling that can be used to justify a current one.
instead it is now pointed to as an important lesson on the limits of the supreme court s power as a key step on the road to the civil war and as one of the worst decisions ever made by the supreme court.
thinking critically connect to history 1 developing historical perspective use the library to find commentaries on dred scott written at the time the decision was made.
read two of these commentaries and identify which section north or south the writer or speaker came from.
explain how each person s region shaped his or her views.
connect to today cmpuky 2 visit the links for historic decisions of the supreme court to research what it means to be a citizen of the united states and what rights that citizenship extends.
research which constitutional amendments u s laws and supreme court decisions guarantee the rights of citizens.
prepare an oral presentation or annotated display to summarize your findings.
i t internet activity review unit 167 the civil war begins main idea why it matters now terms names shortly after the nations southern states seceded from the union war began between the north and south.
the nations identity was forged in part by the civil war.
sectional divisions remain very strong today.
fort sumter bull run stonewall jackson s grant robert e lee antietam emancipation proclamation conscription clara barton income tax one americansi story i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on military actions and social and economic changes during the first two years of the civil war.
on april 18 1861 major robert anderson was traveling by ship from charleston south carolina to new york city.
that day anderson wrote a report to the secretary of war in which he described his most recent command.
a personal voice robert anderson having defended fort sumter for thirty four hours until the quarters were entirely burned the main gates destroyed by fire the magazine surrounded by flames.
four barrels and three cartridges of powder only being available and no provisions but pork remaining i accepted terms of evacuation.
and marched out of the fort.
with colors flying and drums beating.
and saluting my flag with fifty guns.
quoted in fifty basic civil war documents months earlier as soon as the confederacy was formed confederate soldiers in each secessionist state began seizing federal installations especially forts.
by the time of lincoln s inauguration on march 4 1861 only four southern forts remained in union hands.
the most important was fort sumter on an island in charleston harbor.
lincoln decided to neither abandon fort sumter nor reinforce it.
he would merely send in food for hungry men.
at 4 30 a m on april 12 confederate batteries began thundering away to the cheers of charleston s citizens.
the deadly struggle between north and south was under way.
major robert anderson observes the firing at fort sumter in 1861 union and confederate forces clash news of fort sumter s fall united the north.
when lincoln called for volunteers the response throughout the northern states was overwhelming.
however lincoln s call for troops provoked a very different reaction in the states of the is8 chapter 4 the union in peril northern and southern resources 1861 source times atlas of world history 1989 military strength naval ship iron production 15 to 1 firearms production 32 to 1 skillbuilder interpreting graphs 1 which side north or south had the advantage in terms of industrial production.
2 what do the overall data suggest about the eventual outcome of the war.
industrial workers source battles and leaders of the civil war 1884 1888 reprinted ed 1956 most confederate soldiers fought to protect the south from northern aggression.
most union troops saw the war as a struggle to preserve the union.
main idea making inferences why were northern factories and railroads so advantageous to the unions war effort.
upper south.
in april and may virginia arkansas north carolina and tennessee seceded bringing the number of confederate states to eleven.
the western counties of virginia opposed slavery so they seceded from virginia and were admitted into the union as west virginia in 1863 the four remaining slave states maryland delaware kentucky and missouri remained in the union.
strengths and strategies the union and the confederacy were unevenly matched.
the union enjoyed enormous advantages in resources over the south more people more factories greater food production and a more extensive railroad system.
the confederacy s advantages included king cotton first rate generals and highly motivated soldiers.
both sides adopted military strategies suited to their objectives and resources.
the union which had to conquer the south to win devised a three part plan the navy would blockade southern ports so they could neither export cotton nor import much needed manufactured goods.
union riverboats and armies would move down the mississippi river and split the confederacy in two.
union armies would capture the confederate capital at richmond virginia.
the confederacy s strategy was mostly defensive although southern leaders encouraged their generals to attack the north if the opportunity arose.
bull run the first bloodshed on the battlefield occurred about three months after fort sumter fell near the little creek of bull run just 25 miles from washington d c the battle was a seesaw affair.
in the morning the union army gained the upper hand but the confederates held firm inspired by general thomas j jackson.
there stands jackson like a stone wall another general shouted coining the nickname stonewall jackson.
in the afternoon confederate reinforcements helped win the first southern victory.
fortunately for the union the confederates were too exhausted to follow up their victory with an attack on washington.
still confederate morale soared.
many confederate soldiers confident that the war was over left the army and went home.
union armies in the west lincoln responded to the defeat at bull run by stepping up enlistments.
he also appointed general george mcclellan to lead the union forces encamped near washington.
while mcclellan drilled his troops the union forces in the west began the fight for control of the mississippi river.
review unit 169 in february 1862 a union army invaded western tennessee.
see the battles of the west map below.
at its head was general ulysses s grant a brave and decisive military commander.
in just eleven days grant s forces captured two confederate forts fort henry on the tennessee river and fort donelson on the cumberland river.
two months later grant narrowly escaped disaster near shiloh a small church in tennessee close to the mississippi border.
after grant failed to have his troops dig trenches or set out adequate guards and patrols thousands of confederate soldiers carried out a surprise attack.
grant averted disaster by reorganizing his troops and driving the confederate forces away the next day.
however shiloh demonstrated what a bloody slaughter the war was becoming.
nearly one fourth of the 100 000 men who fought there were killed wounded or captured.
as grant pushed toward the mississippi river david g farragut commanding a union fleet of about 40 ships seized new orleans the confederacy s largest city and busiest port.
see the fall of new orleans map below.
by june farragut had taken control of much of the lower mississippi.
between grant and farragut the union had nearly achieved its goal of cutting the confederacy in two.
only port hudson louisiana and vicksburg mississippi still stood in the way.
the war for the capitals in the spring of 1862 while mcclellan was leading his army toward richmond he met a confederate army commanded by general joseph e johnston.
see the battles of the east map on page 171.
after a series of battles johnston was wounded and command of the army passed on to robert e lee.
lee was very different from mcclellan modest rather than vain and willing to go beyond military textbooks in his tactics.
determined to save the confederate capital lee drove mcclellan away from richmond.
main idea making inferences why was control of the mississippi river so important to the union.
400 kilometers civil war 1861 1862 area controlled by union area won by union 1861 1862 area controlled by confederacy union troop movements confederate troop movements union victory confederate victory fort capital 400 miles geography skillbuilder 1 region in which region of the country did northern forces have the most success.
2 place in which states did confederate troops attempt invasions of the north.
vocabulary casualties those who are injured killed captured or missing in action now it was lee s turn to move against washington.
in september his troops crossed the potomac into the union state of maryland.
at this point mcclellan had an incredible stroke of luck.
a union corporal found a copy of lee s orders wrapped around some cigars.
the plan revealed that lee s and stonewall jackson s armies were separated for the moment.
mcclellan ordered his men to pursue lee and the two sides fought on september 17 near a creek called the antietam an te tem.
the clash proved to be the bloodiest single day battle in american history with casualties totaling more than 26 000 the next day instead of pursuing the battered confederate army into virginia and possibly ending the war mcclellan did nothing.
as a result lincoln removed him from command.
historical spotlight main idea drawing conclusions why did both the union and confederacy care about british neutrality.
the politics of war after secession occurred many southerners believed that dependence on southern cotton would force great britain to formally recognize the confederacy as an independent nation.
unfortunately for the south britain had accumulated a huge cotton inventory just before the outbreak of war.
instead of importing southern cotton the british now needed northern wheat and corn.
britain decided that neutrality was the best policy.
boys in war both the union and confederate armies had soldiers who were under 18 years of age.
examination of some confederate recruiting lists for 1861 1862 reveals that approximately 5 percent were 17 or younger with some as young as 13 the percentage of boys in the union army was lower perhaps 1 5 percent.
these figures however do not count the great number of boys who ran away to follow each army without officially enlisting.
review unit 171 key players abraham lincoln 1809 1865 people question why lincoln believed so passionately in the union.
a possible answer lies in his life story.
he was born into poverty the son of illiterate parents.
lincoln once said that in his boyhood there was absolutely nothing to excite ambition for educa tion yet he hungered for knowledge.
apart from a years worth of school lincoln educated himself and after working as rail splitter flatboatman storekeeper and surveyor he taught himself to be a lawyer.
this led to careers in politics and law and eventually to the white house.
perhaps because of this upward mobility lincoln fought passionately to preserve the democracy he described as the last best hope of earth jefferson davis 1808 1889 davis who was named after thomas jefferson was born in kentucky but grew up in mississippi.
after graduating from west point he served in the military then settled down as a planter before going into politics.
he served terms in the u s senate.
his election as president of the confederacy dismayed him.
as his wife varina wrote i thought his genius was military but as a party manager he would not succeed.
he did not know the arts of the politician.
varina was right.
davis fought frequently with other confederate leaders and was blamed for the refusal of many southern states to put the confederacys welfare above their own.
history video emancipation proclamation 7 proclaiming emancipation as jefferson davis s confederacy struggled in vain to gain foreign recognition abolitionist feeling grew in the north.
although lincoln disliked slavery he did not believe that the federal government had the power to abolish it where it already existed.
as the war progressed however lincoln did find a way to use his constitutional war powers to end slavery.
the confederacy used the labor of slaves to build fortifications and grow food.
lincoln s powers as commander in chief allowed him to order his troops to seize enemy resources.
therefore he decided that just as he could order the union army to take confederate supplies he could also authorize the army to emancipate slaves.
emancipation was not just a moral issue it became a weapon of war.
on january 1 1863 lincoln issued his emancipation proclamation.
the following portion captured national attention.
from the emancipation proclamation abraham lincoln i do order and declare that all persons held as slaves within these said designated states and parts of states are and henceforward shall be free and that the executive government of the united states including the military and naval authorities thereof will recognize and maintain the freedom of said persons.
and i hereby enjoin upon the people so declared to be free to abstain from all violence unless in necessary self defense and i recommend to them that in all cases when allowed they labor faithfully for reasonable wages.
and i further declare and make known that such persons of suitable condition will be received into the armed service of the united states to garrison forts positions stations and other places and to man vessels of all sorts in said service.
and upon this sincerely believed to be an act of justice warranted by the constitution upon military necessity i invoke the considerate judgment of mankind and the gracious favor of almighty god from the emancipation proclamation january 1 1863 172 chapter to answer the following questions.
latinos and native americans seek equality pages 768 773 1 what strategies did both cesar chavez and the ufwoc use to achieve their goals.
how did they successfully apply these tactics.
2 what were the demands of the american indian movement aim organizers who staged the trail of broken treaties march on washington in 1972.
women fight for equality pages 776 780 3 describe the roles of political organizations that promoted womens civil rights.
4 what was the supreme courts decision in the roe v wade case.
culture and counterculture pages 781 785 5 briefly explain the role timothy leary played in the counterculture movement.
6 what unintended impact did the counterculture have on many mainstream americans.
critical thinking using your notes re create the diagram shown below.
then fill in the appropriate areas with key individual and shared achievements of latinos native americans and feminists.
the organizations that latinos native americans and women formed during the 1960s.
which do you think was the most influential.
analyzing primary sources reread the song lyrics of bob dylans the times they are a changin on page 784 how do you think this song captured the main message of the counterculture movement.
visual summary an era of social change political protests against vietnam war now fuels feminism the new right emerges era defeated roe v wade more women in the work force aim wins reforms and land rights la raza unida and mapa fight for more rights for latinos bilingual education latino farm workers unionize music music as political expression motown label produces african american artists rock music the beatles woodstock festival social hippies reject mainstream society more communal living new fashion trends reflect freedom of expression traditional forms of worship rejected jn favor of eastern religious teachings 1 more drug use women and minorities seek equality more permissive sexual behavior 1 books magazines and movies show explicit violence art and fashion pop art movement long hair as rebellion hippies popularize bright colorful clothing beads and blue jeans 788 chapter skill activity clarifying and summarizing i defining the skill clarifying means checking to be sure you clearly understand what you have read.
one way to do this is by asking yourself questions about the material.
in your answers you might restate in your own words what you have read.
when you summarize you condense what you have read into a shorter easier to understand format.
a good summary should include only a passage s main ideas and its most important supporting details.
when summarizing remember to use your own words.
knowing how to summarize can help you understand and recall the main ideas of what you read.
understanding the skill strategy understand and condense the text think about what a passage is trying to say and identify the main ideas.
clarify any words or concepts you don t know.
then in your own words write a summary that condenses and also clarifies key information.
the passage below tells about ways women men and children helped the war efforts at home.
following the description is a summary that condenses and also clarifies key information.
sacrifice and struggle at home i world war ii made demands of every american.
allied soldiers sailors and pilots risked life and i limb so that others could enjoy freedom the women children and men who remained in the united i states also played a key role in ensuring success overseas.
millions of americans contributed to the war effort by taking jobs in factories or offices.
in addition men women and children did their part at home to help the united states win the war.
meeting the food needs of the military took top priority in the united states.
the planting of victory gardens was one way in which americans filled these needs.
victory gardens planted at home i allowed more commercially produced food to be sent from farms to troops overseas.
victory gardens i alone did not solve all the nation s food needs.
some foods could not be produced in home gardens and there was simply not enough of certain products to go around.
as a result the united states began rationing food shortly after the nation entered the war.
during the war the government rationed products such as coffee butter sugar and meat.
each member of the family received a ration book which entitled that person to a certain amount of certain foods.
i the shortage of materials such as metal glass rubber and gasoline during the war also changed life for americans.
gasoline was rationed.
americans helped meet the demand for other materials by holding scrap drives in which citizens collected waste materials of all sorts that might be i used in the war efforts.
empty tin cans bits of rubber and glass anything that could be useful was salvaged.
even women s silk and nylon stockings were recycled to make parachutes.
scrap drives i provided a way for young americans to help with the war effort.
i i 599 ski 0 identify the main idea of the passage.
often a main idea is located at the beginning of the passage.
0 look for key supporting details.
include only the most important facts and details in the summary.
pay attention to numbers dates quantities and other data.
0 clarify understanding.
try to use your prior knowledge and experience to understand unfamiliar words or concepts.
for instance you may know that a food drive is an organized effort to collect food which should help yon to understand scrap drive.
if you still don t understand something look it up.
for example the word rationing means limiting the amount of a certain product that each individual can get.
then restate the passages main idea and most important details in your own words in a summary.
strategy write a summary you can write your summary in a paragraph.
the paragraph below summarizes the passage.
after writing your summary review it to see that you have included only the most important details.
summary during world war ii people helped support the war both overseas and at home.
women children and men that remained in the united states supported the efforts by getting jobs to make needed materials growing victory gardens to supply food and following rationing efforts.
to combat a scarcity of metal glass and rubber goods young people started scrap drives to collect waste materials that could then be recycled into items soldiers could use ouch as parachutes.
applying the skill turn to chapter 4 section 1 page 163 and read the passage headed lincoln douglas debates.
pay special attention to the descriptions of lincoln s and douglas s views on slavery.
make a venn diagram that shows the ideas on which the two men differed and on which they agreed.
1 compare identify similarities.
on what ideas did lincoln and douglas agree.
2 contrast identify differences.
on what ideas did they differ.
3 analyze the information.
what do these similarities and differences tell you about what the important issues were during this election.
191 sk2 history multimedia connections 7 w sawcety recked the front door wdon ok toofdn the tired t kuo zopko ofr the ww ok korseb ck i fw a korrude tiykt.
twtffrdty forwodod that tho kad aobuolly w oti lad.
what they kroodd do with uo woo ol feoorfrd ytetifok to wj yotmv kund tnise pierce age 15 click through inter activities a citizen soldier watch the video to meet john burns the man who would come to be called the citizen hero of gettysburg.
ol a family s story watch the video to discover the story of courage and commitment exhibited by one gettysburg family.
jf j the national cemetery watch the video to learn about the soldiers national cemetery and the speech president lincoln gave there.
the gettysburg civilians 191 mc2 major characteristics of u s history historians tend to consider past events within a series of historical eras that they have identified.
different historians may define these eras differently but in general this approach helps them to place events within the larger context of the time in which they occurred.
doing so can enable historians to understand the ideas and beliefs of the past in the way the participants might have.
for each era historians can apply a broad set of characteristics to help understand the connections between time events places and people.
throughout this textbook you will find opportunities to apply the characteristics identified below to eras and events to make those connections and to help you grasp the larger patterns of history.
o w tin women have now m will.
civil rights and government the government of the united states is based on several founding principles such as human equality limited government and democratic representation.
the u s constitution was intended to ensure that individual rights are protected from government interference.
notions such as separation of powers and checks and balances protect citizens by keeping any one branch from abusing its power.
as the nation has developed political and civil rights have been expanded to encompass more people and to ensure that all americans can count on fair treatment and equal protection from the government.
economic development as a result of fertile land and abundant natural resources a free enterprise economic system and government regulation protecting both private property and the public good the united states has long been a land of economic success and opportunity.
the promise of social mobility and economic opportunity through hard work has inspired americans from all walks of life to struggle to improve their prospects just as it has drawn immigrants from around the world to the united states.
involvement in global affairs no matter its level of involvement in the affairs of other nations the united states has been influenced by those nations and has influenced them in return.
early american foreign policy reflected the country s colonial roots as the nation tried to remain isolated from the concerns and affairs of europe.
by the 1900s however the united states emerged as a world superpower with allies and responsibilities around the world driving its greater involvement in global affairs.
major characteristics of u s history movement americans have come from numerous places around the world to form a nation united by the common bond of standing for certain self evident truths equality and the right to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
people from many nations representing an extraordinary range of racial ethnic and religious groups have come to the united states and become american citizens shaping american society and culture in the process.
people have also migrated within the country s borders often in search of new opportunities and a better way of life.
b i 8 8 discovery and innovation a spirit of discovery and a drive for innovation in science and technology has had a tremendous effect on the economy and culture of the united states.
throughout our nation s history americans have developed transformative new inventions and technologies that have vastly improved quality of life and standards of living not only here but across the globe.
such developments continue to shape american society in new and sometimes unexpected ways.
i cultural expression cultural expression often reflects the characteristics and issues of the period in which it occurs.
our diverse nation has given rise to a diverse culture which draws on the heritage and traditions of many different groups.
the blending and remixing of cultural expression among racial ethnic and religious groups can be the source of tremendous creativity but can also lead to conflict.
major eras in u s history 1877 to the present westward expansion industrialization and urbanization progressive era and american expansionism overview in the late 1800s americans moved west in increasing numbers.
the government promoted the settlement of the west by offering free or cheap land to those willing to establish productive farms and by supporting railroad development.
settlers were also drawn west by economic opportunities such as ranching and mining.
native americans resisted but westward expansion settlement continued threatening their traditional way of life.
major characteristics movement as thousands of settlers streamed westward native americans were displaced from their native territory.
economic development the growth of railroads made travel west easier and faster.
discovery and innovation new technologies helped settlers to confront the hardships of life and work on the plains.
overview innovations in business and industry occurred at a rapid pace in the late 1800s.
business leaders made huge sums of money but ordinary workers continued to live and work in dangerous conditions.
immigrants moved to the nation s growing cities in search of new opportunities.
the cities often controlled by corrupt political machines offered challenges as well as opportunity.
major characteristics economic development the growth of the oil and steel industries and the completion of the transcontinental railroad fueled the nation s economy.
discovery and innovation new inventions such as the skyscraper the telephone and electricity changed how americans lived and worked.
movement many immigrants encouraged by optimism about a better life in american traveled to the united states.
4 major eras in u s history overview the progressive movement arose to redress the negative impact of industrialization progressives achieved many wide reaching reforms that affected american political social and economic life.
at the same time global competition for empire led the nation into war against spain and into military conflicts in mexico.
the united states emerged as a new world power.
major characteristics civil rights and government movements for social and political change prompted by industrialization and urbanization led to expansion of suffrage to women and other progressive reforms that gave americans more of a voice in government.
involvement in global affairs the united states grew more involved in foreign affairs claiming new territories after the spanish american war.
economic development claiming alaska hawaii and new territories in the pacific made the united states a growing economic power.
1914 1919 1920 1929 1929 1941 world war i the roaring twenties the great depression overview when rivalries among european nations led to the outbreak of war in 1914 the united states remained neutral.
hostile german acts soon convinced president wilson and congress that war was inevitable.
after the united states joined the allies in 1917 the u s government quickly mobilized the economy and built public support for the war effort.
however some efforts to minimize dissent infringed on individual rights.
major characteristics involvement in global affairs despite americans best efforts to stay neutral in the face of war in europe germany s hostile actions brought an end to any hope for peace.
civil rights and government the espionage act and the sedition act limited antiwar speech which some saw as a violation of their first amendment rights.
overview the years following world war i brought unease over the apparent spread of radical influences in the united states.
the american people sought leaders who promised a return to peaceful times.
they also eagerly contributed to a booming consumer driven economy.
the 1920s were also a time of widespread cultural change as women took on new roles urbanization increased and music art and literature reflected characteristics and issues of the period.
major characteristics economic development government policies increased production efficiencies and the increasing availability of consumer goods fueled a period of prosperity.
cultural expression the artists musicians and writers of the lost generation and the harlem renaissance created works that reflected postwar feelings and expectations.
overview following an era of apparent prosperity the great depression began in 1929 soon millions of americans were suffering and the political landscape of the united states stood on the brink of great change.
following his election in 1932 president roosevelt pushed forward a series of programs called the new deal.
intended to solve the nation s economic troubles the new deal had mixed results.
major characteristics economic development the prosperity of the 1920s came to an abrupt end as the stock market crashed and unemployment skyrocketed.
civil rights and government the new deal met with some success as well as some criticism but it unquestionably changed the relationship between the people and their government.
movement millions of residents left the great plains in search of economic opportunity in the wake of the dust bowl.
review unit 195 major eras in u s history 1877 to the present 1939 1945 1945 1959 1954 1975 1954 1975 world war ii postwar america civil rights and social change the vietnam war w it h 1968 1992 a conservative resurgence 1992 present entering the 21st century overview unsettled conditions after world war i led to the rise of ruthless dictators.
their aggression led europe into another great war in 1939 the united states was eventually drawn into world war ii after being attacked by japan.
americans at home worked hard to support the war and millions went off to fight overseas.
hard fighting by the allies brought victory first in europe and then in the pacific.
major characteristics involvement in global affairs following a period of isolationism the united states joined the other allied nations to defeat the axis powers.
civil rights and government the united states fought against regimes that opposed democracy and minorities began to expect increased civil rights in return for their wartime contributions.
movement world war ii triggered one of the greatest internal migrations in american history as millions moved in search of wartime employment.
major eras in u s history overview after world war ii the united states took its place as a world leader and an adversary of the soviet union in the cold war.
the conflict and tensions during this time period worried many americans.
however they also experienced a period of economic prosperity as consumers were once again able to purchase goods and services to fulfill wants and needs that had accumulated during the war.
major characteristics economic development in the wake of a conversion back to a peacetime economy median family income home ownership and savings all increased steadily during the 1950s.
involvement in global affairs tensions between the united states and its former ally the soviet union led to a prolonged cold war.
discovery and innovation this period witnessed the development of new consumer goods as well as new military technologies.
overview during this period many groups fought for expanded civil and political rights.
the african american civil rights movement won key victories in gaining racial equality.
inspired by their gains women mexican americans and native americans also pushed for greater equality.
presidents kennedy and johnson supported these efforts passing key civil rights and voting rights legislation in the 1960s.
president johnson also implemented his great society plan in an effort to reduce poverty.
major characteristics civil rights and government citizens called for social and political reforms racial equality for african americans and other minorities and gender equality for women.
cultural expression during this period a counterculture developed to challenge the tradi tional american ideals and lifestyle overview concern about the spread of communism during the cold war led the united states to become increasingly involved in vietnam.
president johnson sent the first u s fighting troops to the region in 1965 and the war escalated as u s troop strength increased in the years that followed.
as the war dragged on however more and more americans began to question u s involvement reflecting deep divisions within american society.
president nixon eventually ended u s involvement in vietnam but the war had lasting effects.
major characteristics involvement in global affairs the desire to contain communism and prevent it from spreading caused the united states to become involved in the vietnam war.
civil rights and government television images of the war caused many americans to ques tion u s involvement and those pposed formed a protest move ment to express their views to the overnment.
overview frustration with the counterculture and the social change of the 1960s led to a conservative backlash in the 1970s and 1980s.
despite president nixon s notable successes in foreign relations the watergate scandal ultimately led to his resignation.
still four of the five presidents who followed him also supported conservative policies and values.
many americans embraced the message of smaller government that presidents reagan and bush advocated during the 1980s.
major characteristics civil rights and government the watergate scandal caused some people to question their faith in government and later administrations worked to reduce the size of government.
involvement in global affairs president nixon improved relations with china and the soviet union president carter worked toward middle east peace and president reagan oversaw the end of the cold war.
overview in the wake of the cold war americans faced the 21st century with hope determination and a readiness to confront challenges at home and abroad.
the economy has experienced periods of growth and recession.
the period brought new enemies as the united states became the target of international terrorists on september 11 2001 while confronting these and other challenges society has changed as a result of a more diverse population and new advances in technology.
major characteristics economic development economic gains disappeared as the global economy began to slow down around the turn of the 21st century.
involvement in global affairs the united states worked with other nations to confront the threat of global terrorism.
discovery and innovation innovations such as the internet have affected nearly all areas of american life.
review unit 197 i ll.
unit chapter 6 a new industrial age 1877 1900 chapter 11 making inferences why were some people afraid of the treatys influence over american foreign policy.
j the legacy of the war i vocabulary fascist characteristic of or relating to fascism a system of totalitarian government when world war i ended many americans looked forward to a return of what warren g harding called normalcy.
however both the united states and the rest of the world had been utterly transformed by the war.
at home world war i had strengthened both the u s military and the power of government.
it had also accelerated social change especially for african americans and women.
in addition the propaganda campaign had provoked powerful fears and antagonisms that were left unchanneled when the war finally came to an end.
in europe the destruction and massive loss of life severely damaged social and political systems.
in many countries the war created political instability and violence that persisted for decades.
during the war years the first communist state was established in russia while after the war militant fascist organizations seized control in italy spain and germany.
world war i had devastated european economies allowing the united states to emerge as the world s leading economic power.
however the united states still faced economic challenges at home.
increased demand for consumer goods led to inflation and many americans struggled to afford ordinary items.
farmers who had increased production to meet wartime needs faced setbacks when demand dropped.
still most americans looked forward to the new decade as a time of prosperity.
appalled by the scale of destruction americans began to call world war i the war to end all wars in the hope that humanity would never again be willing to fight such a war.
however the treaty of versailles had settled nothing and unresolved issues in europe would eventually drag america in to an even bigger war.
i i domestic consequences of world war i accelerated americas emergence as the worlds greatest industrial power contributed to the movement of african americans to northern cities intensified anti immigrant and anti radical sentiments among mainstream americans brought over one million women into the work force 1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
fourteen points georges clemenceau treaty of versailles league of nations david lloyd george reparations war guilt clause henry cabot lodge i main idea using your notes re create the spider diagram shown below.
fill in the web with information about the provisions and weaknesses of the treaty of versailles and opposition to it.
do you think congress should have rejected the treaty.
critical thinking developing historical perspective why didnt the treaty of versailles lay the foundations for a lasting peace.
analyzing issues why did so many americans oppose the treaty of versailles.
5 summarizing describe how characteristics and issues of world war i were reflected in film.
6 hypothesizing predict germanys reaction to the treaty of versailles.
give reasons for your predictions.
think about what germans thought of the war guilt clause german reaction to reparations how germans felt about the loss of territory analyzing effects how did the international military conflict of world war i affect the u s economy.
the first world war 403 tracing themes america in world affairs the united states has not always been as involved in world affairs as it is today.
throughout its history the nation s foreign policy has swung back and forth between a commitment to involvement with the world and the desire for isolation.
steer clear of permanent alliances george washington cautioned americans in his farewell address of 1796 washington s warning to the young nation became a theme of government policy for the next hundred years as domestic issues dominated americans attention.
in the late 1800s however americans began to look outward to the larger world.
the country had reached the limits of its continental expansion and stretched from ocean to ocean.
as its economic power grew stronger the united states became more involved in the affairs of its neighbors in the western hemisphere.
the united states and latin america throughout the 19th century the united states expanded its influence in the western hemisphere.
the monroe doctrine was intended to diminish european interference.
after the civil war american trade with latin america including the spanish colony of cuba grew.
in fact the united states traded more heavily with cuba than spain did.
when the cubans rebelled against spain americans sympathized with the rebels.
after the battleship u s s.
maine sank in the cuban harbor of havana americans blamed the spanish and congress declared war.
after defeating the spanish the united states extended its influence in territories such as puerto rico panama and mexico.
a new expansionist era had begun.
the only way we can save her nkjbtrjawwikw u r batti k hip rfv c c stay out stay out for.
my sake as well as your own s involvement and isolationism before world war i the united states had generally limited its military involvement to the western hemisphere.
as the war in europe progressed this position became impossible to maintain as german u boats increasingly threatened american lives.
in spite of fierce opposition from isolationists the united states joined world war i in 1917 u s involvement in the conflict greatly strengthened its armed forces and revealed the nations military potential.
after the war the united states returned to a policy of isolationism.
a decade later as european dictators began menacing other european countries american public opinion was sharply divided.
many argued that the best way to preserve american democracy was to stay out of war in iq.
6 11 t00k japans attack on pearl harbor hawaii in 1 to force the united states into world war ii.
14 chapter and explore the issues below use the annotation tools in your ebook to record your thoughts.
explore the issues what might be some ways to make a living on the western frontier.
if native peoples already live in your intended home how will you co exist.
how might settlers and native americans differ regarding use of the land.
1872 secret ballot is adopted in britain.
1881 french occupy tunisia.
11884 grover cleveland is elected president 1893 1889 oklahoma 1890 sioux diminished u s opened for are massacred gold reserve settlement the at wounded triggers the land rush begins.
panic of 1893.
1890 1893 france takes over indochina.
18961 william mckinley is elected president.
1896 william jennings bryan runs for president.
1900 1899 berlin conference 1900 boxer divides africa among rebellion takes european nations.
place in china.
changes on the western frontier 201 200 chapter 18 vocabulary demilitarize to ban military forces in an area or region settling for stalemate as the macarthur controversy died down the soviet union unexpectedly suggested a cease fire on june 23 1951 truce talks began in july 1951 the opposing sides reached agreement on two points the location of the cease fire line at the existing battle line and the establishment of a demilitarized zone between the opposing sides.
negotiators spent another year wrangling over the exchange of prisoners.
finally in july 1953 the two sides signed an armistice ending the war.
at best the agreement was a stalemate.
on the one hand the north korean invaders had been pushed back and communism had been contained without the use of atomic weapons.
on the other hand korea was still two nations rather than one.
on the home front the war had affected the lives of ordinary americans in many ways.
it had cost 54 000 american lives and 67 billion in expenditures.
the high cost of this unsuccessful war was one of many factors leading americans to reject the democratic party in 1952 and to elect a republican administration under world war ii hero dwight d eisenhower.
in addition the korean war increased fear of communist aggression and prompted a hunt for americans who might be blamed for the communist gains.
sow 0 thefy the two koreas korea is still split into north korea and south korea even after several decades.
south korea is booming economically while north korea still communist struggles with severe shortages of food and energy.
periodically discussions about reuniting the two countries resume.
in 2000 south korean president kim dae jung won the nobel peace prize for his efforts to improve ties with north korea.
the two nations met in north korea for the first time since the nations were established in 1948 although economic and political differences continue to keep the two countries apart there is hope that one day korea will become a united nation.
4 south korean president kim dae jung waves to cheering north koreans on june 13 2000.
1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
chiang kai shek taiwan korean war mao zedong 38th parallel main idea using your notes on a time line such as the one shown below list the major events of the korean war.
choose two events and explain how one event led to the other.
critical thinking 3 hypothesizing what might have happened if macarthur had convinced truman to expand the fighting into china.
how might todays world be different.
analyzing events do you think the korean war was worth fighting.
explain outcomes of u s involvement to justify your answer.
think about the loss of american lives the fear of communism that enveloped the country at the time the stalemate that ended the war evaluating decisions at the end of chinas civil war the united states refused to accept the communist peoples republic of china as chinas true government.
what were the advantages of such a policy.
what were the disadvantages.
do you agree with this decision.
why or why not.
explaining events what is the relationship of the korean war to the u s containment policy.
cold war conflicts 615 teks8b the cold war at home main idea why it matters now terms names during the late 1940s and early 1950s domestic events intensified cold war tensions.
americans today remain vigilant to ensure that accusations of disloyalty are supported by evidence.
huac hollywood ten blacklist alger hiss ethei and julius rosenberg joseph mccarthy mccarthylsm p dneamerican s storyj.
taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on how anti communist fear gripped the united states.
tony kahn made the neighbors uncomfortable because they thought his father gordon kahn was a communist.
in 1947 gordon kahn was a successful screenwriter.
however when a congressional committee began to investigate communists in hollywood kahn was blacklisted named as unfit to hire.
in 1951 gordon kahn was asked to testify before the committee.
to save himself he simply had to name others as communists but he refused.
rather than face the congressional committee he fled to mexico.
tony kahn remembers how the cold war hurt him and his family.
a personal voice tony kahn the first time i was called a communist i was four years old.
ill never forget the look in our neighbors eyes when i walked by.
i thought it was hate.
i was too young to realize it was fear.
from the cold war comes home tony kahn the members of the kahn family were among thousands of victims of the anti communist hysteria that gripped this country in the late 1940s and early 1950s.
by the end of the period no one was immune from accusations.
fear of communist influence the postwar years were a tense time in the united states.
many americans worried about the nation s security.
the soviet domination of eastern europe and the communist takeover of china shocked the american public fueling a fear that communism would spread around the world.
in addition at the height of world war ii about 80 000 americans claimed membership in the communist party.
for several years concern had been growing about possible communist influence in american government.
thus the domestic events of the period intensified cold war tensions already worrying many americans.
616 chapter 18 main idea drawing conclusions fiy how did the loyalty review board pose a threat to civil liberties.
loyalty review board strongly anti communist republicans began to accuse truman of being soft on communism.
consequently in march 1947 president truman issued an executive order setting up the federal employee loyalty program which included the loyalty review board.
its purpose was to investigate government employees and to dismiss those who were found to be disloyal to the u s government.
the u s attorney general drew up a list of 91 subversive organizations membership in any of these groups was grounds for suspicion.
from 1947 to 1951 government loyalty boards investigated 3 2 million employees and dismissed 212 as security risks.
another 2 900 resigned rather than face an investigation that they felt violated their constitutional rights.
individuals under investigation were not allowed to see the evidence against them.
the house un american activities committee other agencies investigated possible communist influence both inside and outside the u s government.
the most famous of these was the house un american activities committee huac.
huac first made headlines in 1947 when it began to investigate communist influence in the movie industry.
the committee believed that communists were sneaking propaganda into films.
the committee pointed to the pro soviet films made during world war ii when the soviet union had been a united states ally.
huac subpoenaed 43 witnesses from the hollywood film industry in september 1947 many of the witnesses were friendly supporting the accusation that communists had infiltrated the film industry.
for example the movie star gary cooper said he had turned down quite a few scripts because i thought they were tinged with communistic ideas.
however when asked which scripts he meant cooper couldn t remember their titles.
ten unfriendly witnesses were called to testify but refused.
these men known as the hollywood ten decided not to cooperate because they believed that the hearings were unconstitutional.
because the hollywood ten refused to answer questions they were sent to prison.
in response to the hearings hollywood executives instituted a blacklist a list of people whom they condemned for having a communist background.
people who were blacklisted approximately 500 actors writers producers and directors had their careers ruined because they could no longer work jy the mccarran act as hollywood tried to rid itself of communists congress decided that truman s loyalty review board did not go far enough.
in 1950 congress passed the mccarran internal security act.
this made it unlawful to plan any action that might lead to the establishment of a totalitarian dictatorship in the united states.
truman vetoed the bill saying in a free country we punish men for the crimes they commit but never for the opinions they have.
but congress enacted the law over truman s veto.
main idea analyzing causes by why was hollywood a target of anti communist investigations by congress.
free the h e wakd dwlxn awahbbw is 60img to jail is 601 0 jail aa fpef whilom tn fsf mipww j0 protesters demonstrate in support of the hollywood ten.
i jllkitmal is jail lien 617 the venona papers in 1943 the u s army signal intelligence service a predecessor of the national security agency nsa began the venona project with the goal of decrypting messages sent by soviet intelligence agencies.
analysts soon deciphered enough to learn that soviet spies had infiltrated all levels of the u s government.
the 3 000 decrypted messages that make up the venona papers declassified in 1995 confirm that 349 u s residents maintained a covert relationship with the soviet union.
it is now clear that these individuals delivered classified information to the soviets that severely hampered u s efforts during the cold war.
the suspicions of huac and others of communist spies in the united states were well founded however their extreme methods intensified the fear and tension of the era.
spy cases stun the nation two spy cases added to fear that was spreading like an epidemic across the country.
one case involved a former state department official named alger hiss.
alger hiss in 1948 a former communist spy named whittaker chambers accused alger hiss of spying for the soviet union.
to support his charges chambers produced microfilm of government documents that he claimed had been typed on hiss s typewriter.
too many years had passed for government prosecutors to charge hiss with espionage but a jury convicted him of perjury for lying about passing the documents and sent him to jail.
a young conservative republican congressman named richard nixon gained fame for pursuing the charges against hiss.
within four years of the highly publicized case nixon was elected vice president of the united states.
hiss claimed that he was innocent and that chambers had forged the documents used against him.
however in the 1990s soviet cables released by the national security agency seemed to prove hiss s guilt.
television making news historians of popular culture believe that the early 1950s were the best years of television.
most programs were filmed live and had a fresh unrehearsed look.
along with variety shows early television presented some of the best serious drama of the age.
since the 1950s television has also become a major vehicle for reporting the news.
not only does television report the news it also has increasingly helped to shape it.
618 chapter 5 vocabulary coup a feat of bravery performed in battle main idea summarizing how did the horse influence native american life on the great plains.
to the east near the lower missouri river tribes such as the osage and iowa had for more than a century hunted and planted crops and settled in small villages.
farther west nomadic tribes such as the sioux and cheyenne gathered wild foods and hunted buffalo.
peoples of the plains abiding by tribal law traded and produced beautifully crafted tools and clothing.
the horse and the buffalo after the spanish brought horses to new mexico in 1598 the native american way of life began to change.
as the native peoples acquired horses and then guns they were able to travel farther and hunt more efficiently.
by the mid 1700s almost all the tribes on the great plains had left their farms to roam the plains and hunt buffalo.
their increased mobility often led to war when hunters in one tribe trespassed on other tribes hunting grounds.
for the young men of a tribe taking part in war parties and raids was a way to win prestige.
a plains warrior gained honor by killing his enemies as well as by counting coup this practice involved touching a live enemy with a coup stick and escaping unharmed.
and sometimes warring tribes would call a truce so that they could trade goods share news or enjoy harvest festivals.
native americans made tepees from buffalo hides and also used the skins for clothing shoes and blankets.
buffalo meat was dried into jerky or mixed with berries and fat to make a staple food called pemmican.
while the horse gave native americans speed and mobility the buffalo provided many of their basic needs and was central to life on the plains.
see chart on page 207.
a portrait of a sioux man and woman in the late 19th century.
family life native americans on the plains usually lived in small extended family groups with ties to other bands that spoke the same language.
young men trained to become hunters and warriors.
the women helped butcher the game and prepared the hides that the men brought back to the camp young women sometimes chose their own husbands.
the plains indian tribes believed that powerful spirits controlled events in the natural world.
men or women who showed particular sensitivity to the spirits became medicine men or women or shamans.
children learned proper behavior and culture through stories and myths games and good examples.
despite their communal way of life however no individual was allowed to dominate the group.
the leaders of a tribe ruled by counsel rather than by force and land was held in common for the use of the whole tribe.
settlers push westward the culture of the white settlers differed in many ways from that of the native americans on the plains.
unlike native americans who believed that land could not be owned the settlers believed that owning land making a mining claim or starting a business would give them a stake in the country.
they argued that the native americans had forfeited their rights to the land because they hadn t settled down to improve it.
concluding that the plains were unsettled migrants streamed westward along railroad and wagon trails to claim the land.
the lure of silver and gold the prospect of striking it rich was one powerful attraction of the west.
the discovery of gold in colorado in 1858 drew tens of thousands of miners to the region.
this yankton sioux coup stick was used by warriors.
history video sitting bull chief of the lakota nation 71 most mining camps and tiny frontier towns had filthy ramshackle quarters.
rows of tents and shacks with dirt streets and wooden sidewalks had replaced unspoiled picturesque landscapes.
fortune seekers of every description including irish german polish chinese and african american men crowded the camps and boomtowns.
a few hardy business minded women tried their luck too working as laundresses freight haulers or miners.
cities such as virginia city nevada and helena montana originated as mining camps on native american land.
the government restricts native americans while allowing more settlers to move westward the arrival of the railroads also influenced the government s policy toward the native americans who lived on the plains.
in 1834 the federal government had passed an act that designated the entire great plains as one enormous reservation or land set aside for native american tribes.
in the 1850s however the government changed its policy and created treaties that defined specific boundaries for each tribe.
most native americans spurned the government treaties and continued to hunt on their traditional lands clashing with settlers and miners with tragic results.
massacre at sand creek one of the most tragic events occurred in 1864 most of the cheyenne assuming they were under the protection of the u s government had peacefully returned to colorado s sand creek reserve for the winter.
yet general s r curtis u s army commander in the west sent a telegram to militia colonel john chivington that read i want no peace till the indians suffer more in response chivington and his troops descended on the cheyenne and arapaho about 200 warriors and 500 women and children camped at sand creek.
the attack at dawn on november 29 1864 killed over 150 inhabitants mostly women and children.
death on the bozeman trail the bozeman trail ran directly through sioux hunting grounds in the bighorn mountains.
the sioux chief red cloud mahpiua luta had unsuccessfully appealed to the government to end white settlement on the trail.
in december 1866 the warrior crazy horse ambushed captain william j fetterman and his company at lodge trail ridge.
over 80 soldiers were killed.
native americans called this fight the battle of the hundred slain.
whites called it the fetterman massacre.
skirmishes continued until the government agreed to close the bozeman trail.
in return the treaty of fort laramie in which the sioux agreed to live on a reservation along the missouri river was forced on the leaders of the sioux in 1868 sitting bull tatanka iyotanka leader of the hunkpapa sioux had never signed it.
although the ogala and brule sioux did sign the treaty they expected to continue using their traditional hunting grounds.
player sitting bull 1831 1890 as a child sitting bull was known as hunkesni or slow he earned the name tatanka iyotanka sitting bull after a fight with the crow a traditional enemy of the sioux.
sitting bull led his people by the strength of his character and purpose.
he was a warrior spiritual leader and medicine man and he was determined that whites should leave sioux territory.
his most famous fight was at the little bighorn river.
about his opponent george armstrong custer he said they tell me i murdered custer.
it is a lie.
he was a fool and rode to his death after sitting bulls surrender to the federal government in 1881 his dislike of whites did not change.
he was killed by native american police at standing rock reservation in december 1890 main idea analyzing issues jj what was the governments policy toward native american land.
104 chapter 24 appointing a new attorney general elliot richardson and was authorizing him to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate watergate.
there can be no whitewash at the white house nixon said.
the president s reassurances however came too late.
in may 1973 the senate began its own investigation of watergate.
a special committee chaired by senator samuel james ervin of north carolina began to call administration officials to give testimony.
throughout the summer millions of americans sat by their televisions as the president s men testified one after another.
divine right went out with the american revolution and doesn t belong to white house aides.
senator sam ervin main idea drawing conclusions d what was significant about the revelation that nixon taped his conversations.
startling testimony john dean delivered the first bomb.
in late june during more than 30 hours of testimony dean provided a startling answer to senator howard baker s repeated question what did the president know and when did he know it.
the former white house counsel declared that president nixon had been deeply involved in the cover up.
dean referred to one meeting in which he and the president along with several advisers discussed strategies for continuing the deceit.
the white house strongly denied dean s charges.
the hearings had suddenly reached an impasse as the committee attempted to sort out who was telling the truth.
the answer came in july from an unlikely source presidential aide alexander butterfield.
butterfield stunned the committee when he revealed that nixon had taped virtually all of his presidential conversations.
butterfield later claimed that the taping system was installed to help nixon write his memoirs.
however for the senate committee the tapes were the key to revealing what nixon knew and when he knew it.
the saturday night massacre a year long battle for the nixon tapes followed.
archibald cox the special prosecutor whom elliot richardson had appointed to investigate the case took the president to court in october 1973 to obtain the tapes.
nixon refused and ordered attorney general richardson to fire cox.
in what became known as the saturday night massacre richardson refused the order and resigned.
the deputy attorney general also refused the order and he was fired.
solicitor general robert bork finally fired cox.
however cox s replacement leon jaworski proved equally determined to get the tapes.
several months after the massacre the house judiciary committee began examining the possibility of an impeachment hearing.
e the entire white house appeared to be under siege.
just days before the saturday night massacre vice president spiro agnew had resigned after it was revealed that he had accepted bribes from engineering firms while governor of maryland.
agnew pleaded nolo contendere no contest to the charge.
acting under the twenty fifth the watergate hearings were chaired by senator sam ervin shown top left with sam dash chief counsel to the senate watergate committee.
john deans testimony above stunned the nation.
main idea summarizing what events led to the saturday night massacre.
an age of limits amendment nixon nominated the house minority leader gerald r ford as his new vice president.
congress quickly confirmed the nomination.
the fall of a president in march 1974 a grand jury indicted seven presidential aides on charges of conspiracy obstruction of justice and perjury.
the investigation was closing in on the president of the united states.
the original nixon white house tape recorder and tape from the 1970s.
nixon releases the tapes in the spring of 1974 president nixon told a television audience that he was releasing 1 254 pages of edited transcripts of white house conversations about watergate.
nixon s offering failed to satisfy investigators who demanded the unedited tapes.
nixon refused and the case went before the supreme court.
on july 24 1974 the high court ruled unanimously that the president must surrender the tapes.
the court rejected nixon s argument that doing so would violate national security.
evidence involving possible criminal activity could not be withheld even by a president.
president nixon maintained that he had done nothing wrong.
at a press conference in november 1973 he proclaimed defiantly i am not a crook.
background although historians sued for access to thousands of hours of tapes it was not until some 21 years later in 1996 that an agreement was made for over 3 700 hours of tape to be made public.
the president resigns even without holding the original tapes the house judiciary committee determined that there was enough evidence to impeach richard nixon.
on july 27 the committee approved three articles of impeachment charging the president with obstruction of justice abuse of power and contempt of congress for refusing to obey a congressional subpoena to release the tapes.
analyzing political cartoons the white house tapes during the watergate hearings a bombshell exploded when it was revealed that president nixon secretly tape recorded all conversations in the oval office.
although nixon hoped the tapes would one day help historians document the triumphs of his presidency they were used to confirm his guilt.
skillbuilder analyzing political cartoons 1 what does this cartoon imply about privacy during president nixon s term in office.
2 what building has been transformed into a giant tape recorder.
auth copyright philadelphia inquirer.
reprinted with permission of universal press syndicate.
all rights reserved.
h hi 806 chapter 11 section 1 pages 379 380 and read the passage the united states declares war.
make a chart like the one above in which you identify the decision to enter the war alternative decisions or actions that might have allowed the united states to avoid entering the war and their possible outcomes.
consider how the effects of each decision might change depending on what action was taken or not taken.
1 identify the decisions.
what events occurred that led the united states to declare war.
2 decide what other decisions might have been made.
what else could the germans have done when president wilson called for peace.
what else might have happened if mexico and germany did not discuss an alliance.
what might have happened if there had been no change in russian leadership.
3 predict the outcomes of the alternate decisions.
consider your answers to the previous question.
think about the possible outcomes if the alternative decisions that you listed had occurred instead.
write your predicted outcomes in your chart.
i j when u s troops arrived in europe in 1917 to fight in world war i the war had been dragging on for nearly three years.
the american soldiers suddenly found themselves in the midst of chaos.
each day they faced the threats of machine gun fire poison gas and aerial attacks.
still the arrival of american reinforcements had sparked a new zeal among the allies who believed the new forces could finally turn the tide in their favor.
the letters soldiers wrote to their families back home reveal the many emotions they felt on the battlefield confusion about their surroundings fear for their own safety concern for friends and loved ones and hope that the war would soon be over.
explore world war i online through the eyes of the soldiers who fought in it.
you can find a wealth of information video clips primary sources activities and more at mci multimedia connections i have been ok everyfront in france.
you cant imagine how torn uy this country really is.
every where there acre wire entan lencents and trenches and layouts.
even out frthe war zone there are entanyiewcents and layouts to yrotedt the civiliansfrom air raids corp albert smith u s soldier w over there watch the video to learn about the experiences of american soldiers on the way to europe and upon their arrival.
letter from france read the document to learn about one soldier s observations of wartime life.
t p 4 1 tl j r war on the western front watch the video to hear one soldier s vivid account of battle and its aftermath.
v xz a x tt o history.
oh surrender.
watch the video to experience soldiers reactions to the news that the war was finally over.
letters from world war i 407 ivic2 the 1920s and the great chapter 5 main idea analyzing causes a how did the railroads help open the west.
vocabulary speculator a person who buys or sells something that involves a risk on the chance of making a profit main idea analyzing effects in what ways did government policies encourage settlement of the west.
dollars for laying track in the west.
in one grant both the union pacific and the central pacific received 10 square miles of public land for every mile of track laid in a state and 20 square miles of land for every mile of track laid in a territory.
in the 1860s the two companies began a race to lay track.
the central pacific moved eastward from sacramento and the union pacific moved westward from omaha.
civil war veterans irish and chinese immigrants african americans and mexican americans did most of the grueling labor.
in late 1868 workers for the union pacific cut their way through the solid rock of the mountains laying up to eight miles of track a day.
both companies had reached utah by the spring of 1869 fifteen years later the country boasted five transcontinental railroads.
the rails to the east and west coasts were forever linked.
the railroad companies sold some of their land to farmers for two to ten dollars an acre.
some companies successfully sent agents to europe to recruit buyers.
by 1880 44 percent of the settlers in nebraska and more than 70 percent of those in minnesota and wisconsin were immigrants.
y government support for settlement another powerful attraction of the west was the land itself.
in 1862 congress passed the homestead act offering 160 acres of land free to any citizen or intended citizen who was head of the household.
from 1862 to 1900 up to 600 000 families took advantage of the government s offer.
several thousand settlers were exodusters african americans who moved from the post reconstruction south to kansas.
despite the massive response by homesteaders or settlers on this free land private speculators and railroad and state government agents sometimes used the law for their own gain.
cattlemen fenced open lands while miners and woodcutters claimed national resources.
only about 10 percent of the land was actually settled by the families for whom it was intended.
in addition not all plots of land were of equal value.
although 160 acres could provide a decent living in the fertile soil of iowa or minnesota settlers on drier western land required larger plots to make farming worthwhile.
eventually the government strengthened the homestead act and passed more legislation to encourage settlers.
in 1889 a major land giveaway in what is now oklahoma attracted thousands of people.
in less than a day land hungry settlers claimed 2 million acres in a massive land rush.
some took possession of the land before the government officially declared it open.
because these settlers claimed land sooner than they were supposed to oklahoma came to be known as the sooner state.
by posters like the one shown here drew hundreds of thousands of settlers to the west.
among the settlers were thousands of exodusters freed slaves who had left the south.
brethren friends ifellowcitizens i feel thankful to inform you that the real estate and homestead association will leave here the 15th ol april o in pursuit of homes in the southwestern lands of america at transportation rates cheaper than ever was known before.
i for full information inquire of benj.
singleton better known as old pap io zero e 3sro t3a eu oitt stzrbeii.
beware of speculators and adventnrere as it is a dangerous thin.
to fall in their hands.
nashville tcnn march 18 1878 the closing of the frontier these federal policies provided significant economic incentives that changed the country forever as settlers gobbled up western land.
the transcontinental railroad made it easier than ever for settlers to reach points further west.
it also presented a source of land as railroads sold their federal allotments to settlers.
the homestead act with its offer of free land also had a huge economic impact as nearly 2 million people applied for claims.
for decades the u s census bureau had monitored the extent of american settlement.
the frontier according to the bureau existed at the point where the population totaled fewer than 2 people per square mile.
in 1890 the census bureau declared that the country no longer had a continuous frontier line the frontier no longer existed.
to many the frontier was what had made america unique.
in an 1893 essay entitled the significance of the frontier in american history the historian frederick jackson turner agreed.
a personal voice frederick jackson turner american social development has been continually beginning over again on the frontier.
this perennial rebirth this fluidity of american life this expansion westward with its new opportunities its continuous touch with the simplicity of primitive society furnish the forces dominating american character.
the significance of the frontier in american history today many historians question turner s view.
they think he gave too much importance to the frontier in the nation s development and in shaping a special american character.
settlers meet the challenges of the plains while the physical geography of the plains included the fertile land that lured settlers it also caused extreme hardships such as droughts floods fires blizzards and locust plagues.
still settlers found ways to adapt and the number of people living west of the mississippi river grew from 1 to almost 30 percent of the nation s population between 1850 and 1900 dugouts and soddies since trees were scarce most settlers built their homes from the land itself.
many pioneers dug their homes into the sides of ravines or small hills.
a stovepipe jutting from the ground was often the only clear sign of such a dugout home.
those who moved to the broad flat plains often made freestanding houses by stacking blocks of prairie turf.
like a dugout a sod home or soddy was warm in a pioneer family stands in front of their soddy near coburg nebraska in 1887 background the u s census bureau is the permanent collector of timely relevant data about the people and economy of the united states.
main idea summarizing q what was turners view of the role of the american frontier in 1893.
vocabulary locust any of numerous grasshoppers that travel in large swarms often doing great damage to crops 6 main idea summarizing jj how did new inventions change farming in the west.
winter and cool in summer.
soddies were small however and offered little light or air.
they were havens for snakes insects and other pests.
although they were fireproof they leaked continuously when it rained.
womens work virtually alone on the flat endless prairie homesteaders had to be almost superhumanly self sufficient.
women often worked beside the men in the fields plowing the land and planting and harvesting the predominant crop wheat.
they sheared the sheep and carded wool to make clothes for their families.
they hauled water from wells that they had helped to dig and made soap and candles from tallow.
at harvest time they canned fruits and vegetables.
they were skilled in doctoring from snakebites to crushed limbs.
women also sponsored schools and churches in an effort to build strong communities.
technical support for farmers establishing a homestead was challenging.
once accomplished it was farming the prairie year in and year out that became an overwhelming task.
in 1837 john deere had invented a steel plow that could slice through heavy soil.
in 1847 cyrus mccormick began to mass produce a reaping machine.
but a mass market for these devices didn t fully develop until the late 1800s with the migration of farmers onto the plains.
other new and improved devices made farm work speedier the spring tooth harrow to prepare the soil 1869 the grain drill to plant the seed 1841 barbed wire to fence the land 1874 and the corn binder 1878.
then came a reaper that could cut and thresh wheat in one pass.
by 1890 there were more than 900 manufacturers of farm equipment.
in 1830 producing a bushel of grain took about 183 minutes.
by 1900 with the use of these machines it took only 10 minutes.
these inventions made more grain available for a wider market.
agricultural education the federal government supported farmers by financing agricultural education.
the morrill act of 1862 and 1890 gave federal land to the states to help finance agricultural colleges and the hatch act of 1887 established agricultural experiment stations to inform farmers of new developments.
agricultural researchers developed grains for arid soil and techniques for dry farming which helped the land to retain moisture.
these innovations enabled the dry eastern plains to flourish and become the breadbasket of the nation.
science technology inventions that tafkdfthe prairie on the great plains treeless expanses root filled soil and unpredictable weather presented challenges to farming.
i bm eiefficjenjlusssis p wire p rey erited from trampling crops and weather wandering off.
fj e peesaved rops7 fromnnclement by bringing up underground water for irrigation.
changes on the western frontier 217 bonanza farms like this one required the labor of hundreds of farm hands and horses.
farmers in debt elaborate machinery was expensive and farmers often had to borrow money to buy it.
when prices for wheat were higher farmers could usually repay their loans.
when wheat prices fell however farmers needed to raise more crops to make ends meet.
this situation gave rise to a new type of farming in the late 1870s.
railroad companies and investors created bonanza farms enormous single crop spreads of 15 000 50 000 acres.
the cass cheney dalrymple farm near cassleton north dakota for example covered 24 square miles.
by 1900 the average farmer had nearly 150 acres under cultivation.
some farmers mortgaged their land to buy more property and as farms grew bigger so did farmers debts.
between 1885 and 1890 much of the plains experienced drought and the large single crop operations couldn t compete with smaller farms which could be more flexible in the crops they grew.
the bonanza farms slowly folded into bankruptcy.
farmers also felt pressure from the rising cost of shipping grain.
railroads charged western farmers a higher fee than they did farmers in the east.
also the railroads sometimes charged more for short hauls for which there was no competing transportation than for long hauls.
the railroads claimed that they were merely doing business but farmers resented being taken advantage of.
no other system of taxation has borne as heavily on the people as those extortions and inequalities of railroad charges wrote henry demarest lloyd in an article in the march 1881 edition of atlantic monthly.
many farmers found themselves growing as much grain as they could grow on as much land as they could acquire which resulted in going further into debt.
but they were not defeated by these conditions.
instead these challenging conditions drew farmers together in a common cause.
vocabulary mortgage to legally pledge property to a creditor as security for the payment of a loan or debt vocabulary extortion illegal use of ones official position or powers to obtain property or funds assessment 1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
homestead act exoduster soddy morrill act bonanza farm main idea using your notes create a time line of four events that shaped the settling of the great plains event two event four event one event three how might history be different if one of these events hadnt happened.
critical thinking 3 evaluating how successful were government efforts to promote settlement of the great plains.
how did the economic impact of these efforts contribute to the close of the frontier.
think about the growth in population on the great plains the role of railroads the homestead act drawing conclusions review the changes in technology that influenced the life of settlers on the great plains in the late 1800s.
explain how specific needs of settlers in the region led to these technological innovations.
identifying problems how did the railroads take advantage of farmers.
218 chapter 24 main idea making inferences why was fords call for voluntary actions to help the economy unsuccessful.
ford not a lincoln gerald ford seemed to many to be a likable and honest man.
upon becoming vice president after spiro agnew s resignation ford candidly admitted his limitations.
i m a ford not a lincoln he remarked.
on september 8 1974 president ford pardoned richard nixon in an attempt to move the country beyond watergate.
the move cost ford a good deal of public support.
ford tries to whip inflation by the time ford took office america s economy had gone from bad to worse.
both inflation and unemployment continued to rise.
after the massive opec oil price increases in 1973 gasoline and heating oil costs had soared pushing inflation from 6 percent to over 10 percent by the end of 1974 ford responded with a program of massive citizen action called whip inflation now or win.
the president called on americans to cut back on their use of oil and gas and to take other energy saving measures.
in the absence of incentives though the plan fell flat.
ford then tried to curb inflation through a tight money policy.
he cut government spending and encouraged the federal reserve board to restrict credit through higher interest rates.
these actions triggered the worst economic recession in 40 years.
as ford implemented his economic programs he continually battled a democratic congress intent on pushing its own economic agenda.
during his two years as president ford vetoed more than 50 pieces of legislation.
fords foreign policy ford fared slightly better in the international arena.
he relied heavily on henry kissinger who continued to hold the key position of secretary of state.
carrying out nixon s foreign policies following kissinger s advice ford pushed ahead with nixon s policy of negotiation with china and the soviet union.
in november 1974 he met with soviet premier leonid brezhnev.
less than a year later he traveled to helsinki finland where 35 nations including the soviet union signed the helsinki accords a series of agreements that promised greater cooperation between the nations of eastern and western europe.
the helsinki accords would be ford s greatest presidential accomplishment.
difficult decisions pardoning president nixon president fords pardon of richard nixon outraged many americans.
but president ford argued that the pardon of richard nixon was in the countrys best interest.
in the event of a watergate trial ford argued ugly passions would again be aroused.
and the credibility of our free institutions.
would again be challenged at home and abroad ford called the pardon decision the most difficult of my life by far.
in 2001 after more than 25 years ford received the john f kennedy profiles in courage award for his courageous decision in the face of public opposition.
1 how might the country have been affected if a former united states president had gone on trial for possible criminal wrongdoing.
2 if you had been in president fords position would you have pardoned richard nixon.
why or why not.
ongoing turmoil in southeast asia like presidents before him ford encountered trouble in southeast asia.
the 1973 cease fire in vietnam had broken down.
heavy fighting resumed and ford asked congress for over 722 million to help south vietnam.
congress refused.
without american financial help south vietnam surrendered to the north in 1975 in the same year the communist government of cambodia seized the u s merchant ship mayagiiez in the gulf of siam.
president ford responded with a massive show of military force to rescue 39 crew members aboard the ship.
the operation cost the lives of 41 u s troops.
critics argued that the mission had cost more lives than it had saved.
i j i jimmy carter 1924 james earl carter jr was born into relative prosperity.
his father earl carter was a disciplinarian who tried to instill a sense of hard work and responsibility in his son.
to earn money for himself carter undertook a variety of jobs selling peanuts running a hamburger and hot dog stand collecting newspapers and selling them to fish markets and selling scrap iron.
before entering politics carter joined the navy where he excelled in electronics and naval tactics.
in 1952 he joined a select group of officers who helped develop the worlds first nuclear submarines.
the groups commander was captain hyman g rickover.
carter later wrote that rickover had a profound effect on my life perhaps more than anyone except my own parents.
he expected the maximum from us but he always contributed more this 1976 campaign toy exaggerates jimmy carters well known smile and parodies his occupation as a peanut farmer.
carter enters the white house gerald ford won the republican nomination for president in 1976 after fending off a powerful conservative challenge from former california governor ronald reagan.
because the republicans seemed divided over ford s leadership the democrats confidently eyed the white house.
we could run an aardvark this year and win predicted one democratic leader.
the democratic nominee was indeed a surprise a nationally unknown peanut farmer and former governor of georgia jimmy carter.
mr carter goes to washington during the post watergate era cynicism toward the washington establishment ran high.
the soft spoken personable man from plains georgia promised to restore integrity to the nation s highest office i will never tell a lie to the american people.
throughout the presidential campaign carter and ford squared off over the key issues of inflation energy and unemployment.
on election day jimmy carter won by a narrow margin claiming 40 8 million popular votes to ford s 39 1 million.
from the very beginning the new first family brought a down to earth style to washington.
after settling into office carter stayed in touch with the people by holding roosevelt like fireside chats on radio and television.
carter failed to reach out to congress in a similar way refusing to play the insider game of deal making.
relying mainly on a team of advisers from georgia carter even alienated congressional democrats.
both parties on capitol hill often joined to sink the president s budget proposals as well as his major policy reforms of tax and welfare programs.
carters domestic agenda like gerald ford president carter focused much of his attention on battling the country s energy and economic crises but was unable to bring the united states out of its economic slump.
confronting the energy crisis carter considered the energy crisis the most important issue facing the nation.
a large part of the problem the president believed was americas reliance on imported oil.
on april 18 1977 during a fireside chat carter urged his fellow americans to cut their consumption of oil and gas.
a personal voice jimmy carter the energy crisis is a problem.
likely to get progressively worse through the rest of this century.
our decision about energy will test the character of the american people.
this difficult effort will be the moral equivalent of war except that we will be uniting our efforts to build and not to destroy.
quoted in keeping faith main idea analyzing causes gj what factors played a significant role in carters election.
812 chapter 18 i the martian chronicles in the martian chronicles ray bradbury describes how earthlings who have colonized mars watch helplessly as their former planet is destroyed by nuclear warfare.
they all came out and looked at the sky that night.
they left their suppers or their washing up or their dressing for the show and they came out upon their now not quite as new porches and watched the green star of earth there.
it was a move without conscious effort they all did it to help them understand the news they had heard on the radio a moment before.
there was earth and there the coming war and there hundreds of thousands of mothers or grandmothers or fathers or brothers or aunts or uncles or cousins.
they stood on the porches and tried to believe in the existence of earth much as they had once tried to believe in the existence of mars it was a problem reversed.
to all intents and purposes earth now was dead they had been away from it for three or four years.
space was an anesthetic seventy million miles of space numbed you put memory to sleep depopulated earth erased the past and allowed these people here to go on with their work.
but now tonight the dead were risen earth was reinhabited memory awoke a million names were spoken what was so and so doing tonight on earth.
what about this one and that one.
the people on the porches glanced sidewise at each other s faces.
l at nine o clock earth seemed to explode catch fire and burn.
e the people on the porches put up their hands as if to beat the fire out.
they waited.
ray bradbury in 1965.
ray bradbury the martian chronicles 1950 a canticle for leibowitz in a canticle for leibowitz walter m miller jr portrays the centuries after a nuclear holocaust as a new dark age for humanity on earth.
he had been wandering for a long time.
the search seemed endless but there was always the promise of finding what he sought across the next rise or beyond the bend in the trail.
when he had finished fanning himself he clapped the hat back on his head and scratched at his bushy beard while blinking around at the landscape.
there was patch of unburned forest on the hillside just ahead.
it offered welcome shade but still the wanderer sat there in the sunlight and watched the curious buzzards.
pickings were good for a while in the region of the red river but then out of the carnage a city state arose.
for rising city states the buzzards had n fondness although they approved of their eventual fall.
they shied away from texarkana and ranged far over the plain to the west.
after the manner of all living things they replenished the earth many times with their kind.
eventually it was the year of our lord 3174 there were rumors of war.
m miller jr a canticle for leibowitz 1959 comparing what themes or general messages about life or humanity do you think these three books convey.
how might readers interpretations of these messages today differ from readers interpretations during the cold war.
internet activity visit the links for american literature to learn more about ray bradbury and the martian chronicles.
when was the martian chronicles published.
how does it reflect cold war fears.
what does the writing tell you about ray bradburys view of american society at the time.
cold war conflicts i h chapter assessment terms names for each term or name below write a sentence explaining its connection to changes on the great plains.
1 homestead act 6 george a custer 2 sitting buil 7 william jennings bryan 3 assimilation 8 william mckinley 4 morrill act 9 populism 5 exoduster 10 grange main ideas use your notes and the information in the chapter 24 main idea analyzing effects how did the three mile island incident affect the use of nuclear power in america.
they demanded that the government call a halt to the construction of new power plants and gradually shut down existing nuclear facilities.
while the government did not do away with nuclear power federal officials did recognize nuclear energy s potential danger to both humans and the environment.
as a result of the accident at three mile island the nuclear regulatory commission strengthened its safety standards and improved its inspection procedures.
historical spotlight private conservation groups w a continuing movement although the environmental movement of the 1970s gained popular support opponents of the movement also made their voices heard.
in tennessee for example where a federal dam project was halted because it threatened a species of fish local developers took out ads asking residents to tell the government that the size of your wallet is more important than some two inch long minnow.
when confronted with environmental concerns one unemployed steelworker spoke for others when he remarked why worry about the long run when you re out of work right now.
the environmental movement that blossomed in the 1970s became in the 1980s and 1990s a struggle to balance environmental concerns with jobs and progress.
in the years since the first earth day however environmental issues have gained increasing attention and support.
assessment as concerns about pollution and the depletion of nonrenewable resources grew so did membership in private nonprofit organizations dedicated to the preservation of wilderness and endangered species.
many of these groups lobbied government for protective legislation.
some filed lawsuits to block projects such as road or dam construction or logging that would threaten habitats.
the environmental defense fund today environmental defense brought lawsuits that led to the bans on ddt and on leaded gasoline.
radical groups also emerged.
members of greenpeace risked their lives at sea to escort whales and protect them from commercial hunters.
1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
rachel carson earth day environmentalist three mile island environmental protection agency epa main idea using your notes re create the web below on your paper and fill in events that illustrate the main idea in the center.
critical thinking analyzing causes how much should the united states rely on nuclear power as a source of energy.
think about the safety of nuclear power the alternatives to nuclear power u s energy demands analyzing visual sources what message does this 1969 poster give about the role of governmental entities such as the epa in managing the environment.
an age of limits terms names for each term or name below write a sentence explaining its significance to the nixon ford assessment or carter administrations.
1 richard m nixon 2 stagflation 3 opec organization of petroleum exporting countries salt i treaty 5 watergate main ideas 6 saturday night massacre 7 camp david accords 8 ayatollah ruhollah khomeini 9 rachel carson 10 environmental protection agency epa use your notes and the information in the chapter 12 main idea analyzing issues jjj what were the main advantage and disadvantage of buying on credit.
an extended period without having to put down much money at the time of purchase.
banks provided the money at low interest rates.
advertisers pushed the installment plan idea with such slogans as you furnish the girl we ll furnish the home and enjoy while you pay.
some economists and business owners worried that installment buying might be getting out of hand and that it was really a sign of fundamental weaknesses behind a superficial economic prosperity.
one business owner even wrote to president coolidge and related a conversation he had overheard on a train.
jdi a personal voice have you an automobile yet no i talked it over with john and he felt we could not afford one mr.
budge who lives in your town has one and they are not as well off as you are yes i know.
their second installment came due and they had no money to pay it what did they do.
lose the car no they got the money and paid the installment how did they get the money they sold the cook stove how could they get along without a cook stove they didnt.
they bought another on the installment plan a business owner quoted in n the time of silent cal main idea predicting effects jg how do you think the changes in spending will affect the economy.
still most americans focused their attention on the present with little concern for the future.
what could possibly go wrong with the nation s economy.
the decade of the 1920s had brought about many technological and economic changes.
and yet the coolidge era was built on paradox the president stood for economy and a frugal way of life but he was favored by a public who had thrown all care to the wind.
life definitely seemed easier and more enjoyable for hundreds of thousands of americans.
from the look of things there was little warning of what was to come.
automobile registration 1910 1930 1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
calvin coolidge productivity urban sprawl installment plan main idea using your notes re create the web below on your paper and fill it in with events that illustrate the central idea.
critical thinking 3 evaluating do you agree with president coolidges statement the man who builds a factory builds a temple the man who works there worships there.
explain your answer.
think about the goals of business and of religion the american idolization of business the difference between workers and management source historical statistics of the united states.
interpreting graphs what trend does the graph show between 1920 and 1930.
what were some of the reasons for this trend.
choose one event from the web and explain its significance in the 1920s.
politics of the roaring twenties 427 tracing themes economic opportunity the courage to take risks the confidence to rely on one s self the strength to stand in the face of despair and the resourcefulness to make the most of opportunity these are all qualities often considered distinctly american.
freedom requires individuals to discover or create opportunities for themselves.
however the government has also played a key role in distributing and creating economic opportunities.
oai or kminnat.
for rti tmfii j le kong uki great ar t rn rt lh rt n ntobrasia.
homesteading even before 1763 americans looked toward the untamed west in search of greater wealth and freedom.
in the 1830s the mormons went west to escape religious as well as economic persecution.
the government helped to expand economic opportunities for whites by first clearing the land of its native inhabitants relocating them to reservations or killing them.
as the nation claimed ownership of the land it also gave it away.
the homestead act of 1862 provided free of charge 160 acres of public land to anyone 21 years of age or older or the head of a family who had inhabited the land for five years and had improved it.
this provided americans a chance to be independent and self sufficient if they would work hard.
from 1862 until 1900 between 400 000 and 600 000 families were provided homesteads.
immigration while many people have come to the u s seeking political and religious freedom economic opportunity has also been a key reason for immigration.
in 1905 for instance almost half a million people from southern and eastern europe migrated to the united states in search of economic freedom and opportunity as well as to escape religious persecution.
many found work at menial jobs for low pay but still were able to save enough money to eventually open their own businesses.
chapter skill activity.
three types of graphs are bar graphs line graphs and pie graphs.
use a bar graph to display information about quantities and to compare related quantities.
use a line graph to show a change in a single quantity over time.
use a pie graph to show relative proportions among parts of a single thing.
charts can be used to organize condense and summarize written information or lists.
often people use computer software to help create charts and graphs.
understanding the skill strategy create a graph choose the information that you wish to represent visually.
after reading the following paragraph a student created the bar graph below to compare american commuting choices between 1960 and 1990 the bar graph below shows how the information in the passage might be represented.
american commuting choices 1960 1990 in 1960 64 of the population traveled to work by car truck or van 12 took public transportation 7 worked at home and 17 got to work by other means.
in 1990 87 traveled to work by car truck or van 5 took public transportation 3 worked at home and 5 went to work by other means.
100 1 30 150 25 10 0 r a 0 mci 2 i zl htwcb l wi i toca pjaljx i kcrm cz3 htumucl cfthtfb nvwmv decide how best to represent information.
decide what kind of graph or chart will best represent your information.
in this case a student has created a bar graph because he is comparing information.
q use a titie that sums up the information include a time span.
0 use clear labels.
label vertical and horizontal axes.
note dates and percentages.
for this bar graph the vertical axis shows increasing quantities in the form of percentages.
the horizontal axis indicates what is being compared.
in this case dates form the horizontal axis.
o if needed add a legend to indicate the meaning of any colors or symbols.
for some simple graphs a legend is not necessary.
in this case a legend helps a reader identify the data being compared.
827 ski strategy.
create a chart the same statistical information that can be displayed visually in a graph can also often be presented in a chart.
the chart below shows how the information in the same passage could be represented in this format.
2 american commuting choices 1960 and 1990 transportation 1960 1990 used a car truck or van 64 87 used public transportation 12 5 worked at home 7 3 traveled by other means 17 5 o decide how best to represent information.
decide how many rows and columns you need to represent your information.
0 use a title that sums up the information include a time span.
use clear labels.
for a chart label the rows and columns.
choose labels that express the content of each.
use rows to show different options used.
in this case percentages form the rows and dates form the columns.
applying the skill turn to.

chapter 14 the reconstruction era 285 a during the reconstruction era southern states needed to rebuild their economies and to be re admitted into the union.
b lincoln sought to treat the south leniently by asking 10 of its voters to take an oath of allegiance and have the state ratify the thirteenth amendment.
when he was assassinated the next president andrew johnson sought to follow lincolns plan by treating the south leniently pardoning former confederates.
c one of the biggest issues facing the south was the fate of the freedmen.
despite experiments during the war the freedmen were not given their own land.
the federal government set up the freedmens bureau with offices throughout the south to help the freedmen adjust and to set up schools to educate them.
d southern state legislatures created black codes based on older slave codes.
these limited the civil rights and freedom of movement of the freedmen.
e radical republicans in congress were outraged by the black codes.
they passed the civil rights bill granting freedmen their civil rights.
this act later became the fourteenth amendment.
the congress passed military reconstruction dividing the south into districts governed by the army.
former confederate leaders lost their political rights while the freedmen were given the right to vote.
f congress also impeached president johnson.
he was impeached accused by the house of representatives but the senate failed to remove him from office.
g during reconstruction three amendments were added to the constitution.
the thirteenth amendment abolished slavery.
the fourteenth amendment guaranteed all citizens equal protection of the laws and due process the fifteenth amendment prohibited denial of voting rights on the basis of race.
h during reconstruction freedmen carpetbaggers and scalawags held power in southern governments.
for the first time african americans were elected to government posts.
hiram rhodes revels became the first african american elected to congress.
reconstruction governments built roads schools and took steps towards racial equality.
however after northern troops were withdrawn southern states passed segregation laws in the 1880s.
i southerners also developed a new economy during reconstruction.
many former slaves became tenants and sharecroppers giving a share of their crops to the landowner.
new industries developed in the south especially in larger cities.
j this period also saw the opening of the great plains to settlement in the west.
congress passed the homestead act and morrill act during the civil war giving away federal lands to settlers in the west.
the completion of the transcontinental railroad 1869 helped develop the west.
k the indian wars forced indians onto government reservations while the widespread massacre of the buffalo on the great plains destroyed their food supply.
in 1887 the dawes act meant to help indians failed to respect tribal customs and led to the loss of most of their remaining land.
l the civil war provided a great stimulus to industrial production in the north.
new banking laws and higher tariffs helped northern industries to expand.
immigration from europe stimulated the growth of northern cities while workers organized into trade unions for higher wages and better working conditions.
name chapter 5 european exploration and colonization can you classify the thirteen colonies based on why they were established or seized by the british.
the first row has been filled in for you.
complete the others.
reasons examples political concerns government citizens7 rights and responsibilities.
virginia new york delaware new jersey economic concerns money and wealth.
religious deals with beliefs and practices in the worship of god.
social involves how people organize themselves or live together.
acting as an amateur historian t maps are important tools for both geographers and historians.
sketching your own map of an area can help you better grasp where certain places are located.
a sketch map is not visually identical to the map being sketched.
rather a sketch map focuses on the relationships between and among places.
it helps you to better understand the various spatial relationships.
make your own sketch map of early colonial america showing the location of these places jamestown williamsburg plymouth boston baltimore philadelphia new york city albany and charleston.
use the internet to find pictures of these cities during colonial times to decorate the outside borders of your map.
what do all of these locations have in common.
chapter 5 concept map new foods to both culrjres smallpox v measles new diseases introduced to native populations political social economic reasons why colonists came mayflower compact growth of representative government k fundamental orders of ct virg x columbian thirteen 1 v exchange english why colonies j economic gunpowder c j colonies were esiabl1shed c keasuns j compass rudder technical advances religious zeal european exploration and colonization religious i religious k toleration i reasons j 1 1.
pilgrims pennsylvania puritans.
quakers rhode island anne huchinson maryland catholics cortes in mexico new spain desire for gold s1lver pizarro in peru growth of trade t spices silks reasons x for european exploration.
european colonial empires new france canada mississippi powerful rulers allowed religious tolerance new netherland diversity of ethnic groups k j chapter 12 america in world war ii 241 genocide is an effort to murder an entire people or nationality.
part of hitlers nazi philosophy was his intense hatred of jewish people on whom he blamed all of germanys problems.
the holocaust refers to the attempted genocide of the jews during world war ii.
after the outbreak of the war hitler and other nazi leaders decided to murder all european jews.
he called his plan the final solution at first jews were machine gunned next to open trenches they had been forced to when this method of extermination proved too slow for the nazis large concentration camps were built across europe.
jews from nazi controlled countries were sent in cramped railroad cattle cars to these camps.
when they arrived in the camps most were killed with poison gas and their bodies were burned in large ovens.
some were spared to do the work of running the camp.
these inmates were half starved and subjected to inhumane conditions.
about six million jews two thirds of those living in europe were killed during the holocaust.
six million gypsies slavs political prisoners elderly mentally disabled and others also died in nazi concentration camps.
dig themselves or gassed in trucks.
jewish men inside a nazi concentration camp.
liberation of the concentration camps.
during the last months of the war the allies advanced into germany where the true horror of nazi brutality was revealed.
american army units were the first to liberate concentration camps.
they were shocked to see the half starved dehydrated disease ridden prisoners.
acting as an amateur historian the following account is from woman prisoner t 917 at lenzing concentration camp now began a frightful time of waiting.
we were locked in the camp without food.
i was asleep when my sister wakened me.
she reported that in front of the camp were two young men they told us that they would get help from the american soldiers who were nearby but had no idea our camp was there it took a few hours until they arrived.
it was general pattons 3rd army.
the soldiers broke open the gate.
it must have been a shock for the soldiers when they saw us emaciated or swollen pale and dirty creatures.
they first provided us with their food rations and soap who do you think was more surprised at the meeting the concentration camp inmates or the american soldiers.
explain your answer.
chapter 12 america in world war ii 245 his successor president harry truman feared that an invasion of japan might lead to a million american casualties.
truman preferred to use the atomic bomb against japan rather than to sustain such high losses.
he selected centers of japanese military production as targets.
on august 6 an atomic bomb was exploded over the japanese city of hiroshima.
three days later a second bomb was exploded over nagasaki.
about 230 000 people were killed in both explosions combined.
critics argued that truman could have exploded bombs on unoccupied islands in the pacific as demonstrations instead of on heavily populated cities.
japan surrendered shortly after the second explosion once american leaders agreed to allow the japanese emperor to remain on his throne.
smoke rises 60 000feet after an atom bomb is dropped on nagasaki august 1945.
acting as an amateur historian presidents roosevelt and truman had different leadership styles.
president roosevelt came from wealth had an elite education and had an abundance of self confidence.
a life long politician he excelled at communicating with the public.
this was sharply different from president truman who spent his early years running a small clothing business and served as a local judge before being elected as u s senator.
he was chosen by roosevelt as his vice president in 1944 truman was vice president only 82 days when he suddenly found himself as president.
roosevelt rarely consulted with him and truman knew nothing at all about the development of the atomic bomb until after roosevelts death.
with limited foreign policy experience one might think that truman simply allowed his advisers to make decisions.
in fact nothing better describes his leadership style than the sign on his desk in the white house the buck stops here truman chaired morning staff meetings issued directions and assignments to his advisers and made all major policy decisions himself.
he tended to look at things as they were presented to him examined both sides of the issue and then made his decision much as during his earlier years as a judge.
select one of these presidents and evaluate his domestic and international leadership during world war ii.
conduct research on the internet or in your library for information.
you might consider how fdr forged a close relationship with churchill and mobilized americans for war.
or you might select how truman reached his decision to use the atomic bomb against japan.
then prepare a short report poster or oral presentation to communicate your conclusions about the leadership style of the president you researched.
chapter 4 foundations background to american history 43 the declaration of independence only set up a series of aspirations or goals for americans.
it promised a system of government that promoted liberty equality and individual rights and that was based on the will of the people.
the u s constitution actually turned these goals into a concrete system of government with a series of specific fundamental laws.
the constitution was not the first central government that the colonies established after independence.
the colonies originally set up a very weak national association under an agreement known as the articles of confederation.
this association was an experiment in government that failed.
in 1786 american leaders met at annapolis maryland and decided that a stronger government was needed.
they decided to meet again and invited delegates to philadelphia to revise the articles.
the constitutional convention meeting in philadelphia in 1787 quickly decided to abandon the articles altogether and to write an entirely new constitution.
the articles of confederation principles of the u s constitution the u s constitution written by the constitutional convention established the basic structure of our national government.
it established a government in which power rested with the people who elect their own representatives.
the framers of the constitution sought to create a national government strong enough to defend the nations interests and to promote its general welfare.
they gave the new national government many important powers and made federal law supreme over state law.
the signing of the u s constitution at independence hall the new constitution created an elected president a congress with two houses and a supreme court.
to ensure that this new national government was not too strong the new constitution also adopted a number of important principles name chapter 6 life in colonial america 85 17 which of these events is in the correct order in which they occurred.
hist 3jalj a start of the virginia house of burgesses magna carta great awakening fundamental orders of connecticut b magna carta fundamental orders of connecticut the great awakening start of the virginia house of burgesses c fundamental orders of connecticut great awakening magna carta start of the virginia house of burgesses d magna carta start of the virginia house of burgesses fundamental orders of connecticut great awakening 18 which statement most accurately describes the people who were allowed to vote in elections of representatives to colonial assemblies in british america.
f they were colonists of means bom in america.
hist 3 a j g they were men who owned property.
h they were women who were able to read and write.
j they were colonists bom in england.
19 which geographic conditions discouraged the development of a plantation economy in the new england colonies.
a a wide coastal plain and an absence of good harbors b rocky soil and a short growing season c numerous rivers and a humid climate d flatlands and a lack of forests use the painting and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
20 the painting to the right by john singleton copley 1765 shows dr joseph warren.
this painting by copley is typical of paintings in colonial america in that it f shows someone in the professions uitwjj g is religious in nature h is a portrait j depicts a government official 21 which city in the thirteen colonies is correctly paired with a geographic feature that contributed to its growth.
a new orleans great lakes geog io b j b new york city atlantic ocean c charleston mississippi river d boston appalachian mountains 22 which best explains why colonial farmers settled near oceans or coastal waterways.
f it was safer since fewer native american indians lived there.
geog ii a j g colonial governments often paid farmers to settle there.
h the land was easier to clear since it had fewer trees and rocks.
j transportation by water of goods and crops was easier.
name the american revolution the road to independence ck of teks covered in chapter 4 foundations background to american history examine the question.
this question tests your ability to draw a conclusion from three amendments in the dill of rights.
you should read each excerpt carefully.
then think about what they have in common.
recall what you know.
you should realize that each of these amendments establishes rights for individuals accused of a crime.
these rights protect us from false accusations or unfair treatment by government officials.
apply what you know.
the best answer is choice a all three of these amendments deal with rights for someone accused of a crime.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 the bill of rights was added to the u s constitution primarily to f provide the president with power in times of emergency hist i a g establish fair and impartial elections h protect individual liberties j guarantee voting privileges to minorities 3 which guarantees freedom of the press freedom of speech and freedom of religion to individuals in the united states.
a the treaty of paris of 1783 hisyi a b the articles of confederation c the first amendment to the u s constitution d the fifth amendment to the u s constitution use the chart and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
person a person b signed the declaration of independence signed the declaration of independence president of the continental congress father of american medicine signature on declaration became a symbol of freedom in the colonies favored educating women and making a public university to train public servants 4 which two individuals who played a role in the american revolution are described in the table above.
f john trumbull sr and charles carroll of carrollton hist i cj g benjamin rush and john witherspoon h john hancock and benjamin rush j alexis de tocqueville and john peter muhlenberg 5 which of the following was an important characteristic of american society as noted by alexis de tocqueville in 1831 1832.
a federalism c populism f citi 22 a b imperialism d isolationism name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 299 acting as an amateur historian in her book friedan challenged the belief that all women were content leading lives as mothers and housewives each suburban wife struggles with it alone.
as she made the beds shopped for groceries matched slipcover material ate peanut butter sandwiches with her children chauffeured cub scouts and brownies and lay beside her husband at night she was afraid to ask even of herself the silent question is this all some criticized betty friedan for limiting her focus to middle class educated women.
they claimed she ignored other womens voices.
do you think this was a valid criticism.
explain your answer.
achievements of the women s liberation movement feminist goals were far reaching.
women sought greater freedom and a fuller social and economic life.
as a result of affirmative action universities receiving federal support could no longer discriminate on the basis of sex in their admissions policy.
most colleges became co educational and hired women professors.
in fact they had to hire more women faculty quickly because most professors were males.
greater gender equality was also achieved in admissions to military academies law schools and medical schools.
employment.
feminists sought to end discrimination in hiring to establish equal job opportunities for women and to place women in positions of greater responsibility.
in 1963 congress passed the equal pay act requiring companies to pay women the same wages as men for the same work.
new attitudes.
feminists objected to beauty contests and introduced the title ms to replace miss and mrs they opposed sexist language policeman and fireman the use of women as sex objects in advertising or the idea that men cannot do housework.
womens leaders opposed sexual discrimination in textbooks that ignored womens contributions.
they lobbied for more funds to research womens diseases like breast cancer.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 121 the rebels wanted to stop state courts from seizing their property and imprisoning them for unpaid debts.
they also wanted the state to issue paper money.
there was no national army to put down the uprising if it had spread to other states.
although the state militia was able to put it down many property owners across the country now felt the need for a stronger national government.
a meeting of representatives at annapolis in 1786 called for a convention of delegates to revise the articles of confederation.
since only five of the 13 states were represented at annapolis they agreed to assemble again a few months later in philadelphia.
in may 1787 representatives from the states met in philadelphia to revise the articles of confederation.
george washington benjamin franklin and the signing of the u s constitution at independence hall alexander hamilton were among the delegates.
the representatives quickly agreed on discarding the articles of confederation.
instead they decided that a new national constitution was needed.
acting as an amateur historian jims although it was agreed that the discussions of the constitutional convention were to be kept secret james madison wrote down every speech.
madison is known as the father of the u s constitution if not for his notes little of what took place at the constitutional convention would be known.
below is a speech that madison gave at the convention in time of war great powers are given to the executive.
constant fear of war has the same tendency to make the head too large for the body.
a standing military force with an overgrown executive will not be a safe protector of liberty.
the defense against foreign threats has been the instrument of tyranny at home.
among the romans it was a standing truth to stir fear of a war whenever a revolt was threatened.
the armies were kept on under the excuse of defending the people but they enslaved them what did madison mean when he said the head is too large for the body.
what danger was madison warning against in this speech.
name chapter 6 american society in transition 89 in u s v wong kim ark 1898 the u s supreme court ruled that the children of chinese immigrants bom in the united states could not be denied citizenship.
this part of the chinese exclusion act the court held violated the 14th amendment.
applying what you have learned imagine you are a member of congress in 1882 write a speech giving arguments for or against the proposed chinese exclusion act.
your speech should try to persuade other members of congress to vote as you suggest.
complete the graphic organizer below by describing various aspects of urbanization and immigration in this period.
chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 139 use the information in the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
he the president shall have power with the advice and consent of the senate to make treaties provided two thirds of the senators present concur and he shall nominate with the advice and consent of the senate ambassadors and other public ministers article ii section 2 clause 2 u s constitution 11 12 13 which principle of the u s constitution is reflected in this passage.
a checks and balances c popular sovereignty b amendment process d federalism hist 15 6 what was a key argument used by the federalists for ratification of the u s constitution.
f it prohibited the power of the federal government to wage war.
g it provided for construction of a new capital in the south.
h it allowed the slave trade to continue for at least twenty more years.
j it had features that prevented the abuse of government power.
which historic document was written in support of ratification of the u s constitution.
a magna carta b mayflower compact c declaration of independence d the federalist papers use the passage below and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
the nation deserves and i will select a supreme court justice that americans can be proud of.
the nation also deserves a dignified process of confirmation in the united states senate characterized by fair treatment a fair hearing and a fair vote.
i will choose a nominee in a timely manner so that the hearing and the vote can be completed before the new supreme court term begins president george w bush 2005 14 which constitutional principle is discussed in this quotation.
f federalism h statesrights govt 15 d g checks and balances j due process 15 why did the framers of the constitution create three separate branches of the national government.
a to insure that the legislative branch was bicameral govt 15 d b to make sure all laws were approved by the supreme court c to make sure that the president was superior to the legislature d to prevent any one branch of government from gaining too much power name chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 329 important ideas continued j with the reagan doctrine president reagan announced he would not just contain communism but try to roll it back.
he sent u s forces to grenada and provided anti communist rebels in nicaragua and afghanistan with funds.
k reagan introduced the strategic defense initiative star wars a research program to protect america from nuclear attack by the soviet union.
l iran contra affair officials sold weapons to iran to free hostages the proceeds helped to supply contras in nicaragua despite a congressional ban.
m president george h w.
bush continued reagans policies.
the cold war ended during his presidency.
bush sent troops into panama kuwait and somalia.
n president bill clinton attempted to enact a comprehensive health care reform but failed to do so.
reduced defense spending after the cold war coupled with a rise in the computer industry made the 1990s a time of general prosperity.
o impeachment charges were brought against president clinton for lying about an affair he had with a white house intern.
attempts to convict him of these charges failed in the senate.
clinton was able to successfully push nafta through congress and saw the creation of the world trade organization.
p a talented and hard working group of diverse entrepreneurs including bill gates sam walton estee lauder robert johnson and lionel sosa helped the american economy.
key terms and people in this chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 147 the right of assembly in some countries people cannot peacefully gather to protest against government policies without fear of punishment.
if they gather or demonstrate they fear they might be beaten arrested imprisoned or even killed.
the first amendment states that congress cannot deny individuals the right to peacefully assemble this means that people have a right to gather peaceably with others without fear that the government will use force against them.
in a democracy many groups and organizations often use the right to peacefully assemble as a way to get the word out.
they gather in parades and demonstrations to show their support for certain ideas and beliefs.
the right to petition congress also cannot deny individuals the right to write to government representatives or officials seeking a change in the law.
this is known as the right to petition.
this right is based on the belief that citizens have a right to complain to their representatives about things that they do not like and would like to see changed.
if there is a law or policy that citizens dislike they gather peoples signatures on petitions.
these petitions are then sent to government officials.
the right to gather signatures on a petition is protected by the first amendment.
rewrite the first amendment in your own words.
which rights in the first amendment do you think are the most important.
explain your reasons.
the second amendment americans recognized the important role played by the militia in winning the revolutionary war.
a militia is a citizens army a force made up of ordinary citizens who take up arms.
the second amendment states that a well regulated militia is necessary for the security of a free state.
for this reason it says people should have the right to keep and bear arms carry weapons.
because of the second amendment americans have the right to own guns.
in other countries citizens do not have this right.
some americans question whether this right is still necessary today and whether it encourages violence.
name chapter 6 american society in transition 101 use the information in the bar graph and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
9 based on this poster which is an accurate statement.
a immigrants were encouraged to leam to speak english.
b granite city had laws prohibiting immigrants from moving there.
c the people in the poster were native born americans.
d granite city encouraged diversity in its immigrant population.
cult 26 b pi granite city americanization schools monday and thursday evenings 7 30 p m e underwood underwood these two men are brothers one is an american citizen and the i other has just come to this country with their old mother.
see the difference in the way they dress and look.
america is a great country.
in america everybody has a chance.
everybody who comes to h america from the old country ought to leam the american language and become an american citizen.
if the people that come to america t do not become americans this country will soon be tike the old keep america great.
become american citizen beginning monday september the 27th 1920 learn the language.
i i i 10 during the late 1800s and early 1900s prejudice against new immigrants increased because these immigrants f had job skills superior to those of most american workers f hist 3 c g formed their own labor unions in order to receive higher wages h came from cultural backgrounds different from those of the majority of americans j tried to replace american democracy with other forms of government 11 what major trend occurred to the population of the united states during the industrial expansion of the late nineteenth century.
a farm population increased i geog 13 c b migration to rural areas increased c immigration decreased d urbanization increased 12 the homestead act 1862 promoted the development of western lands by f creating a system of dams for crop irrigation econi5 a j g providing free land to settlers h removing all restrictions on immigration j moving native american indians to reservations 13 in the late 1800s why did congress pass restrictions on immigration from china.
a to stop illegal immigration from latin america econ is c j b to provide highly skilled workers for industry c to limit the power of urban political machines d to satisfy nativist prejudices in california name chapter 7 the progressive era 105 a maswa a farmers faced problems in the late 19th century.
new farm machinery and the opening of the great plains led to overproduction.
food prices fell as farmers expenses remained the same.
farmers fell into debt while they were also charged excessive rates by railroads and grain storage operators.
b farmers organized in the grange movement to fight for their special interests.
they passed laws regulating railroad rates.
when the law was overturned by the supreme court congress passed the interstate commerce act 1887.
c farmers next combined with industrial workers and miners into the populist party.
they advocated many reforms that were later adopted by the major political parties and enacted by congress.
populists believed the shortage of currency was responsible for falling prices.
in 1896 and 1900 william jennings bryan was the candidate for the populists and democrats.
bryan lost both elections.
d the progressive movement flourished in 1900 1920 like the populists progressives sought reform.
they were mainly educated members of the middle class.
they sought to correct abuses of big business such as exploiting workers.
they also sought to reform the corrupt practices of government.
the roots of the movement were with the populists muckrackers and social gospel movement.
muckrakers like upton sinclair were investigative reporters.
e states passed political reforms and social legislation.
f on the eve of the progressive era the federal government was reformed by the pendleton act which reduced the number of political appointments and replaced them with candidates who had passed a competitive examination.
g progressive reforms were introduced at the national level by presidents theodore roosevelt william howard taft and woodrow wilson.
h theodore roosevelt believed in a strong presidency and used his powers to safeguard the public interest.
he used the anti trust laws to curb the unfair practices of business.
his square deal program passed laws protecting consumers.
j william howard taft continued most of roosevelts policies.
when roosevelt decided to run as the bull moose candidate in 1912 he split the republican party helping woodrow wilson the democratic candidate to win the election.
k woodrow wilson furthered progressive reforms with his new freedom program.
he lowered tariff duties and introduced a graduated income tax made possible by the 16th amendment.
he created the federal reserve system to control the nations money supply.
to control the unfair practices of big business he passed the clayton anti trust act creating the federal trade commission.
l in art and literature realism was popular in the late 19th century.
realism attempted to show things as they were and gave writers and artists a way to depict the hardships and abuses of the new industrial workers.
some of the greatest writers included horatio alger mark twain and kate chopin.
noted artists included james mcneil whistler winslow homer and thomas eakins.
project without permission chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 341 reagan supporter charlton heston later became president of the nra.
after the problems faced by recent presidents conservative beliefs suddenly enjoyed an unexpected resurgence in the united states in the 1980s.
in great britain margaret thatcher had come into office in 1979 with similar ideas combating unions reducing taxes cutting government spending and reducing the amount of government regulations.
in the 1980 presidential election ronald reagan received the support of a number of leading american conservative groups national rifle association the nra was begun to promote rifle shooting and marksmanship skills.
after the assassinations of president kennedy his brother robert and dr martin luther king jr congress enacted the gun control act of 1968 the nra had traditionally steered clear of politics but now it became more political.
most of its members tended to be politically conservative.
in the 1980 election the nra endorsed ronald reagan marking the first time in its history the nra supported a presidential candidate.
jerry falwell the moral majority another highly influential conservative group that helped elect reagan was the moral majority mainly composed of fundamentalist christians.
begun in 1979 by evangelist rev.
jerry falwell the moral majority favored a strict interpretation of the bible and an agenda that was socially conservative and anti communist.
the group also opposed the equal rights amendment.
the moral majority made telephone calls and held rallies to help get ronald reagan elected as president.
the group was dissolved in 1989 when falwell announced that our mission is accomplished.
heritage foundation many of reagan s policies were strongly influenced by the heritage foundation a think tank based in washington d c the heritage foundation seeks to promote conservative policies based on the principles of free enterprise limited government individual freedom values and a strong national defense.
it provides an example of a non profit lobbying group that attempts to influence legislators on various bills.
z name chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 359 use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
interests in the persian gulf are vital to our national security.
these interests include access to oil and the security of key states in the region.
the united states will defend its vital interests in the area through the use of force if necessary against any power with interests unfriendly to our own.
the united states will support the defense of friendly countries in the area to enable them to play a more active role in their own defense.
the united states will encourage the participation of our allies and other friendly states to promote our mutual interests in the persian gulf region natl security directive u s.
policy in response to the iraqi invasion of kuwait 6 based on the reasoning in this directive why did the united states became involved in the persian gulf war in 1991.
f the united states was forced into the war by its treaty obligations.
g the united states sought to end violations to the rights of the iraqi people.
h the united states sought to remove saddam hussein from power in iraq.
j the united states saw the invasion of kuwait as a threat to its national interests.
7 the north american free trade agreement nafta and the general agreement on trade and tariffs gatt have encouraged countries to a engage in more international trade econ i.
e i b create a uniform international currency c accept similar wage and price controls d regulate multinational corporations from the middle east 8 what did the events of the persian gulf war and the balkan crisis in the 1990s indicate about the foreign policy goals of american leaders.
f they desire greater stability in the middle east.
hist ii a i g they wish to expand trade with middle eastern nations.
h they want to help maintain peace and stop oppression around the world.
j they only act where american access to scarce resources is at stake.
use the information in the boxes and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
reopening of diplomatic relations with communist china introduction of a policy of detente with the soviet union r president clinton orders u s forces to bosnia and kosovo the events shown above illustrate attempts by the united states to a further the interests of peace in the world hist ii a.
b protect its interests in the middle east c deliver humanitarian aid to europe d contain the spread of communism in asia 9 name chapter 7 the progressive era 131 use the information in the cartoon and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
source udo j keppler puck september 7 1904 adapted 9 the main message of this cartoon is that the standard oil company a used its size to lower its prices econ 15 b i b protected americans from foreign competitors c used its economic power to sway government decisions d employed violence to gain unfair advantages for its workers 10 progressive reformers attacked political machines because they often f denied voting rights to the poor hist 3 a g stole public money through overpriced contracts h wasted money on military spending j discriminated against migrant workers 11 to guarantee an adequate money supply in the national economy econ 15 e j president wilson introduced a limits on foreign investments c an end to the gold standard b insurance for all bank deposits d the federal reserve system 12 during the progressive era many state and local governments adopted the initiative referendum and recall.
together these procedures f extended the right to vote to 18 year old citizens d hist 5 a i g gave citizens a more direct voice in government h let registered voters select each states presidential electors j allowed a states residents to bring lawsuits against another state 13 during the early 1900s the term muckrakers was used to describe a people who demonstrated against war i hist 5 b b writers who exposed the evils in american society c newspaper columnists who reported on celebrities d politicians who criticized progressive era presidents chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 177 construction of the national road begins.
whitneys plan was for machines to produce standardized parts which could be used with other parts to assemble a whole product without a laborer filing and fitting each part together.
this interchangeability allowed easy assembly of new devices and easier repair of existing devices while minimizing the time and skill needed for a person to assembly or repair a product.
use of interchangeable parts in the manufacture of muskets guns was a major contribution to the development of america industry.
the shift of manufacturing to factories known as the industrial revolution would soon lead to the rise of new industries and rapidly growing cities.
transportation.
americas vast and untamed landscape made travel difficult.
cities were connected by roads that were little more than dirt trails.
a few had log or plank roads.
most short travel was done by walking.
for longer trips people rode on horse drawn wagons.
travel on roads was slow a trip from boston to new york took three days by stage coach.
western settlers sought roads to aid settlement and for the transfer of goods.
they wished for a way to make it easier to market their goods and to buy essential supplies in return.
in 1806 congress set aside funds to build the first federally funded road the national road.
travel by water was easier and cheaper than travel overland.
goods were often carried along streams and rivers to ports along the coast.
people took ferries to cross rivers and took boats to travel down rivers across lakes or along coastlines.
communication.
communications were slow.
there were no telephones telegraphs televisions or computers.
people communicated primarily by letter.
letters had to be carried over dusty unpaved roads or by packet boat.
mail was often mangled or even lost.
news about events traveled slowly.
most people received their information from local newspapers.
most were published weekly or monthly and were shared by many readers.
regional differences.
the three main regions from colonial times new england the middle atlantic colonies and the south were replaced by the north the south and the emerging west.
the nations population was growing at an enormous rate.
the land available for settlement increased by almost the size of europe from 4 4 million to 7 8 million square kilometers.
regional population growth 1800 1830 select one state and use your school or public library and internet websites of local organizations to gather documents artworks statistics and other materials about life in that state in the early 1800s.
chapter looks at american foreign policy.
foreign policy refers to a country s policies towards other countries.
social scientists believe there are certain characteristics that make foreign policy special.
international anarchy.
each independent sovereign nation has its own laws that citizens must obey.
if citizens fail to obey these laws they can be punished.
sovereign countries however are not subject to such higher laws.
for this reason social scientists say that sovereign nations exist in a system of international anarchy.
each nation must depend on its own military and economic power to survive.
on the other hand countries usually follow some rules and customs to get along with one another.
balance of power.
when one country becomes too powerful other countries sometimes band together in an alliance or coalition to protect themselves and make sure the threatening power does not become any stronger.
this tendency is known as maintaining the balance of power.
control of u s foreign policy.
in the united states the constitution places control of foreign policy in the hands of both the president and congress.
while the president and secretary of state handle day to day diplomacy they need congress to vote funds to support their policies or to declare war.
traditional foreign policy.
for much of their early history americans felt safe behind their two oceans.
these oceans protected americans from attack.
president washington had warned americans to avoid entanglements with european nations who were frequently at war with each other.
instead he advised americans to focus on the western hemisphere.
for the first 150 years after independence americans largely followed washington s advice.
national interests.
in the conduct of foreign policy each nation is usually guided by its national interests.
for the united states these include security from attack protecting american investments and promoting american democracy and its way of life.
to evaluate a particular foreign policy you must determine how well it promotes these goals.
chapter 16 america in the new millennium 379 free enterprise and technological innovation the free enterprise system allows people to use their own economic resources to produce goods and services for sale to others.
copyright and patent laws give writers and inventors exclusive rights to their own creations and inventions.
in a free enterprise system scientists inventors and entrepreneurs have a powerful incentive to pay attention to the needs of consumers.
since they can profit by meeting consumer needs they continually strive to improve established products and to create new ones.
both the producers and the consumers benefit.
by allowing people to pursue their own interests free enterprise can drive technological innovation and achieve extraordinary results.
running shoes personal computers gel toothpaste cellular phones blackberrys iphones and global positioning system products are just some of the products created as a result of innovation by our free enterprise system.
the free enterprise system drives the creation of new businesses.
innovations addressing specific needs attempts to address specific needs often lead to scientific discoveries and technological innovation.
for example in the 1950s dr jonas salk specifically developed a vaccine to cure polio.
in the 1980s a new disease appeared known as aids.
those who contracted the disease had no immunity to other illnesses.
scientists set about discovering what caused aids and finding a cure.
they discovered it was caused by the hiv virus which attacks the human immune system.
the virus can be transmitted during sexual contact or blood transfusions.
scientists were able to develop a number of specific drugs that slow down the reproduction of the hiv virus and help restore the immune system.
scientists are now attempting to find a vaccine to prevent aids.
scientists have also developed new drugs to reduce the levels of cholesterol lowering the risk of heart attacks and they are working on a cure for alzheimers a disease that attacks an older persons memory and mental abilities.
scientists have also developed more insect resistant foods with greater nutritional value making it possible to support the worlds growing population.
both the u s military and space program have used teams of scientists and engineers to design solutions to specific problems.
these solutions often have more general applications the jet engine for example is now used by commercial airlines to power their airplanes and the internet developed for scientists is now used to communicate by everyone.
the computer revolution much of the increased productivity of the american economy in the last few decades has been due to advances in information technology it.
computers are machines that use a binary system to store and manipulate information.
applying wh chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 195 eli whitney and samuel slater were important to the spread of the industrial revolution to the united states because they csts a created new methods of production c increased steel production b devised new forms of transportation d built steam powered machines use the graph and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
10 what conclusion can be drawn from the information in the graph.
f the u s government encour aged foreign trade between 1800 and 1812 g american trade was affected by events taking place in europe.
h trade increased sharply with the passage of the embargo acts j american trading ships were attacked by france and great britain.
source historical statistics of the united states 11 a major reason president thomas jefferson supported the purchase of the louisiana territory in 1803 was that it a gave the united states ownership of florida 1 oq b allowed the united states to gain control of california c gave the united states control of the mississippi river d removed the spanish from north america 12 washingtons proclamation of neutrality 1793 jeffersons embargo act 1807 and the monroe doctrine 1823 were all efforts to f avoid political conflicts with european nations hist 5 e g directly support european revolutions h aid great britain in its war against france j promote military alliances 13 the decision in marbury v madison 1803 was important because it a upheld the constitutionality of the national bank govt 18 b j b restricted congresss power to use the elastic clause c permitted the federal government to regulate interstate commerce d established the supreme courts power to judge the constitutionality of laws 14 which areas were added to the united states by the louisiana purchase.
f territory from the atlantic ocean to the appalachians g territory from the appalachians to the mississippi river h territory from the rocky mountains to the pacific ocean j territory from the mississippi river to the rocky mountains chapter 11 the age of jackson 201 the age of jackson a native of tennessee andrew jackson was not bom to wealth.
he defeated british forces at the battle of new orleans in 1815 later he spent several years fighting native american indians in georgia and florida.
after his defeat in the election of 1824 jackson and his supporters spent the next four years campaigning for the presidency.
they introduced new campaign tactics like popular rallies parades and nominating conventions.
the age of the common man.
jackson was finally elected president in 1828 his supporters were the common people laborers farmers and frontiersmen.
jackson saw himself as the spokesman of the common man the average american.
the inauguration.
jackson invited the public to visit the white house for his inauguration.
a crowd of 20 000 people many in muddy boots passed through the building.
some broke glassware and china dishes in their struggle to get refreshments.
the expansion of democracy.
jacksons two terms in office saw an expansion of american democracy.
this was a time in which state governments were changing their requirements for voting.
when the republic was founded most states required white adult males to own some property in order to vote.
now these property qualification were lifted.
democratic changes under jackson voting rights.
in the 1820s states eliminated the requirement that voters own property so that most white males over 21 could vote.
choosing a president.
selection of presidential candidates by party leaders was replaced by nominating conventions where popularly elected members of each political party chose their candidates.
campaign methods.
with increased numbers of voters new campaign methods emerged.
candidates held dinners rallies and public meetings.
jackson invited ordinary people to his inauguration.
the spoils system.
jackson believed the president should act as the voice of the common people.
to make government more responsive to popular needs jackson favored the spoils system.
supporters who helped in his election campaign were appointed to government posts in place of existing officials.
name chapter 9 america in world war i 161 alvin york 1887 1964 was a devoted bible reader and almost avoided military service as a conscientious objector.
he was drafted into the army at age 29 in many respects he was typical of the draftees underprivileged and undereducated who were sent to france to make the world safe for democracy in the battle of the argonne forest with nothing more than his rifle and pistol he reportedly killed 25 germans and captured 132 prisoners.
alvin york acting as an amateur historian the passage below is from the diary of alvin york.
york was bom in a two room log cabin in the hills of tennessee my little old mother and pastor pile wanted to get me out of the army.
pastor pile put in a plea to the government that it was against the religion of our church to fight.
he filled the papers out and sent them to me to sign.
the army told me all i had to do was to sign them.
my mother too put in a plea to get me out as her sole support.
my father was dead and i was supporting my family.
i had brothers in tennessee that could look after my mother.
so i never asked for an exemption from service.
i never was a conscientious objector.
i didnt want to fight and kill.
but i had to answer the call of my country imagine you are sergeant york or some other soldier in the american expeditionary force on the western front during world war i write a letter to your family at home describing your experiences.
to fight the war president wilson was given sweeping powers by congress.
he established several agencies to regulate the economy during the war.
railroads were placed under direct government control.
congress passed the selective service act 1917 and millions of americans registered for the draft.
almost two million american troops eventually reached europe while women and african americans filled many of their jobs at home.
the cost of the war about 30 billion was paid for by higher taxes and war bonds.
the war greatly benefited the american economy since exports to the allied powers greatly increased.
during the war civil liberties were curtailed to meet wartime needs.
the espionage act of 1917 made it a crime to criticize the war effort.
name chapter 9 america in world war i 171 15 during his re election campaign in 1916 president woodrow wilson used the slogan he kept us out of war in april 1917 wilson asked congress for a declaration of war on germany.
what explains the reason for this change.
a german forces had invaded poland and belgium.
hist 4 c b germany had resumed unrestricted submarine warfare.
c britain was invaded by nations of the central powers.
d russia signed a treaty of alliance with the german government.
use the graph and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
16 data from this graph supports the conclusion that world war i f caused the u s trade deficit to increase g cost the united states many billions of dollars h was a significant benefit to the american economy j created an unfavorable balance of trade 17 which need did president woodrow wilson identify in order to persuade congress to enter world war i.
a the need to protect freedom of the seas hist 4 c b the need to assist the neutral nations with their defense c the need to retaliate against the japanese bombing of pearl harbor d the need to remove the nazi threat from the western hemisphere 18 president woodrow wilsons fourteen points were based on the belief that f military strength offers a nations best security hist 4 f i g isolationism should guide a nations relations h self determination should be applied to all peoples j industrial nations should have equal access to colonial possessions 19 the success of american soldiers during world war i was largely credited to his leadership and he returned to the united states as a true hero this statement was made by a speaker attending the funeral of a archduke franz ferdinand hist 4 b b john j pershing c woodrow wilson d henry cabot lodge chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 233 learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing how the united states obtained each of these territories to extend its frontiers to the pacific ocean.
name chapter 10 the roaring twenties 185 by 1933 most americans saw this experiment in morals as a failure.
many people had simply refused to accept the ban on alcohol.
although illegal alcoholic drinks were widely available at speakeasies and other underground drinking establishments.
even president harding drank alcohol in the white house.
fewer than fourteen years after the ban on alcoholic drinks went into effect prohibition was repealed by the twenty first amendment 1933.
the experience of prohibition demonstrated that unpopular laws are sometimes unenforceable.
the scopes monkey trial of 1925 an even greater clash between traditionalists and modernists took place in the 1920s in tennessee the first state to pass a law against the teaching of darwins theory of evolution.
state legislators believed that darwin had contradicted the biblical account of creation.
in 1925 john scopes a biology teacher was arrested for teaching his class about the theory of evolution.
scopes was arrested and put on trial.
the scopes monkey trial drew nationwide attention for pitting older religious beliefs against new scientific theories.
the state was represented by william jennings bryan as special prosecutor while the famed attorney clarence darrow defended scopes.
bryan and darrow were considered to be the greatest orators of their day and the scopes trial became the first in american history to be broadcast over national radio.
darrow cross examined bryan as an expert on the bible pointing to seeming contradictions in the biblical text.
in the end scopes was convicted for teaching evolution but his 1 fine was later set aside.
clarence darrow argues one of this points during the scopes monkey trial acting as an amateur historian journalist h l.
mencken wrote the following just before the trial no principle is at stake save the principle that school teachers like plumbers should stick to the job that is set before them and not go roving around the house breaking windows raiding the cellar and demoralizing children.
when a teacher takes his oath of office he renounces his right to free speech quite as certainly as a bishop does or a colonel in the army or an editorial writer of a newspaper.
he becomes a paid propagandist of certain definite doctrines and every time he departs from them deliberately he deliberately swindles his employers which side does mencken support and what were his reasons for doing so.
do you agree or disagree with this argument.
project without permission chapter 11 history 2 d explain the significance of the following years as turning points 1929 the great depression begins geography 12 a analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the dust bowl economics 15 e describe the emergence of monetary policy in the united states including the federal reserve act of 1913 and the shifting trend from a gold standard to fiat money.
economics 16 b identify the causes of the great depression including the impact of tariffs on world trade stock market speculation bank failures and the monetary policy of the federal reserve system.
economics 16 c analyze the effects of the great depression on the u s economy and society such as widespread unemployment and deportation and repatriation of people of european and mexican heritage and others.
economics 16 d compare the new deal policies and its opponents approaches to resolving the economic effects of the great depression.
economics 16 e describe how various new deal agencies and programs including the federal deposit insurance corporation the securities and exchange commission and the social security administration continue to affect the lives of u s citizens.
government 19 a evaluate the impact of new deal legislation on the historical roles of state and federal government.
government 19 b explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events including the great depression.
government 20 b evaluate the impact of relationships among the legislative executive and judicial branches of government including franklin d roosevelt s attempt to increase the number of u s supreme court justices culture 26 d identify the political social and economic contributions of women such as eleanor roosevelt to american society.
in this chapter you will leam about the civil war.
some of the developments you read about in this chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal 215 the greatest growth in union membership in american history took place in the 1930s as a result of the new deal.
roosevelt sought to raise the wages of labor to help fight the depression.
norris laguardia act 1932 prohibited the use of injunctions against peaceful strikes.
new deal legislation favorable to labor 1 national industrial recovery act 1933 guaranteed workers the right to form unions.
employers could not refuse to hire union members.
this act was declared unconstitutional in 1935 but was replaced by the wagner act.
wagner act 1935 greatly stimulated the unionization of american workers by protecting the right of unions to bargain collectively with their employers.
union membership grew rapidly with this new law.
although the new deal was generally popular roosevelt did face criticism.
some of his critics proposed alternative approaches to dealing with the depression.
conservative critics like the liberty league charged roosevelt with being a traitor to his class and attempting to establish a popular dictatorship.
radical critics felt that roosevelt did not go far enough in reforming the american economy.
dr francis townsend wanted to give citizens over 65 years old a pension of 200 a month to be spent within the month.
townsend believed these pensioners would soon spend the money and this would create new jobs bringing an end to the depression.
u s senator and former governor of louisiana huey long promised to give each american family an income of 5 000 a year to be paid for by taxing the rich.
long was assassinated before he was able to mount his campaign against fdr.
huey long was a fiery speaker who riled up crowds.
father coughlin gave radio addresses to millions calling for the nationalization of banks and utilities.
coughlin was also violently anti semitic prejudiced against jewish people.
coughlin found an audience among nativists and those who distrusted wall street bankers.
eventually the catholic church ordered an end to coughlins broadcasts.
name chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal 217 in your opinion was franklin roosevelt a hero to be admired or someone who wrongly overstepped his constitutional authority.
explain your answer.
learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by summarizing the most important legislation of roosevelts new deal refi orm chapter it concept map people lost their homes v hl factories closed down v y john steinbeck h y wrote the grapes of wrath j h.
established reconstruction finance corp rugged individualism checking your unperstanping directions put a circle around the letter that best answers the question.
1 what is the main idea of the cartoon.
a president roosevelt used a system of trial and error to mend the economy.
b congress and the president were unable to cope with the great depression.
c president roosevelt always followed the rec ommendations of the congress.
d the president and congress constantly fought over depression era programs.
econ 16 d of course we may have to change remedies if we dont get results name.


chapter to learn how americans sacrificed during world war ii in the hopes of achieving a better future.
s rosie the riveter is a fictional character that came to symbolize women in the workforce during world war ii.
images such as this one encouraged women to participate in the war effort.
photo the granger collection new york 355 chapter 12 place and time the world 1941 1945 after germany invaded poland president roosevelt expanded the army and built up the country s defenses.
after the bombing of pearl harbor the united states was at war.
the united states increased the defense budget and rapidly increased production of aircraft ships and equipment.
the nation was now fighting a war that involved europe africa and the pacific.
step into the place read the quote and look at the information presented on the map.
b9 7b 7e 29a 29h 31b how did the scale of world war ii influence roosevelt s feelings about democracy.
december 7 1941 the japanese attacked pearl harbor hawaii.
global scale of world war ii 1942 german subm attacked and sank hu of allied freighters primarysource the preservation ofthe spirit and faith ofthe nation does and will furnish the highest justification for every sacrifice that we may make in the cause of national defense.
in the face of great perils never before encountered our strong purpose is to protect and to perpetuate the integrity of democracy.
for this we muster the spirit of america and the faith of america.
we do not retreat.
we are not content to stand still.
as americans we go forward in the service of our country d roosevelt third inaugural address january 20 1941 step into the time determining cause bh33sesi3 determining cause and effect choose a wwii event from the time line and imetitfctsi jrirzti hlallital pacific ocean 1942 after having several ships sunk by german submarines brazil declared war on the axis.
1944 brazil sent 25 000 troops to fight alongside the u s army in europe.
main allied countries i i other allied countries i.
i main axis countries i i other axis countries battle 0 3000 km robinson projection f roosevelt 1933 1945 world 3000 miles i tankers along thee june 25 1941 roosevelt bans february 1942 japanese discrimination in defense industries relocation ordered decembers 1941 united states may1942 women s army at enters world war ii corps established tw rks more online.
map explore the interactive version of this map on networks.
r f timeline explore the m interactive version of the time line on networks.
4rc77c oce71a xs ex photos left page t library of congress b detail white house collection the white house historical association fight page detail white house collection the white house historical association i networks biography oveta culp hobby i ef biography henry kaiser i ef biography a philip randolph ef chart graph output of military products sf map japanese relocation camps ef map migration in the united states ef slideshow japanese there s more online.
lesson 1 wartime america sf slideshow the real rosie ef video women at war ef interactive self check quiz internment of sacrifices does war require.
reading helpdesk academic vocabulary draft coordinate justify it matters because after world war i america returned to isolationism.
when l nation entered world war ii in 1941 its armed forces rankei nineteenth in might behind the tiny european nation of belgium.
three years later the united states was producing 40 percent of the world s arms.
content vocabulary disenfranchised cost plus sunbelt zootsuit victory suit rationing victory garden taking notes key ideas and details organizing use the following graphic organizer to list changes for women and minorities during the war.
changes women african americans native americans hispanic americans japanese americans 1 1 building the military guidingquestion what roles did minorities and women play in the armed forces during world war ii.
within days of germanys attack on poland in 1939 president roosevelt expanded the army to 227 000 soldiers.
before the spring of 1940 many americans had opposed a peacetime draft opinions changed after france surrendered to germany in june 1940 in september of that year congress approved the selectiv training and service act a plan for the first peacetime draft in american history by a wide margin.
the man responsible for taking the flood of recruits and buildii large modern army capable of engaging the armed forces of germai and japan was general george c marshall chief of staff of the u s army and roosevelts chief military advisor.
marshall would guide largest expansion of the army in american history from fewer than 190 000 men at the time the war began in europe in 1939 to over 8 million men by the wars end.
you re in the army now more than 60 000 men enlisted in the month after the attack on pe harbor.
at first the flood of recruits overwhelmed the armys train facilities and equipment supplies.
in 1940 the department of agricul had transferred over 350 000 acres to the war department.
new ba such as the naval air station in jacksonville florida were built an existing ones such as eglin air force base were expanded.
many reci lived in tents rather than barracks carried sticks representing guns practiced maneuvers with trucks labeled tank 358 new recruits were given physical exams and injections against smallpox and typhoid.
then they were issued uniforms boots and available equipment and sent to basic training for eight weeks.
trainees drilled and exercised constantly and learned how to work as a team.
basic training helped break down barriers between soldiers.
recruits came from all over the country and training together created tight relationships among the troops.
a segregated military although basic training promoted unity most recruits did not encounter americans from every part of society.
at the start ofthe war the u s military was segregated.
african americans were organized into their own units but white officers generally commanded them.
military leaders typically assigned them to construction and supply units.
pushing for double v not all african americans wanted to support the war.
as one african american college student noted the army jim crows us employers and labor unions shut us out.
lynchings continue.
we are disenfranchised.
and spat upon.
what more could hitler do to us than that nevertheless most agreed that they should support their country.
one leading african american newspaper the pittsburgh courier launched the double v campaign to urge readers to support the war to win a double victory over hitlers racism abroad and racism at home.
african americans in combat under pressure from african american leaders president roosevelt ordered the armed services to recruit african americans and to put them into combat.
he also promoted colonel benjamin 0 davis sr the highest ranking african american officer to the rank of brigadier general.
in early 1941 the air force created its first african american unit the 99th pursuit squadron.
trained in tuskegee alabama the pilots became known as the tuskegee airmen.
commanded by lt colonel benjamin o davis jr the squadron helped win the battle of anzio in italy.
three other tuskegee squadrons protected american bombers as they flew to their targets.
known as the 332nd fighter group these squadrons flew 200 such missions without losing a single member to enemy aircraft.
also the african american 761st tank battalion was commended for service during the battle of the bulge.
other minorities in the military although japanese americans were not allowed to serve at first as the war progressed second generation japanese americans served in the 100th infantry battalion and the 442nd regimental combat team.
almost half had been in internment camps in teks texas essential knowledge and skills 7b evaluate the domestic and international leadership of franklin d roosevelt and harry truman during world war ii including the u s relationship with its allies and domestic industrys rapid mobilization for the war effort 7c analyze the function ofthe u s office of war information 7d analyze major issues of world war ii including the holocaust the internment of german italian and japanese americans and executive order 9066 and the development of conventional and atomic weapons 7f evaluate the military contributions of leaders during world war ii including omar bradley dwight eisenhower douglas macarthur chester a nimitz george marshall and george patton 7g explain the home front and how american patriotism inspired exceptional actions by citizens and military personnel including high levels of military enlistment volunteerism the purchase of war bonds victory gardens the bravery and contributions of the tuskegee airmen the flying tigers and the navajo code talkers and opportunities and obstacles for women and ethnic minorities 17a describe the economic effects of world war ii on the home front such as the end ofthe great depression rationing and increased opportunity for women and minority employment continued on the next page draft a system used for choosing people from the population to serve in the military disenfranchise to deprive of the right to vote skills practice charts graphs u s armed forces 1939 1946 source historical statistics ofthe united states 1 comparing and contrasting in which years were the armed forces at their highest and lowest levels.
2 drawing conclusions between which two years was there the greatest increase in the armed services.
what happened during this time period that might account forthe increase.
i when you hear new academic vocabulary words be sure to use them to help build your understanding of them.
this section uses the academic terms draft coordinate and justify.
include these words in sentences you write and in discussions with your classmates.
america and world warll 359 analyzing primary sources broadened perspectives 66 entrance into the army in august 1942 widened my horizons literally as well as experientially for the first time i travelled beyond a 200 mile radius from newark.
i marveled at the flatness of the prairie in illinois stops at posts in miami beach florida and richmond virginia were my introduction to the american south.
m carl degler from the history teacher vol.
23 1990 dbq drawing conclusions why might entering the army have changed a person s perspective.
continued from p 359 tcks texas essential knowledge and skills 19b explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events including world war i the great depression world war ii the 1960s and 9 11 27b explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture the military and medicine including vaccines the southwest.
together these units became the most decorated in the history of the united states military.
approximately 500 000 hispanic americans served in the armed forces despite racial hostility against them.
by the end ofthe war 17 hispanic americans had received the medal of honor.
about one third of all able bodied native american men aged 18 50 served in the military during the war.
more than 400 navajo marines served as code talkers relaying critical information and orders over fielc radios as spoken messages coded in their own language.
of the half million jewish americans who served in the military approximately 52 000 were decorated for bravery.
because so many european jews died as a result of the holocaust american jews took on increased leadership in the worldwide jewish community.
although the military did not end all segregation during the war it di integrate military bases in 1943 and steadily expanded the role of african americans within the armed forces.
these successes paved the way for president trumans decision to fully integrate the military in 1948 women join the armed forces women also joined the armed forces.
the army enlisted them for the firs time but barred them from combat.
many army jobs were administrative and clerical.
filling these jobs with women freed more men for combat.
congress first allowed women in the military in may 1942 by creatin the womens army auxiliary corps waac.
it appointed war departm official oveta culp hobby as waacs first director.
many women were unhappy that waac was not part of the regular army however.
about a year later the army replaced the waac with the womens army corps wac and hobby became a colonel.
the coast guard navy and marines followed suit and set up womens units.
another 68 000 women served as nurses in the army and navy.
ab 300 women serving as women airforce service pilots wasps made me than 12 000 flights to deliver planes to the war effort.
h reading progress check summarizing how did the status of women and minorities in the armed forces change during the war.
1 2 charts graphs mobilizing industry determining cause and effect when did tank production begin to drop.
why might this be so.
predicting consequences how might the changes in industrial production toward the end ofthe war have affected employment in the late 1940s.
source the big v american logistics in world war si.
industrial workers watch as new tanks rol out ofthe factory.
360 american economy in wartime guiding question howdidthe u s government mobilize the economy for war.
fighting a global war troubled president roosevelt but not british prime minister winston churchill who knew that victory depended on industry.
he compared the american economy to a gigantic boiler once the fire is lighted under it there is no limit to the power it can generate converting the economy war production increased rapidly after the attack on pearl harbor helped by existing government plans to build thousands of warplanes and a two ocean navy.
roosevelt believed that government and business had to work together to prepare for war.
he created the national defense advisory committee and asked business leaders to serve on the committee.
the president and his advisers believed that giving industry incentives to produce goods quickly was the best way to rapidly mobilize the economy.
normally the government asked companies to bid on contracts to produce military equipment a slow process.
instead the government signed cost plus contracts agreeing to pay a company the cost to make a product plus a guaranteed percentage as profit.
under the cost plus system the more and faster a company produced the more money it made.
although not cheap the system got war materials produced quickly and in quantity.
cost plus convinced many companies to convert to war production and congress authorized the reconstruction finance corporation rfc to make loans to companies wanting to convert.
american industry gets the job done by the fall of 1941 much had already been done to prepare the economy for war but it was still only partially mobilized.
the attack on pearl harbor changed everything.
by the summer of 1942 almost all major industries and some 200 000 companies had converted to war production.
together they made the nations wartime miracle possible.
cost plus a government contract to pay a manufacturer the cost to produce an item plus a guaranteed percentage analyzing primary sources the value of vehicles primarysource ohe greatest advantage the united states has enjoyed on the ground in the fighting so far was the jeep and the two and a half ton truck.
these are the instruments which moved and supplied united states troops in battle while the german army depended heavily on animal transport the united states profiting from the mass production achievements of its automotive industry had mobility that completely outclassed the enemy.
general george c marshall chief of staff for the u s army quoted in miracle of world war ii dbq analyzing historical documents making inferences why was u s mobility such an important advantage.
j america and world war ii 361 tanks replace cars the automobile industry was uniquely suited to mass producing military goods.
automobile pla began making trucks jeeps and tanks.
m production was critical because the count that could move troops and supplies most quickly usually won the battle.
automobile factories produced rifles helmets artillery and dozens of other pie of military equipment along with vehicles henry ford created an assembly line near detroit for the enormous b 24 liberator bomber.
the factory went on to build mo than 8 600 aircraft.
overall the auto industry made nearly one third of all wartime military equipment.
building liberty ships fords remarka achievement in aircraft production was it than matched by henry kaisers shipyard german submarines were sinking ameri cargo ships at a terrifying rate.
the unite states had to find a way to build cargo sh during world war ii millions of american women took jobs in wartime factories.
critical thinking making connettions what was the long term impact of women s wartime participation in the labor force.
as quickly as possible.
kaisers method emphasized speed and results.
instead of building an entire ship in one place from the keel up parts w prefabricated and brought to the shipyard for assembly.
kaisers shipyards built many kinds of ships but they were best knov for basic cargo ships called liberty ships.
when the war began it took 244 days to build the first liberty ship.
after kaiser shipyards applied th mass production techniques average production time dropped to 41 dai kaisers shipyards built 30 percent of all american ships constructed dui the war.
as war production grew controversies between business leaders government agencies and the military increased.
president roosevelt created the war production board wpb to direct priorities and production goals.
later he set up the office of war mobilization to settle disputes among the different agencies.
h reading progress check explaining how did the government work to quickly prepare the american ecoi for the war effort.
life on the home front guiding question how did world war ii change life for women and minorities in the united states.
the war dramatically changed american society.
unlike much of euro and asia which experienced devastation america benefited somewha from the war.
mobilizing the economy finally ended the great depress creating almost 19 million new jobs and nearly doubling the average family s income.
as an ohio worker noted o ne of the important thi that came out of world war ii was the arrival of the working class at a status level in this society.
the war integrated into the mainstream whole chunk of society that had been living on the edge the improvement in the economy did not come without cost.
families had to move to where the defense factories were located.
housing conditions were terrible.
the pressures and prejudices of the era led to strikes race riots and rising juvenile delinquency.
goods were rationed and taxes were higher.
workers earned more money but also worked longer hours.
when the war began american defense factories wanted to hire white men.
with so many men in the military however there simply were not enough white men to fill all ofthe jobs.
under pressure to produce employers began to recruit women and minorities.
women in defense plants during the great depression many people believed married women should not work outside the home especially if they took jobs that could go to men trying to support their families.
most working women were young single and employed in traditional female jobs such as domestic work or teaching.
the wartime labor shortage however forced factories to recruit married women for industrial jobs traditionally reserved for men.
although the government hired nearly 4 million women primarily for clerical jobs the women working in the factories captured the publics imagination.
the great symbol of the campaign to hire women was rosie the riveter a character from a popular song by the four vagabonds.
the lyrics told of rosie who worked in a factory while her boyfriend served in the marines.
images of rosie appeared on posters in newspapers and in nwti analyzing supreme court cases korematsu v united states 1944 background to the case during world war 11 president roosevelt s executive order 9066 and other legislation gave the military the power to exclude people of japanese descent from areas that were deemed important to u s national defense and security.
in 1942 toyosaburo korematsu refused to leave san leandro california which had been designated as a military area based on executive order 9066 korematsu was found guilty in federal district court of violating civilian exclusion order no.
34 korematsu petitioned the supreme court to review the federal court s decision.
how the court ruled in their decision the majority of the supreme court with three dissenting found that although exclusion orders based on race are constitutionally suspect the government is justified in time of emergency and peril to suspend citizens civil rights.
a request fora rehearing ofthe case in 1945 was denied.
japanese american women and their children talk together at the heart ofthe mountain relocation camp.
q drawing conclusions why did the supreme court find in favor ofthe government in this case even though the justices were suspicious of exclusion based on race.
q suggesting a solution under what circumstances if any do you think the government should be able to suspend civil liberties of all or specific groups of american citizens.
america and world war ii 363 sunbelt a new industrial region in southern california and the deep south that developed during world war ii coordinate to harmonize or bring into common action movement or condition thinkina like a i historian distinguishing fact from opinion when in defense of internment the case for racial profiling in world war ii and the war on terror was published in 2004 many historians were outraged.
author michelle malkin supported the decision to put japanese americans in internment camps.
the historians committee for fairness said it was contradicted by several decades of scholarly research malkin wrote that roosevelt had evidence that some spying was taking place on the west coast and that roosevelt was protecting national security.
zoot suit men s clothing of extreme cut typically consisting of a thigh length jacket with wide padded shoulders and baggy pleated pants with narrow cuffs magazines.
eventually 2 5 million women worked in shipyards aircraft factories and other manufacturing plants.
by the end of the war the number of working women had increased from 12 9 million to 18 8 million.
although most women were laid off or their jobs voluntarily after the war their success permanently changed american attitudes about women in the workplace.
african americans demand war work factories hired women but they resisted hiring african americans.
frustrated by the situation a philip randolph the head of the brotherh of sleeping car porters a major union for african american railroad workers decided to act.
he informed president roosevelt that he was organizing a march on washington in the interest of securing jobs in i national defense and.
integration into the.
military and naval force on june 25 1941 roosevelt issued executive order 8802 which sta there shall be no discrimination in the employment of workers in defei industries or government because of race creed color or national origi to enforce the order he created the fair employment practices commission the first federal civil rights agency since reconstruction.
mexican farmworkers the wartime economy also benefited mexicans.
in 1942 the federal government arranged for mexican farmworkers to help harvest crops in southwest as part of the bracero program which continued until 1964 more than 200 000 mexicans came to work during the war.
many also helped build and maintain railroads.
migrant workers thus became important to the southwests economic system.
q reading progress check describing what changes did women and minorities experience as a result of economic mobilization.
a nation on the move guidingquestion how did the wartime relocation of many americans affect u s government and sot the wartime economy created millions of new jobs leading 15 million americans to move to find work.
the growth of southern california and cities in the deep south created a new industrial region the sunbelt.
c with war industries had to find room for the thousands of arriving worke tent cities and parks filled with tiny trailers sprang up.
congress authors 150 million for housing in 1940 in 1942 roosevelt created the national housing agency nha to coordinate government housing programs.
racism leads to violence many african americans left the south for jobs in war factories in the north and west.
however african americans often faced suspicion an intolerance.
racial violence erupted in detroit on sunday june 20 194 fighting between white and african american teens triggered a citywk riot that left 25 african americans and 9 whites dead.
in los angeles the fear of juvenile crime and racism against mexican americans became linked in the zoot suit riots.
popular with mexican american teenagers zoot suits had very baggy pleated pants and an overstuffed knee length jacket with wide lapels.
most men to conserve fab 364 americans donated pots tires tin cans car bumpers broken radiators and rusting bicycles to scrap drives held during world war ii.
critical thinking drawing conclusions how did holding scrap drives help the government prevent shortages.
for the war wore a victory suit with no vest no cuffs a short jacket and narrow lapels.
in june 1943 after hearing rumors that zoot suiters had attacked several sailors some 2 500 soldiers and sailors attacked mexican american neighborhoods in los angeles.
japanese german and italian american relocation when japan attacked pearl harbor many americans turned their anger against japanese immigrants and japanese americans.
on february 19 1942 president roosevelt signed executive order 9066 allowing the war department to declare any part of the united states a military zone and to remove people from that zone as needed.
he must have felt justified four days later when a japanese submarine surfaced north of santa barbara california and shelled an oil refinery.
most of the west coast was declared a military zone and people of japanese ancestry were evacuated to 10 internment camps farther inland.
in 1988 president ronald reagan apologized to japanese americans on behalf of the u s government and signed legislation granting 20 000 to each surviving japanese american who had been interned.
thousands of people of german and italian descent also had their freedom restricted.
all unnaturalized residents of german and italian descent aged 14 years or over were deemed enemy aliens and subject to regulations including travel restrictions and the seizure of personal property.
more than 5 000 were arrested and sent to live in military internment camps.
d reading progress check determining cause and effect how did both voluntary and forced movement during world war ii change the united states.
daily life in wartime guiding question what steps did the government take to stabilize wages and prices.
both wages and prices began to rise quickly during the war because of the high demand for workers and raw materials.
worried about inflation roosevelt created the office of price administration and civilian supply opacs and the office of economic stabilization oes to regulate wages and certain prices.
at the end of the war prices had risen only about half i as much as they had during world war i i while opacs and oes worked to control inflation the war labor board wlb tried to prevent strikes.
most american unions issued a no j strike pledge instead asking the wlb to mediate wage disputes.
by the end of the war the wlb had helped settle more than 17 000 disputes.
support and sacrifices 5 high demand for raw materials and supplies created shortages.
opacs began rationing or limiting the purchase of many products to make sure.
enough were available for military use.
households picked up a book of j rationing coupons every month for different kinds of food.
when people bought food they had to have enough coupon points to cover their i purchases.
meat sugar fats oils processed foods coffee shoes and gasoline victory suit a men s suit with no vest no cuffs a short jacket and narrow lapels worn during world war ii in order to save fabric for the war effort justify to prove or to show to be just right or reasonable rationing restricting the amount of an item an individual can have due to a limited supply america and world war ii 365 were all rationed.
driving distances were restricted and the speed limit v set at 35 miles per hour to save gas and rubber.
americans also planted gardens in backyards schoolyards city parks and empty lots to produce more food for the war effort.
the government victory garden garden encouraged victory gardens by praising them in film reels pamphlets an planted by dtizens during war to official statements.
the government organized scrap drives to collect rubb raise vegetables for home use tin aluminum and steel.
leaving more for the troops the federal government spent more than 300 billion during world w ii more money than it had spent from washingtons administration to th end of franklin roosevelts second term.
congress raised taxes although i as high as roosevelt requested due to public opposition to large tax increa as a result the extra taxes collected covered only 45 percent of the wars ci to make up the difference the government issued war bonds.
buying b is a way to loan money to the government.
in exchange for the money the government promised to repay the bonds purchase price plus interest at soi future date.
individual americans demonstrated their patriotism and commitment to winning the war by buying nearly 50 billion worth of war bonds.
banks insurance companies and other financial institutions bought rest more than 100 billion worth of bonds.
despite the hardships the overwhelming majority of americans believe the war had to be fought.
although the war brought many changes to the u states most americans remained united behind one goal winning the wa hollywood goes to war in 1942 president roosevelt created the office of war information 0 the owis role was to improve the publics understanding of the war ai act as a liaison office with the various media.
the owi established det guidelines for filmmakers including a set of questions to be considers before making a movie such as will this picture help win the war p reading progress check evaluating how did the office of price administration and civilian supply assur there were enough supplies for military use.
lesson 1 review reviewing vocabulary 1 explaining how did cost plus contracts help the united states prepare for war.
7b using your notes 2 evaluating use the notes that you completed during the lesson to evaluate which groups benefited from the war and how they did so.
7g 17a answering the guiding questions 3 summarizing what roles did minorities and women play in the armed forces during world war ii.
7g 4 analyzing how did the u s government mobilize the economy for war.
7b 17a 5 assessing how did world war ii change life for women am minorities in the united states.
7g 17a 6 mailing connections how did the wartime relocation of r americans affect u s government and society.
17a 7 specifying what steps did the government take to stabili wages and prices.
17a writing activity informative explanatory think about what you learned about women and minorities in the workforce durii world war i write a short essay in which you compare the i of women and minorities in the workforce during world wt and world war ii.
7g 17a 366 etworks here s more online.
biography chester nimitz image battle of tarawa image kamikaze pilots primarysource code breaking video forced labor in asia interactive self check quiz z k hilippin ea jeon philippines leyte gulf 123 26 1944jt lesson 2 the war in the pacific ds of sacrifices does war require.
helpdesk academic vocabulary code content vocabulary amphtrac kamikaze it matters because the early battles ofthe war required changes in strategy from all sides.
in the pacific the battle of midway was a major turning point against the japanese.
after that american victory admiral nimitz and general macarthur led american forces in a steady advance across the pacific.
holding the line against japan guidingquestion why was the doolittle raid important for u s forces in the pacific.
taking notes key ideas and details organizing use the following graphic organizer to record the major battles discussed and the victor in each.
tfljs texas essential knowledge and skills 7d analyze major issues of world war ii including the holocaust the internment of german italian and japanese americans and executive order 9066 and the development of conventional and atomic weapons 7e analyze major military events of world war ii including the battle of midway the u s military advancement through the pacific islands the bataan death march the invasion of normandy fighting the war on multiple fronts and the liberation of concentration camps continued on the next page admiral chester nimitz the commander of the united states navy in the pacific began planning operations against the japanese navy.
although the japanese had badly damaged the american fleet at pearl harbor they had missed the american aircraft carriers which were at sea on a mission.
the united states had several carriers in the pacific and nimitz was determined to use them.
in the days just after pearl harbor however nimitz could do little to stop japans advance into southeast asia.
the fall of the philippines a few hours after bombing pearl harbor the japanese attacked american airfields in the philippines.
two days later they landed troops.
the american and filipino forces defending the philippines were badly outnumbered.
their commander general douglas macarthur retreated to the bataan peninsula.
using the peninsulas rugged terrain the troops held out for more than three months.
by march in desperation the troops ate cavalry horses and mules.
the lack of food and supplies along with diseases such as malaria scurvy and dysentery took their toll.
the women of the army nurse corps worked on bataan in primitive conditions.
patients slept in the open air.
one nurse rose meier reported if we needed more room we got our axes and chopped some bamboo trees down america and world war ii 367 general douglas macarthur 1880 1964 general douglas macarthur graduated from west point in 1903 one of his first military assignments was in the philippines site of his later world war ii defeat and subsequent victory.
in 1904 he was appointed aide de camp to his father general arthur macarthur in japan.
following his world war ii success in the pacific he was appointed supreme commander allied powers scap in japan.
there he decreased japan s military and helped reestablish its economy.
critical thinking evaluating what is the significance of macarthur s early military experience in the philippines and japan.
realizing macarthurs capture would demoralize the american people president roosevelt ordered the general to evacuate to australia.
macarthur promised li came through and i shall return.
on april 9 1942 the weary defenders of the bataan peninsula final surrendered.
nearly 78 000 prisoners of war were forced to march sicl exhausted and starving 65 miles 105 km to a japanese prison camp.
almost 10 000 troops died on this march which was later to be called t.
bataan death march.
private leon beck was taken prisoner when bataa surrendered and took part in the bataan death march for 13 days befor escaping.
he later recalled primary source continued front p 367 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 7f evaluate the military contributions of leaders during world war ii including omar bradley dwight eisenhower douglas macarthur chester a nimitz george marshall and george patton 7g explain the home front and how american patriotism inspired exceptional actions by citizens and military personnel including high levels of military enlistment volunteerism the purchase of war bonds victory gardens the bravery and contributions of the tuskegee airmen the flying tigers and the navajo code talkers and opportunities and obstacles for women and ethnic minorities continued on the next page they d halt us in front of these big artesian wells so we could see the water and they wouldn us have any.
anyone who would make a break for water would be shot or bayoneted.
then they we there.
finally it got so bad further along the road that you never got away from the stench of deatl there were bodies laying all along the road in various degrees of decomposition swollen burst o maggots crawling by the thousands from death march the survivors ofbatai sixty six women nurses were also captured and sent to the university o santo tomas in manila.
they remained there with 11 navy nurses anc some 3 000 allied civilians until early in 1945 although the troops in the bataan peninsula surrendered a small f held out on the island of corregidor in manila bay.
finally in may 194 corregidor surrendered.
the philippines had fallen to the japanese.
the doolittle raid on tokyo even before the philippines fell president roosevelt was searching for way to raise the morale of the american people.
he wanted to bomb tc but american planes could reach tokyo only if an aircraft carrier brouj them close enough.
however japanese ships in the north pacific preve carriers from getting near japan.
in early 1942 a military planner suggested replacing the carriers u short range bombers with long range b 25 bombers that could attack f farther away.
the only problem was that although b 25s could take off from a carrier the bombers could not land on its short deck.
after attac japan they would have to land in china.
president roosevelt put lieutenant colonel james doolittle in command of the mission to bomb tokyo.
at the end of march a crane loaded sixteen b 25s onto the aircraft carrier hornet.
the next day the hornet headed west across the pacific.
on april 18 american bombs f on japan for the first time.
japan changes strategy while americans rejoiced in the air forces success japanese leaders w aghast at the raid.
those bombs could have killed emperor hirohito w was revered as a god.
the doolittle raid convinced japanese leaders to change their strategy.
before the raid the japanese navy had disagreed about the next ste the officers in charge of the navys planning wanted to cut american supply lines to australia by capturing the south coast of new guinea.
1 commander of the fleet admiral yamamoto wanted to attack midway is and the last american base in the north pacific west of hawaii.
yamamoto believed that attacking midway would lure the american fl into battle and enable his fleet to destroy it.
368 these navajo code talkers assigned to a pacific based marine regiment relay orders using a field radio.
critical thinking evaluating what advantages did the code talkers provide to american forces.
6 o x after doolittles raid the japanese war planners dropped their opposition to yamamotos idea.
the american fleet had to be destroyed to protect tokyo from bombing.
the attack on new guinea would still go ahead but only three aircraft carriers were assigned to the mission.
all of the other carriers were ordered to assault midway.
the battle of the coral sea the japanese believed that they could safely proceed with two attacks at once because they thought their operations were secret.
what the japanese did not know was that an american team of code breakers based in hawaii had already broken the japanese navys secret code for conducting operations.
in march 1942 decoded japanese messages alerted the united states to the japanese attack on new guinea.
in response admiral nimitz sent two carriers the yorktown and the lexington to intercept the japanese in the coral sea.
there in early may carriers from both sides launched all out airstrikes against each other.
although the japanese sank the lexington and badly damaged the yorktown the american attacks prevented the japanese from landing on new guineas south coast and kept the supply lines to australia open.
the navajo code talkers when american marines stormed an enemy beach they used radios to communicate.
using radios however meant that the japanese could intercept and translate the messages.
in the midst of the battle there was no time to use a code machine.
acting upon the suggestion of philip johnston an engineer who had lived on a navajo reservation as a child the marines recruited navajos to serve as code talkers the navajo language had no written alphabet and was known only to the navajo and a few missionaries and anthropologists.
the navajo recruits developed code words using their own language that stood for military terms.
for example the navajo word jay sho or buzzard was code for bomber lo tso or whale meant battleship and ni ma si or potatoes stood for grenades.
code talkers proved invaluable in combat.
they could relay a message in minutes that would have taken a code machine operator hours to encipher and transmit.
during the battle of iwo jima code talkers transmitted more than 800 messages during the first 48 hours as the marines struggled to continued from p 368 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 27b explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture the military and medicine including vaccines code a signal or symbol used to represent something that is to be kept secret the navajo language is not a written language and only a small number of people understand it.
criticalthinking drawing conclusions what was the advantage of having a code that the japanese could not decipher.
geography connectionchar the battle of midway was fought predominantly by aircraft.
the world in spatial terms when did japan launch the attack on midway.
physical systems why were aircraft carriers so vital to the war in the pacific.
get ashore under intense bombardment.
sworn to secrecy their mission not revealed until 1971 in 2001 congress awarded the code talkers the congressional gold medal for their unique contribution during the wa h reading progress check explaining what did the doolittle raid on tokyo accomplish.
battle of midway guiding question why was the battle of midway a turning point in the war in the pacific.
back at pearl harbor the code breaking team now learned ofthe plan attack midway.
with so many ships at sea admiral yamamoto transmi the plans for the midway attack by radio using the same code the americans had already cracked.
admiral nimitz had been waiting for the opportunity to ambush tl japanese fleet.
he immediately ordered carriers to take up positions ne midway.
unaware that they were heading into an ambush the japanese launched their aircraft against midway on june 4 1942 the american were ready.
the japanese ran into a blizzard of antiaircraft fire and 38 planes were shot down.
as the japanese prepared a second wave to attack midway aircraft from the american carriers hornet yorktown enterprise then launched a counterattack.
the american planes caugh japanese carriers with fuel bombs and aircraft exposed on their flight d within minutes three japanese carriers were reduced to burning wre 370 a fourth was sunk a few hours later and admiral yamamoto ordered his remaining ships to retreat.
the battle of midway was a turning point in the war.
the japanese navy lost four large carriers the heart of its fleet.
just six months after pearl harbor the united states had stopped the japanese advance.
the victory was not without cost however.
the battle killed 362 americans and 3 057 japanese.
g reaping progress check explaining why was the united states able to ambush the japanese at midway and turn the tide of the war.
driving back japan guiding questions what was the military strategy behind island hopping.
was it successful.
the american plan to defeat japan called for a two pronged attack.
the pacific fleet commanded by admiral nimitz would advance through the central pacific by hopping from one island to the next closer and closer to japan.
meanwhile general macarthurs troops would advance through the solomon islands capture the north coast of new guinea and then launch an invasion to retake the philippines.
island hopping in the pacific by the fall of 1943 the navy was ready to launch its island hopping campaign but the geography of the central pacific posed a problem.
many of the islands were coral reef atolls.
the water over the coral reef was not always deep enough to allow landing craft to get to the shore.
if the landing craft ran aground on the analyzing primary sources sherrod on the battle of tarawa two more marines scaled the seawall one carrying a twin cylindered tank strapped to his shoulders the other holding the nozzle of the flamethrower a khaki clad figure ran out the side entrance.
the flamethrower caught him in its withering stream of intense fire.
as soon as it touched him the japanese soldier flared up like a piece of celluloid.
he was dead instantly charred almost to nothingness robert sherrod from tarawa the story of a battle dbq drawing conclusions based on this excerpt how do you think fighting continued.
geography connection 120e 140e other troops fighting in the pacific included the american volunteer group avg known as the flying tigers who helped defend china against japanese forces.
criticalthinking analyzing information how did aircraft help support the troops on the ground.
amphtrac an amphibious tractor used to move troops from ships to shore reef the troops would have to wade to the beach.
as some 5 000 united states marines learned at tarawa atoll wading ashore coul cause very high casualties.
tarawa part of the gilbert islands was the navys first objective.
the japanese base there had to captured in order to put air bases in the nearby marshall islands.
when the landing craft hit the reef ai least 20 ships ran aground.
the marines h to plunge into shoulder high water and wa several hundred yards to the beach.
raked i japanese fire only one marine in three made ashore.
once the marines reached the beach t battle was still far from over.
although many troops died wading ashore on vehicle had been able to cross the reef and deliver its troops onto the beaches.
the vehicle was a boat with tank tracks nicknamed the alligator this amphibious tractor or amphtrac had been invented in the late 1930s to rescue people in florida swamps.
it had never been used in combat and the navy decided to buy only 2 of them in 1941 if more had been available at tarawa american casualties probably would have been much lower.
more than 1 000 marines died on tarawa.
photos of bodies lying crumpled next to burning landing craft shocked americans back home.
ma people began to wonder how many lives would be lost in defeating japan.
the next assault kwajalein atoll in the marshall islands went mu more smoothly.
this time all of the troops went ashore in amphtracs.
although the japanese resisted fiercely the marines captured kwajalein and nearby eniwetok with far fewer casualties.
after the marshall islands the navy targeted the mariana islands.
ameri military planners wanted to use the marianas as a base for a new heavy bomb the b 29 superfortress.
the b 29 could fly farther than any other plane in the world.
from airfields in the marianas b 29s could bomb japan.
admiral nin decided to invade three of the mariana islands saipan tinian and guam.
despite strong japanese resistance american troops captured all three by august 1944 a few months later b 29s began bombing japan.
macarthur returns as the forces under admiral nimitz hopped across the central pacific general douglas macarthurs troops began their own campaign in the southwest pacific.
the campaign began by invading guadalcanal in the solomon islands east of new guinea in august 1942 it continued until early 1944 when macarthurs troops finally captured enough islands to surround the main japanese base in the region.
in response the japanesi withdrew their ships and aircraft from the base although they left 100 0 troops behind to hold the island.
worried that the navys advance across the central pacific was leavin him behind macarthur ordered his forces to leap nearly 600 miles 9661 to capture the japanese base at hollandia on the north coast of new guinea.
shortly after securing new guinea macarthurs troops seized t island of morotai the last stop before the philippines.
to take back the philippines the united states assembled an enormous invasion force.
in october 1944 over 700 ships carrying more than 160 000 372 photo digital stock corbis royalty troops sailed for leyte gulf in the philippines.
on october 20 the troops beg to land on leyte an island on the eastern side of the philippines.
a few hours after the invasion began macarthur headed to the beach.
upon reaching the shore he strode to a radio and spoke into the microphone people ofthe philippines i have returned.
by the grace of almighty god our forces stand again on philippine soil to stop the american invasion the japanese sent four aircraft carriers toward the philippines from the north and secretly dispatched another fleet from the west.
believing the japanese carriers were leading the main attack most of the american carriers protecting the invasion left leyte gulf and headed north to stop them.
seizing their chance the japanese warships to the west raced through the philippine islands into leyte gulf and ambushed the remaining american ships.
the battle of leyte gulf was the largest naval battle in history.
it was also the first time that the japanese used kamikaze attacks.
kamikaze means divine wind in japanese.
it refers to the great storm that destroyed the mongol fleet during its invasion of japan in the thirteenth century.
kamikaze pilots would deliberately crash their planes into american ships killing themselves but also inflicting severe damage.
luckily for the americans just as their situation was becoming desperate the japanese commander believing more american ships were on the way ordered a retreat.
although the japanese fleet had retreated the campaign to recapture the philippines from the japanese was long and grueling.
more than 80 000 japanese were killed fewer than 1 000 surrendered.
macarthurs troops did not capture manila until march 1945 the battle left the city in ruins and more than 100 000 filipino civilians dead.
the remaining japanese retreated into the rugged terrain north of manila they were still fighting in august 1945 when word came that japan had surrendered.
an kamikaze during world war ii a japanese suicide pilot whose mission was to crash into his target victory in the battle of leyte gulf enables macarthur to return to the philippines.
critical thinking analyzing visuals how does the photo represent the success ofthe island hopping strategy.
d reading progress check describing how did the united states navy successfully drive back japanese forces in the pacific.
lesson 2 review reviewing vocabulary 1 explaining explain how amphtracs helped the marines land more safely on pacific islands.
7d 278 using your notes 2 explaining use your notes on major pacific battles to explain the causes and effects ofthe effort to defeat the japanese in 1942.
7e answering the guiding questions j assessing why was the doolittle raid important for u s forces in the pacific.
7e 7f 4 drawing conclusions why was the battle of midway a turning point in the war in the pacific.
7e 5 evaluating what was the military strategy behind islandhopping.
was it successful.
7e writing activity argument suppose you are a journalist in 1971 reporting on the government s disclosure about the navajo code talkers.
write a newspaper article informing americans how the code talkers assisted the marines at the battle of iwo jima.
7g america and world war ii 373 networks there s more online.
biography omar bradley biography george c marshall ef biography george patton map the battle of stalingrad ef video the war in europe interactive self check quiz lesson 3 the war in europe target intense briefly content vocabulary halting the germans guidingquestion why did churchill and roosevelt want to attack german controlled ai north africa before areas in europe.
periphery convoy system taking notes key ideas and details organizing use the following graphic organizer to record the major battles discussed and when each was fought.
international leadership of franklin d roosevelt and harry truman during world war ii including the u s relationship with its allies and domestic industrys rapid mobilization for the war effort continued on the next page since 1940 u s military strategists had discussed with presiden roosevelt the pressures of a two front war.
he wanted to get u s troops into battle in europe but prime minister churchill did n believe the united states and britain were ready to invade eurof instead the prime minister wanted to attack the periphery or edges of the german empire.
roosevelt eventually agreed andi july 1942 he ordered the invasion of morocco and algeria tw french territories indirectly under german control.
the battle for north africa roosevelt decided to invade for two reasons.
the invasion woul give the army some experience without requiring a lot of troops it would also help the british troops fight the germans in egypt most of britains empire including india hong kong singapon malaya and australia sent supplies to britain through egypts suez canal.
german general erwin rommel whose success earned him nickname desert fox commanded the afrika korps after a 12 day battle at the egyptian coastal city of el alamein the brit secured the suez canal and forced rommel to retreat in novem 1942 despite this defeat german forces remained a serious thr in north africa.
later that month american troops commanded by general dwight d eisenhower invaded north africa.
when the americ advanced into the mountains of western tunisia they fought th german army for the first time.
at the battle of kasserine pass the americans were outmaneuvered and outfought.
they suffered roughly 7 000 casualties and lost nearly 200 tanks.
eisenhower fired the general who led the attack and put general george patton in command.
the american and british forces finally pushed the germans back.
on may 13 1943 the last german troops in north africa surrendered.
the battle of the atlantic after germany declared war on the united states german submarines entered american coastal waters.
american cargo ships were easy targets especially at night when the glow from the cities in the night sky silhouetted the vessels.
to protect the ships citizens on the east coast dimmed their lights every evening and put up special blackout curtains if they had to drive at night they did so with their headlights off.
by august 1942 german submarines had sunk about 360 american ships along the east coast including many oil tankers.
the loss of so many ships convinced the u s navy to set up a convoy system in which cargo ships traveled in groups escorted by warships.
the convoy system improved the situation dramatically making it much more difficult for a submarine to torpedo a cargo ship and escape without being attacked.
the spring of 1942 marked the high point of the german submarine campaign.
in may and june alone more than 1 2 million tons of shipping were sunk.
yet in those same two months american and british shipyards built more than 1 1 million tons of new shipping.
at the same time american airplanes and warships began to use new technology including radar sonar and depth charges to locate and attack submarines.
as the new technology began to take its toll on german submarines the battle of the atlantic turned in favor of the allies.
continued from p 374 tbb texas essential knowledge and skills 7d analyze major issues of world war ii including the holocaust the internment of german italian and japanese americans and executive order 9066 and the development of conventional and atomic weapons 7e analyze major military events of world war ii including the battle of midway the u s military advancement through the pacific islands the bataan death march the invasion of normandy fighting the war on multiple fronts and the liberation of concentration camps continued on the next page periphery the outer boundary of something target something or someone fired on or marked for attack convoy system a system in which merchant ships travel with naval vessels for protection the battle of stalingrad adolf hitler was convinced that defeating the soviet union depended on destroying the soviet economy.
in may 1942 he ordered his army to capture strategic oil fields factories and farmlands in southern russia and ukraine.
the city of stalingrad which controlled the volga river and was a major railroad junction was the key to the attack.
if the german army captured stalingrad they would cut off the soviets from the resources they needed to stay in the war.
a british tank successfully navigates a wide ditch in the desert outside a town in north africa.
criticalthinking analyzing primary sources howdo you think the environment made combat in north africa challenging.
a soviet gun crew fights against nazi forces in stalingrad.
only one day after the nazis publicly boasted that the city would fall to them the red army turned the tide ofthe battle.
criticalthinking analyzing images howdoyou think the environment made combat in stalingrad difficult.
when german troops entered stalingrad in mid september stalin ordered his troops to hold the city all costs.
the germans were forced to fight from ho to house losing thousands of soldiers in the process unlike the soviets they were not equipped to fight in the bitter cold.
on november 23 soviet reinforcements arrived and surrounded stalingrad trapping almost 250 000 german troops.
when the battle ended in february 1943 some 91 000 germai had surrendered.
only 5 000 of them survived the soviet prison camps.
each side lost nearly half a million soldiers.
the battle of stalingrad put the germans on the defensive.
continued from p 375 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 7f evaluate the military contributions of leaders during world war ii including omar bradley dwight eisenhower douglas macarthur chester a nimitz george marshall and george patton 26f discuss the importance of congressional medal of honor recipients including individuals of all races and genders such as vernon j baker alvin york and roy benavidez h reaping progress check explaining what was roosevelt s purpose in invading north africa.
striking germany and italy guiding question iv iof were the goals of strategic bombing in germany and the invasion of sicily.
the allied invasion of north africa in november 1942 had shown that a large scale invasion from the sea was possible.
the success of the landinj convinced roosevelt to meet again with churchill to plan the next stage the war.
in january 1943 roosevelt headed to casablanca morocco tor the prime minister.
at the casablanca conference roosevelt and churchill agreed to step up the bombing of germany.
the goal of this new campaign was the progressive destruction of the german military industrial and economic system and the undermining of the morale of the german people the allies also agreed to attack the axis on the island of sicily.
churchill called italy the soft underbelly of europe.
he was convinced that the italians would quit the war if the allies invaded their homeland strategic bombing the allies had been bombing germany even before the casablanca conference.
britains royal air force had dropped an average of 2 300 2 093 t of explosives on germany every month for more than three y the united states eighth army air force had dropped an additional 1 tons 1 365 t of bombs during the last six months of 1942 these numl were small however compared to the massive new campaign.
between january 1943 and may 1945 the royal air force and the united states eighth army air force dropped approximately 53 000 tons 48 2301 of explosives on germany every month.
the bombing campaign did not destroy germanys economy or undermine german morale but it did cause a severe oil shortage and wrecked the railroad system.
it also destroyed so many aircraft factork that germany s air force could not replace its losses.
by the time the al landed in france they had control of the air ensuring that their troop would not be bombed.
striking the soft underbelly as the bombing campaign against germany intensified plans to invad sicily also moved ahead.
general dwight d eisenhower commanded invasion with general patton and british general bernard montgome 376 heading the ground forces.
the invasion began before dawn on july 10 1943 despite bad weather the allied troops made it ashore with few casualties.
a new amphibious truck delivered supplies and artillery to the soldiers on the beach.
eight days after the troops came ashore american tanks smashed through enemy lines and captured the western half of the island.
pattons troops then headed east while the british attacked from the south.
by august 17 the germans had evacuated the island.
the attack on sicily created a crisis within the italian government.
the king of italy victor emmanuel and a group of italian generals decided that it was time to depose mussolini.
on july 25 1943 the king invited the dictator to his palace.
my dear duce the king began its no longer any good.
italy has gone to bits.
army morale is at rock bottom.
the soldiers dont want to fight anymore.
you can certainly be under no illusion as to italys feelings with regard to yourself.
at this moment you are the most hated man in italy the king then arrested mussolini and the new italian government began negotiating a surrender to the allies.
following italys surrender however german troops seized control of northern italy including rome and returned mussolini to power.
the germans then took up positions near the heavily fortified town of cassino.
the terrain near cassino was steep barren and rocky.
rather than geographyt the war against germany and italy was fought on three fronts.
the world in spatial terms how much west to east territory did the axis control neartheendofl942.
places and regions what allied victories are shown in north africa.
vernon baker 1919 2010 u s army company c 370th regiment 92nd infantry division on april 5 1945 first lieutenant vernon baker and his platoon advanced toward castle aghinolfi a german stronghold in the mountains nearviareggio italy.
baker and about 25 others moved ahead ofthe group and baker successfully destroyed an observation post a dugout and three machine gun positions.
in 1996 his actions earned him a medal of honor for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of his own life above and beyond the call of duty in action on 5 and 6 april 1945.
this made baker one of seven african american world war ii veterans to receive belated recognition for their service.
critical thinking drawing conclusions why were baker s actions so important to the assault on castle aghinolfi.
attack such difficult terrain the allies landed at anzio behind german lines.
instead of retreating however as the allies had hoped the germans surrounded the allied troops near anzio.
it took the allies five months to break through the german lines at cassino and anzio.
finally in late may 1944 the germans retreated.
less than two weeks later the allies captured rome.
fighting in italy continued however for another year.
the italian campaign was one ofthe bloodiest in the war with more than 300 000 allied casualties.
the tehran conference roosevelt wanted to meet with stalin before the allies invaded france.
in late 1943 stalin agreed proposing that roosevelt and churchill meet him in tehran iran.
the leaders reached several agreements.
stalin promised to launch a full scale offensive against the germans when the allies invaded france in 1944 roosevelt and stalin then agreed to divide germany after the war so that it would never again threaten world peace.
stalin promised that once germany was defeated the soviet union would help the united states against japan.
he also accepted roosevelts proposal of an international peacekeeping organization after the war.
part of the agreement proclaimed primarysource m the common understanding which we have here reached guarantees that victory will be ours.
ant as to peace we are sure that our concord will win an enduring peace.
we recognize fully the supren responsibility to make a peace which will command the goodwill ofthe overwhelming mass of th peoples ofthe world and banish the scourge and terror of war for many generations 99 from the tehran declaration december 1 b reading progress check evaluating what did roosevelt and other leaders hope to accomplish by attackim germany and italy.
the d day invasion guiding question what if d day had failed and germany had defeated the allies in europe.
after the conference in tehran roosevelt headed to cairo egypt where 1 and churchill continued planning an invasion of france to force german again fight the war on two fronts.
one major decision still had to be made the president had to choose the commander for operation overlord the code name for the invasion.
roosevelt selected general eisenhower.
planning operation overlord hitler had fortified the french coast along the english channel but he d not know when or where the allies would land.
the germans believed tl landing would be in pas de calais the area of france closest to britain.
the allies encouraged this belief by placing dummy equipment along the coast across from calais.
the real target was farther south a 60 mile stre of five beaches along the normandy coast.
the selection of a site for the largest amphibious landing in history wa one ofthe biggest decisions of world war ii.
allied planners considered coastlines from denmark to portugal in search of a sheltered location with firm flat beaches within range of friendly fighter planes in england.
there ad to be enough roads and paths to move jeeps and trucks off the beache 378 and to accommodate the hundreds of thousands of american canadian and british troops set to stream ashore following the invasion.
an airfield and a seaport that the allies could use were also needed.
most important was a reasonable expectation of achieving the element of surprise.
planners also discussed who should lead france after the invasion.
general eisenhower had informed charles de gaulle that the french resistance forces would assist in the liberation of paris but president roosevelt was not sure he trusted de gaulle and refused to recognize him as the official french leader.
by the spring of 1944 more than 1 5 million american soldiers 12 000 airplanes and 5 million tons 4 6 million t of equipment had been sent to england.
only setting the invasion date and giving the command to go remained.
the invasion had to begin at night to hide the ships crossing the english channel.
the ships had to arrive at low tide so that they could see the beach obstacles.
the low tide had to come at dawn so that gunners bombarding the coast could see their targets.
paratroopers who would be dropped behind enemy lines needed a moonlit night to see where to land.
perhaps most important of all was good weather.
a storm would ground the airplanes and high waves would swamp landing craft.
given all these requirements there were only a few days each month to begin the invasion.
the first opportunity was from june 5 to 7 1944 eisenhowers planning staff referred to the day any operation began by the letter d the invasion date therefore came to be known as d day.
heavy cloud cover strong winds and high waves made june 5 impossible.
the weather was forecast to improve briefly a day later.
the channel would still be rough but the landing ships and aircraft briefly for a short time allied troops from various parts ofthe british coast headed for normandy beaches for the d day invasion.
criticalthinking determining cause and effect how did the d day invasion turn the tide ofworldwarll.
analyzing primary sources fighting at omaha beach f two hundred yards out we took a direct hit somehow or other the ramp door opened up and the men in front were being struck by machine gun fire.
everyone started to jump off into the water the tide was moving us so rapidly we would grab out at some of those underwater obstructions and mines built on telephone poles and girders and hang on.
wed take cover then make a dash through the surf to the next one fifty feet beyond.
lieutenant john bentz carroll from d day piercing the atlantic wall 1994 dbq making inferences based on this description what can you infer about the manner ofthe landing on omaha beach.
intense existing in an extreme degree skills practice explain the events of one of the major battles in world war ii.
before you start think about interesting and specific details of the battle.
include as many of these details as you can in your explanation.
could operate.
after looking at forecasts one last time shortly after midnight on june 6 1944 eisenhower gave the final order ok well go the longest day nearly 7 000 ships carrying more than 100 000 soldiers headed for normandys coast.
at the same time 23 000 paratroopers were dropped inland east and west of the beaches.
allied fighter bombers raced up and down the coast hitting bridges bunkers and radar sites.
at dawn allied warships began a tremendous barrage.
thousands of shells rained down o the beaches code named utah omaha gold sword and juno the american landing at utah beach went well.
the german defenses were weak and in less than three hours the troops had captured the bead and moved inland suffering fewer than 200 casualties.
on the eastern flank the british and canadian landings also went well.
by the end of the day british and canadian forces were several miles inland.
omaha beach however was a different story.
surrounded at both ends by cliffs that rose wall like from the sea omaha beach was only foui miles long.
the entire beach overlooked a 150 foot high bluff and there were only five ravines leading from the beach to the top of the bluff.
the germans had made full use of the geographic advantage the high bluff gave them.
they dug trenches and built concrete bunkers for machine guns at the top of the cliffs and positioned them to guard the ravines leading to the beach.
under intense german fire the american assault almost disintegrated.
general omar bradley commander of the american forces landing at omaha and utah began making plans to evacuate.
slowly however the american troops began to knock out the german defenses.
more landing craft arrived ramming their way through the obstacles to get to the bead nearly 2 500 americans were either killed or wounded on omaha but by early afternoon bradley received this message troops formerly pinned down on beaches.
are advancing up heights behind beaches by the end of the day nearly 35 000 american troops had landed at omaha and another 23 000 had landed at utah.
more than 75 000 british and canadi troops were on shore as well.
the invasion had succeeded.
h reading progress check summarizing why was it so important that all ofthe conditions be met before eisenhower could order d day to begin.
what would have happened if the invasic had failed.
reviewing vocabulary 1 explaining explain how using the convoy system helped the united states begin winning the battle ofthe atlantic.
7e using your notes 2 sequencing review the notes you completed during the lesson and use them to sequence the major allied victories.
7e 7f answering the guiding questions 3 analyzing why did churchill and roosevelt want to attack german controlled areas in north africa before areas in europe.
7b 7e 4 determining cause and effect what were the goals of strate bombing in germany and the invasion of sicily.
7d 7e 5 speculating what if d day had failed and germany had defea the allies in europe.
7e writing activity narrative american soldiers invading normandy on d day showed extreme bravery in the face of enormous difficulties.
imagine that you are one ofthe first soldiers approaching omal beach by water.
write a description ofthe beach and the atmosphere ofthe moment.
be sure to include sensory words.
380 map japanese entrenchment on iwojima map axis expansion and retreat map the atomic bomb at hiroshima video the atomic bomb etw rks here s more online.
image iwojima photograph lesson 4 the war ends content vocabulary hedgerow napalm on what kinds of sacrifices does war require.
it matters because fierce fighting in both europe and the pacific during 1945 led to the defeat of the axis powers.
as the war ended the allies began war crimes trials as part of a plan to build a better world.
taking notes key ideas and details outlining as you read create an outline of the section similar to the one below using the major headings as the main points.
the war ends i the third reich collapses a i teks texas essential knowledge and skills 2d explain the significance of the following years as turning points 1898 spanish american war 1914 1918 world war i 1929 the great depression begins 1939 1945 world war ii 1957 sputnik launch ignites u s soviet space race 1968 1969 martin luther king jr assassination and u s lands on the moon 1991 cold war ends 2001 terrorist attacks on world trade center and the pentagon and 2008 election of first black president barack obama continued on the next page the third reich collapses guiding question why w675 the battle of the bulge so important to the allied forces.
although d day had been a success it was only the beginning.
surrounding many fields in normandy were hedgerows dirt walls several feet thick covered in shrubbery built to fence in cattle and crops.
they also enabled the germans to fiercely defend their positions.
the battle of the hedgerows ended on july 25 1944 when 2 500 u s bombers blew a hole in the german lines enabling u s tanks to race through the gap.
as the allies broke out of normandy the french resistance french civilians who had secretly organized to resist the german occupation staged a rebellion in paris.
when the allies liberated paris on august 25 the streets were filled with french citizens celebrating their victory.
the battle of the bulge as the allies advanced toward the german border hitler decided to stage one last desperate offensive.
his goal was to cut off allied supplies coming through the port of antwerp belgium.
the attack began just before dawn on december 16 1944 six inches 15 cm of snow covered the ground and the weather was bitterly cold.
moving rapidly the germans caught the american defenders by surprise.
as the german troops raced west their lines bulged outward and the attack became known as the battle of the bulge.
eisenhower ordered general patton to the rescue.
three days later faster than anyone expected in the midst of a snowstorm pattons troops slammed into the german lines.
as the weather cleared allied aircraft began hitting german fuel depots.
america and world war ii 381 hedgerow an enclosure made of dirt walls covered in shrubbery built to fence in cattle and crops on christmas eve out of fuel and weakened by heavy losses the german troops driving toward antwerp were forced to halt.
two days later pattons troops broke through to the german line.
fighting continued for three weeks but the united states had won the battle of the bulge.
on january 8 the germans began to withdraw having suffered more than 100 000 casualties.
they had very few resources left to prevent the allies from entering germany.
the war ends in europ while american and britis forces fought to liberate france the soviets attacks german troops in russia.
i the end of the battle of the bulge the soviets had driven hitlers forces out russia and across poland.
by february 1945 the soviets were only 35 miles 56 km from germanys capital berlin.
soviet troops crossed germanys eastern border while american forces attacked its western borde by the end of february 1945 american troops he reached the rhine river germanys last major line defense in the west.
on march 7 american tanks american troops march through the snow on january 31 1945 during the battle ofthe bulge.
critical thinking making inferences looking at the photo what can you infer about the conditions during the battle ofthe bulge.
continued from p 381 tcks texas essential knowledge and skills 7d analyze major issues of world war ii including the holocaust the internment of german italian and japanese americans and executive order 9066 and the development of conventional and atomic weapons 7e analyze major military events of world war ii including the battle of midway the u s military advancement through the pacific islands the bataan death march the invasion of normandy fighting the war on multiple fronts and the liberation of concentration camps continued on the next page crossed the rhine.
as german defenses crumbled american troops raced east to within 70 mil 113 km of berlin.
on april 16 soviet troops finally smashed through tl german defenses and reached the outskirts of berlin five days later.
deep in his berlin bunker adolf hitler knew the end was near.
on ap 30 1945 he committed suicide.
on may 7 1945 germany accepted the te for an unconditional surrender.
the next day may 8 1945 was proclain v e day for victory in europe q reading progress check explaining why was the battle of the bulge such a disastrous defeat for german japan is defeated guiding question doyou agree or disagree with president truman s decision to drop the atomic bo explain your reasons.
unfortunately president roosevelt did not live to see the defeat of germany.
on april 12 1945 while vacationing in warm springs geor he died of a stroke.
his vice president harry s truman became presid during this difficult time.
the next day truman told reporters boys if you ever pray pray me now.
when they told me yesterday what had happened i felt li 382 the moon the stars and all the planets had fallen on me despite his despite in spite of feelings truman began at once to make decisions about the war.
although germany surrendered a few weeks later the war with japan continued and truman was forced to make some of the most difficult decisions ofthe war during his first six months in office.
the battle of iwo jima on november 24 1944 bombs fell on tokyo.
above the city flew 80 b 29 superfortress bombers that had traveled more than 1 500 miles 2 414 km from new american bases in the mariana islands.
many of their bombs missed the targets.
by the time the b 29s reached japan they did not have enough fuel left to fix their navigational errors or to adjust for high winds.
the pilots needed an island closer to japan so the b 29s could refuel.
american military planners chose iwo jima.
iwo jima was perfectly located roughly halfway between the marianas and japan but its geography was formidable.
it had a dormant volcano at its southern tip and rugged terrain with rocky cliffs jagged ravines and dozens ol caves.
volcanic ash covered the ground.
even worse the japanese had built a vast network of concrete bunkers connected by miles of tunnels.
on february 19 1945 some 60 000 marines landed on iwo jima.
as the troops leaped from the amphtracs they sank up to their ankles in the soft ash and were pounded by japanese artillery.
the marines crawled inland attacking the japanese bunkers with flamethrowers and explosives.
more than 6 800 marines were killed capturing the island.
admiral nimitz later wrote that on iwo jima uncommon valor was a common virtue continued from p 382 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 7f evaluate the military contributions of leaders during world war ii including omar bradley dwight eisenhower douglas macarthur chester a nimitz george marshall and george patton 27b explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture the military and medicine including vaccines firebombing japan while american engineers prepared airfields on iwo jima general curtis lemay commander of the b 29s based in the marianas changed strategy.
to help the b 29s hit their targets he ordered them to drop bombs filled with napalm a type of jellied gasoline.
the bombs would not only explode but would also start fires.
even if the b 29s missed their targets the fires they started would spread to the intended targets.
the use of firebombs was very controversial because the fires would also kill civilians however lemay could think of no other way to destroy japans war production quickly.
loaded with firebombs b 29s attacked tokyo on march 9 1945 as strong winds fanned the flames the firestorm grew so intense that it sucked the oxygen out of the air asphyxiating thousands.
as one survivor later recalled napalm a type of jellied gasoline u s marines raise the american flag after the capture of iwo jima.
more than 6 800 marines were killed before the island was captured.
criticalthinking determining cause and effect how might the battle of iwo jima have been a factor in president truman s decision to drop the atomic bomb.
primary source the fires were incredible with flames leaping hundreds of feet into the air with every passini moment the air became more foul the noise was a continuing crashing roar fire winds filled wi burning particles rushed up and down the streets.
i watched people running for their lives the flames raced after them like living things striking them down wherever i turned my eyes i sawpe seeking air to breathe quoted in american heritage new history of world the firebombing of tokyo killed more than 80 000 people and destro more than 250 000 buildings.
by the end of june 1945 japans six key industrial cities had been firebombed.
by the end of the war the b 29s h firebombed 67 japanese cities.
the invasion of okinawa despite the massive damage that firebombing caused there were few signs ii the spring of 1945 that japan was ready to quit.
many american officials believed the japanese would not surrender until japan had been invaded.
to prepare for the invasion the united states needed a base near japan to stock supplies and build up troops.
iwo jima was small and still too far away.
milit planners chose okinawa only 350 miles 563 km from mainland japan.
american troops landed on okinawa on april 1 1945 instead of defending the beaches the japanese troops took up positions in the islands rugged mountains.
to dig the japanese out of their caves and bunkers the american troops had to fight their way up steep slopes agai constant machine gun and artillery fire.
more than 12 000 american soldiers sailors and marines died during the fighting but by june 22 1 okinawa had finally been captured.
the terms for surrender shortly after the united states captured okinawa the japanese empero hirohito urged his government to find a way to end the war.
the biggt problem was the american demand for unconditional surrender.
many japanese leaders were willing to surrender but on one condition hirol had to stay in power.
american officials knew that the fate of hirohito was the most impo issue for the japanese.
most americans however blamed the emperor ft war and wanted him removed from power.
president truman was reluct to go against public opinion.
furthermore he knew the united states w almost ready to test a new weapon that might force japan to surrender without any conditions.
the new weapon was the atomic bomb.
the manhattan project in 1939 leo szilard a jewish physicist who had fled nazi persecution learned that german scientists had split the uranium atom.
szilard ha been the first scientist to suggest that splitting the atom might release enormous energy.
worried that the nazis were working on an atomic bomb szilard convinced the worlds best known physicist albert ein to sign a letter szilard had drafted and send it to president roosevelt letter einstein warned that by using uranium extremely powerful be of a new type may be constructed roosevelt responded by setting up a scientific committee to study issue.
in 1941 the committee met with british scientists who were alrc working on an atomic bomb.
the americans then convinced rooseve begin a program to build an atomic bomb.
384 the secret american program to build an atomic bomb was code named the manhattan project and was headed by general leslie r groves.
the first breakthrough came in 1942 when szilard and enrico fermi another physicist built the worlds first nuclear reactor at the university of chicago.
groves then organized a team of engineers and scientists to build an atomic bomb at a secret laboratory in los alamos new mexico.
physicist j robert oppenheimer led the team.
on july 16 1945 they detonated the worlds first atomic bomb in new mexico.
hiroshima and nagasaki even before the bomb was tested american officials began debating how to use it.
admiral william leahy chairman of the joint chiefs of staff opposed using the bomb because it would kill civilians.
he believed an economic blockade and conventional bombing would convince japan to surrender.
secretary of war henry stimson wanted to warn the japanese about the bomb and tell them their emperor could stay in power if they surrendered.
secretary of state james byrnes however wanted to drop the bomb on japan without any warning.
president truman later wrote that he regarded the bomb as a military weapon and never had any doubts that it should be used his advisers had warned him to expect massive casualties if the united states invaded japan.
truman believed it was his duty as president to use every weapon available to save american lives.
analyzing primary sources o o nuclear relating to the nucleus of an atom a key figure ofthe nuclear age enrico fermi proved a nuclear reaction could be initiated controlled and stopped.
criticalthinking identifying central ideas why was enrico fermi s work on nuclear reactions so important.
people continue to debate whether president truman s decision to drop atomic bombs on japan was the best way to end world war ii.
m the world will note that the first atomic bomb was dropped on hiroshima a military base if japan does not surrender bombs will have to be dropped on her war industries and unfortunately thousands of civilian lives will be lost having found the bomb we have used it.
we have used it against those who attacked us without warning at pearl harbor against those who have starved and beaten and executed american prisoners of war against those who have abandoned all pretense of obeying international laws of warfare.
we have used it in order to shorten the agony of war in order to save the lives of thousands and thousands of young americans s truman radio report to the american people august 9 1945 harry s truman president of the united states it is my opinion that the use of this barbarous weapon at hiroshima and nagasaki was of no material assistance in our war against japan.
the japanese were already defeated and ready to surrender because ofthe effective sea blockade and the successful bombing with conventional weapons william leahy chairman of the joint chiefs of staff the lethal possibilities of atomic warfare in the future are frightening.
my own feeling was that in being the first to use it we had adopted an ethical standard common to the barbarians ofthe dark ages.
i was not taught to make war in that fashion and wars cannot be won by destroying women and children william leahy from was there 1950 dbq analyzing historical documents 0 identifying points of view what reasons does truman offer to justify the use of the atomic bomb.
q summarizing why does leahy say he was against using the bomb.
1 nil ml i america and world war ii 385 the united states dropped an atomic bomb that destroyed the japanese city of hiroshima.
critical thinking analyzing primary sources what details in the picture illustrate the effect of the atomic bomb.
the allies threatened japan with prompt and utter destruction if t nation did not surrender but the japanese did not reply.
truman then ordered the military to drop the bomb.
on august 6 1945 a b 29 bomb named enola gay dropped an atomic bomb code named little boy 01 hiroshima an important industrial city.
the bomb destroyed about 63 percent of the city.
between 80 000 ar 120 000 people died instantly and thousands more died later from burn and radiation sickness.
three days later on august 9 the soviet union declared war on japan.
later that day the united states dropped anothe atomic bomb code named fat man on the city of nagasaki killing between 35 000 and 74 000 people.
faced with such massive destructioi and the shock of the soviets joining the war hirohito ordered his government to surrender.
on august 15 1945 v j day japan surrendered.
the long war was over.
putting the enemy on trial in august 1945 the united states britain france and the soviet union created the international military tribunal imt to punish german an japanese leaders for war crimes.
the tribunal held trials in nuremberg germany where hitler had staged nazi party rallies.
twenty two german leaders were prosecuted at the nuremberg tri three were acquitted 7 were given prison sentences and 12 were sentei to death.
trials of lower ranking leaders continued until april 1949 lea to 24 more executions and 107 prison sentences.
similar trials were held in tokyo.
the imt for the far east charged 25 japanese leaders with war crimes.
the allies did not indict hirohito fearing that any attempt to put the emperor on trial would lead to an uprising.
eighteen japanese defendants were sentenced to prison.
the i were sentenced to death by hanging.
386 the trials punished many of the people responsible for world war ii and the holocaust but they were also part of the american plan for building a better world.
as robert jackson chief counsel for the united states at nuremberg said in his opening statement to the court the wrongs we seek to condemn and punish have been so calculated so malignant and so devastating that civilization cannot tolerate their being ignored because it cannot survive their being repeated world war ii a turning point the years 1939 1945 were a major turning point in world history.
by the end of world war ii large areas of the worlds great powers britain france germany japan and the soviet union lay devastated.
germany and japan were occupied by foreign armies.
some 25 million people had been killed.
japans empire was gone and the european empires would never fully recover.
over the next three decades nearly all of the subject peoples of the british french and dutch empires would gain their independence.
new countries in africa asia and the middle east were born.
the middle eastern conflict between the new nation of israel and the arab nations was itself a direct result of world war ii.
the war also opened a new era in american history.
the american economy was undamaged and by the mid 1940s it was producing over 35 percent of the entire worlds gross domestic product.
a vast american military force was deployed in europe and asia and it also controlled the worlds first nuclear weapons.
the united states had emerged as the worlds strongest economic and military power.
it was in a position of such strength and dominance that a new term superpower was later coined to describe its relationship to the rest of the world.
only one other country had the potential to rival the united states at the end of the war.
the soviet union although devastated from germanys invasion had built its own enormous army and industrial capacity.
soviet troops were in control of eastern europe and communist ideas posed the only real ideological challenge to american ideas of democracy free enterprise and limited government.
although world war ii had put an end to nazism the struggle had left europe divided and the resulting tensions between former allies would soon lead to a new international conflict known as the cold war.
b reading progress check analyzing what arguments did truman consider when deciding whether to use the atomic bomb.
lesson 4 review reviewing vocabulary 1 explaining explain why napalm bombs are highly destructive.
using your notes 2 summarizing using the notes you completed during the lesson on factors that led to the end of world war ii explain how the allies achieved victory in europe and over japan.
7d 7e 7f answering the guiding questions 3 analyzing why was the battle of the bulge so important to the allied forces.
7e 7f 4 defending do you agree or disagree with president truman s decision to drop the atomic bomb.
explain your reasons.
7d writing activity narrative suppose that you are in a large u s city when news of victory over japan comes.
describe the celebrations and the mood of the people.
america and world war ii 387 using secondary sources why learn this skill.
secondary sources are everywhere.
every history book is a secondary source including this textbook.
any book article document website or other presentation of information that discusses or describes information that originates somewhere else is a secondary source.
primary sources are where scholars get information primary sources include data facts documents letters quotes interviews original photos art speeches transcripts and other materials that people create as part of their activities.
secondary sources are efforts by people to comment on primary sources and try to understand what they mean and what they are telling us about people s activities.
learning to use secondary sources will help you figure out whether those sources are presenting a complete and accurate picture of a topic or event and whether you can rely on the information they present.
learning the skill when writing a secondary source historians typically combine many primary sources and other secondary sources together to create the historical narrative.
the goal of a secondary source is to analyze and interpret primary sources then synthesize or combine them so that generalizations and evaluations about history are possible.
secondary sources are what stitch all the evidence together into a presentation of events that we call history.
the reason you analyze a secondary source is to figure out what an author s main ideas and argument is and to determine whether you agree with it or not and why.
follow these steps 1 first ask yourself what you are trying to accomplish with the secondary source.
are you trying to acquire information.
or are you trying to analyze or answer historical questions.
2 who is the author.
what are his or her credentials.
do they have training or a background that makes you think you trust their work.
3 who published the secondary source.
does that indicate any possible bias am special motive for the work that might make you suspicious of its conclusions 4 look at the secondary source.
whenw it written.
examine its title and table o contents.
what clues does it provide as the topic of the work and the approach author is taking.
5 does the secondary source have footm or endnotes where it cites the primary sources it uses to prove its ideas.
does have a bibliography listing all of the sources of evidence used to prepare the work.
6 what kind of sources are being used.
the secondary source using mostly otl secondary sources or is it using many primary sources.
this is important if want to use the secondary source to acquire information.
you have to be si its information is reliable.
7 if it is using primary sources what kii are being used.
are they reliable.
dot the author generally rely on one partii kind of primary source to support his her conclusions.
are there any weaknesses or biases in the types of primary sources being used.
might tf author be led to the wrong conclusion relying on one type of source too muc 8 figure out the author s argument.
th important if you are using the seconc source to analyze or answer historica questions.
look at the work s introdu and conclusion.
what are the major questions or issues the author is tryii explain.
is the author trying to be objective clearly separating facts froi opinions.
or is the author making a strong emotional argument with a v clear opinion and all the facts seem t support that opinion.
388 8 9 think about the author s conclusions.
do they make sense to you.
what kind of evidence could be used to disprove them.
did the author examine sources that challenge his ideas and explain how they fit into the work.
practicing this skill practice this skill with this text you are using.
this text is a secondary source.
let s analyze your textbook.
1 can the textbook be used to acquire information.
can the textbook be used to analyze and answer historical questions.
2 who are the authors of this program.
what are their credentials.
what else have they written.
do you think they can be trusted to be professional.
3 who published your textbook.
what is their purpose.
is there likely to be a bias in what they publish.
4 does the textbook use primary sources.
what kinds.
5 does your textbook have one single argument or focus on only one major issue.
why or why not.
6 pick one chapter 4 cover.
what is the social studies skills activity for chapter lesson 2 focusing on afghanistan and iraq lesson domestic lesson 4 the obama presidency the story matters as the united states entered the twenty first century a new collection of challenges emerged.
terrorists launched devastating attacks on september 11 2001 that led to wars in afghanistan and iraq.
the economy slowed and then crashed.
in 2008 barack obama became the first african american to be elected president ofthe united states.
his campaign promised hope to a country swept up in a time of great challenges.
barack obama took office in january 2009 his first tasks were leading two wars improving a declining economy and reshaping a political system filled with partisanship.
photo pete souza obama transition team handout corbis news corbis 619 chapter i lesson 1 studying history lesson 2 studying geography and economics lesson 3 government and citizenship lesson 4 culture science and society lesson 5 social studies skills the story matters images like this one can tell vivid stories about the past.
to uncover these stories we must ask questions.
for instance who is this woman.
where is she from.
when did she live.
what was her life like.
why is she the subject of this art.
who made this portrait and why.
where is she travelling to and what does her future hold.
learning about social studies helps us gain the skills we need to ask the right questions and the skills to find the answers.
foldables before cars and airplanes families travelled across tlie country in covered wqgons.
i north wind picture archives z 4 goto the foldables library in the back of your book to make a foldable that will help you take notes while reading this chapter 8 place and time united states 1777 1790 a few years after achieving independence the united states made plans to expand into some of the land to the west.
leaders put forward a plan to settle the northwest territory and over time form new states.
step into the place map focus the british gave up their claim to the northwest territory in the treaty of paris.
regions what geographical features made this territory desirable for settlement by people from the united states.
ioa iia place what present day states were made from the northwest territory.
3 at thinking drawing conclusions which areas of the territory do you think were likely to be settled first.
explain your answer.
iia 29b step into the time time line review the time line.
what years are covered in this time line.
identify two world events that might h networks there s more online.
bzf biographies john adams richard henry lee ef charts capitals ofthe united states articles of confederation and the constitution et game concentration game ef graphic organizer powers of national government sf map the northwest territory et self check quiz sf video lesson 1 the articles of confederation al question whydopeop eformjfwemments.
this texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting ofthe declaration of independence creation and ratification ofthe constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
4c explain the issues surrounding important events ofthe american revolution including declaring independence writing the articles of confederation fighting the battles of lexington concord saratoga and yorktown enduring the winter at valley forge and signing the treaty of paris of 1783.
5b summarize arguments regarding protective tariffs taxation and the banking system.
6a explain how the northwest ordinance established principles and procedures for orderly expansion ofthe united states.
14a explain why a free enterprise system of economics developed in the new nation including minimal government intrusion taxation and property rights.
15b summarize the strengths and weaknesses ofthe articles of confederation.
reading helpdesk it matters because after gaining independence americans faced the task of forming independent governments at both the state and national levels.
the making of a republic guidingquestioim what kind of government was created by the articles of confederation.
becoming independent caused the country to enter a neweraasa young republic.
after throwing oil british rule the independent states faced the challenge of governing themselves.
the 13 states needed a plan of government that would satisfy all their needs.
would the states be able to work together and still maintain their independence.
how would each individual state govern itself.
during the era of the early republic that followed the american revolution the young nation struggled to resolve these questions states write constitutions the continental congress took up this last question even before declaring independence.
in may 1776 congress asked the states to organize their governments.
each state adopted a state constitution or plan of government.
eight states had drafted constitutions before e end of the year.
new york and georgia followed in 1777 and assachuses in 1780 connecticut and rhode island decided to use their colonial charters as state constitutions.
tn nk er years bnhsh rule americans were determined not craftprk uc bower n the hands of one ruler or body.
they pennsvlvanw utlons t lat bruited the power of the governor.
anelectx cnstltution ced the office entirely with an elected 12 person council.
taking notes identifying as you read use a diagram like the one shown to identify the powers ofthe national government under the articles of confederation.
a more perfect union rowers of national government content vocabulary.
bicameral depreciate constitutional republic ordinance states also divided power between the governor or council and the legislature.
most states set up two house or bicameral legislatures to divide the work of government even further.
the first state constitutions aimed to keep power in the hands of the people.
for example voters chose the state legislators and states held elections often.
in most states only white males who were at least 21 years old could vote.
because state constitutions limited the powers of the governors the legislatures became the most powerful branch of government.
the state legislatures tried to make taxes fair for everyone but disagreements arose.
the shift from british colonies to self governing states held many challenges.
a new republic the american people also had to form a national government.
people agreed the new country should be a constitutional republic a government in which citizens rule through elected representatives.
these representatives would serve for a specific term of office and pledge to govern by the laws set down in a written constitution or plan of government.
at first most americans wanted a weak central government.
they expected that each state would remain free to act independently on most issues.
the states would rely on a central government only to wage war and handle relations with other countries.
capitals of the united states length of time as u s capital philadelphia pennsylvania may 10 1775 to december 12 1776 philadelphia pennsylvania march 4 1777 to september 18 1777 september 30 1777 to june 27 1778 june 30 1783 to november 1783 york pennsylvania princeton new jersey trenton new jersey philadelphia pennsylvania december 6 1790 to may 14 1800 washington d c november 1 1784 to december 24 1784 170c aunuct 17 non nine different cities have served as the capital ofthe united states.
identifying what was the first capital ofthe united states.
critical thinking drawing inferences why do you think the united states had so many different capital cities during the period shown.
bicameral having two separate lawmaking chambers constitutional republic a government in which citizens rule through elected representatives according to a plan of government jssjfc state house built i772 i779 gapitoloftiie united states november 26 1783 august i3 1784 in this state house oldest in the nation still ocmurn uy use general george washington bsoas amnsfissm w s jefferson minister plenipotentiary.
from on june 7 1776 virginia s richard henry lee moved that a plan of confederation be prepared and transmitted to the respective colonies for their consideration and approbation approval.
creating the articles of confederation in the summer of 1776 while also drafting the declaration of independence the second continental congress appointed a committee to write a plan for a new central government.
the result was the articles of confederation.
after much debate congress adopted the articles the nations first constitution in november 1777 the articles of confederation established a weak central government.
the states kept most of their power.
for the states the articles of confederation were a firm league of friendship in which each state retained its sovereignty freedom and independence the articles of confederation gave the congress the powerto conduct foreign affairs maintain armed forces borrow money and issue currency.
congress did not have the power to regulate trade force citizens to join the army or impose taxes.
if congress needed to raise money or troops it had to ask the states.
states were not required to contribute.
the new central government had no chief executive.
this is an official such as a president or a governor who carries out the laws and leads the government in its day to day operations.
under the articles of confederation government carried on its business such as selling western lands through congressional committees all the states had to approve the articles and any amendments.
yet not every state supported the articles of confederation at first.
under the new plan each state had one vote regardless of population.
states with large populations believed they should have more votes.
disputes over western lands delayed ratification of the articles by the 1780s seven of the original states laid claim to areas west of the appalachians.
maryland refused to approve the articles until new york virginia and other states abandoned their land claims and ceded or gave up such territory to the national government.
this done maryland joined the other 12 states in approving the articles.
on march 1 1781 the confederation formally became the government of the united states of america.
the confederation government the next several years were critical ones for the young republic.
it soon became clear that the new national government was too weak to handle the problems facing the united states.
the weak academic vocabulary abandon to give up skills practice write some questions about the most important ideas in a lesson or a shorter section of your text.
exchange papers with a partner and answer one another s questions.
ii a more perfect union weaknesses of the articles of confederation congress had no authority to raise money by collecting taxes.
congress had no control over foreign trade.
congress could not force states to carry out its laws.
all 13 states had to agree to any amendments making it nearly impossible to correct problems.
the articles of confederation had several key weaknesses.
0 summarizing summarize the basic problem with the articles of confederation.
congress could not pass a law unless nine states voted in favor of it.
changing the articles required the approval of all 13 states.
this made it hard for congress to pass laws or amend the articles when there was any disagreement.
even with these challenges the new government managed some key achievements.
under the confederation government americans negotiated a peace treaty with britain and expanded the countrys foreign trade.
the confederation also helped with settling and governing the countrys western lands.
critical thinking speculating why do you think getting 13 states to agree on decisions and actions was so difficult.
q reading progress check drawing inferences why do you think most americans in 1776 wanted a weak central government.
policies for western lands guiding question what process allowed new states tojoin the union.
the articles of confederation did not propose a way to add new states to the united states.
yet there were settlers living west of the appalachian mountains outside the existing states.
these western settlers wanted to organize their lands as states and join the union.
under the terms of the treaty of paris the british gave up control of the land north of the ohio river and west of the appalachian mountains.
many americans were eager to settle in this region.
the new united states government had to establish policies for settlement of these western lands.
another challenge was to come up with an orderly process by which new territories could achieve the status of statehood.
the ordinance of 1785 in 1785 the confederation congress passed an ordinance or law that set up a process to survey and sell the lands north of the ohio river.
the new law divided this large area into townships.
reading in the content area charts charts can take many forms.
the simple chart on this page lists a series of statements or facts.
it presents a clear short summary of key information.
the title of the chart indicates the common theme that unites the items in the chart.
lesson 1 229 under the articles of confederation congress could not tax citizens directly.
congress raised money by selling land in the northwest territory.
the ordinance divided land into townships 6 miles 10 km to a side.
this created 36 square miles or sections.
place which rivers acted as borders for the northwest territory.
critical thinking identifying central issues why do you think congress set up such a precise system for measuring out and dividing up the land.
ii each township was 6 miles long 9 7 km and 6 miles wide 9 7 km.
these townships were to be further divided into 36 sections of 640 acres 259 ha.
the government would sell each section at public auction or sale for at least a dollar an acre.
concerned about lawless people moving into western lands richard henry lee the president of the congress urged that the rights of property be clearly defined by the government.
congress drafted another law to protect the interests of hardworking settlers.
the northwest ordinance the northwest ordinance passed in 1787 guaranteed the property rights of settlers and provided a democratic model for national expansion.
it created a single northwest territory from lands north ofthe ohio river and east of the mississippi river.
the lands were to be divided into three to five smaller territories.
when a territory had 60 000 residents the people could seek statehood.
each new state would have the same standing as the original 13 states.
reading helpdesk ordinance a law academic vocabulary clause a special condition in a formal document a more perfect union the northwest ordinance had a bill of rights for the settlers in the territory.
it guaranteed freedom of religion and trial by jury.
it also stated there shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude in said territory this clause or condition added to a document marked the first attempt to stop the spread of slavery in the united states.
the ordinance of 1785 and the northwest ordinance attempted to make possible the settlement of the northwest territory in a peaceful and orderly way.
in general the laws were successful.
the united states congress would later take a similar step in the south.
in 1798 it created the mississippi territory from land west of georgia.
congress organized the government of the territory in the same basic way as in the northwest territory except that slavery was allowed.
land act of 1800 the ordinance of 1785 and the northwest ordinance aimed to encourage settlement in the northwest territory.
in time it became clear that people needed even more help.
in 1800 congress passed the land act.
the act made it possible for people to pay for land a little at a time.
under the terms of this law a person was required to buy at least 320 acres of land at a price of 2 per acre.
the buyer could pay half of the money at the time of purchase and the rest in four yearly payments.
h reading progress check explaining according to the northwest ordinance when could a territory apply for statehood.
much ofthe land in the west was sold to pay off debts from the revolutionary war.
the sale of these lands also provided opportunity for many settlers who eagerly moved west.
i money is any object widely accepted as payment.
tobacco leaves were once used as money in colonial virginia.
colonists also used other goods as well as coins as money.
eventually governments began issuing paper money to make exchanges of goods and business dealings easier.
ii critical thinking drawing conclusions why is it important to have a system of money that is recognized agreed upon and used by all people.
reading helpdesk depreciate to fall in value problems at home and abroad guiding question in whatways was the confederation government weak.
because of its weakness the confederation government had trouble with financial issues.
continentals paper bills the continental congress had printed during the war did not hold their value.
by 1781 the currency had depreciated dihpreeshee ayt ed or fallen in value so far that it was worth almost nothing.
as more continentals appeared people realized that congress could not exchange or trade in the bills for gold or silver.
the public began to doubt the money was worth anything.
in 1779 it took 40 continentals to buy a single spanish silver dollar.
by 1781 a person needed 146 continentals to buy that spanish coin.
not worth a continental became a common saying.
at the same time the price of food and other goods soared.
in boston and some other areas high prices led to food riots.
in the 1780s the continental congress faced a large debt.
during the revolutionary war congress had borrowed money from american citizens and foreign governments.
it still owed revolutionary soldiers pay for their military service.
without the power to tax the confederation could not easily raise money to pay its debts.
the continental congress asked the states for money but it could not force the states to pay.
in fact the states provided less than half of the money the federal government asked them to contribute.
plan for import tax congress faced a collapse of the countrys finances.
in 1781 it created a department of finance led by philadelphia merchant robert morris.
while serving in congress morris had proposed a 5 percent tax on imported goods to help pay the national debt.
the plan required a change to the articles of confederation.
twelve states approved the plan but rhode island opposed it.
under the articles the single no vote was enough to block the plan.
a second effort in 1783 also failed to win approval by all the states.
the financial crisis grew worse.
relations with britain trouble with foreign governments also revealed the weaknesses o the american government.
for example american merchants complained that the british were blocking americans from the a more perfect union west indies and other british markets.
in the treaty of paris of 1783 britain had promised to withdraw from the lands east of the mississippi river.
british troops however continued to occupy several forts in the great lakes region.
in 1785 congress sent john adams to london to discuss these problems.
adams found the british unwilling to talk.
they pointed to the failure of the united states to honor its promises made in the treaty of paris.
the british claimed that americans had agreed to pay loyalists for the property taken from them during the revolutionary war.
congress had proposed that the states pay the loyalists.
the states simply refused and congress could do nothing about it.
relations with spain the united states had even greater problems with spain.
this european power which controlled florida as well as lands west of the mississippi river wanted to stop american expansion into its territory.
to do this spain closed the lower mississippi river to american shipping in 1784 western settlers could no longer use the mississippi river which they relied on to ship goods to market.
in 1786 american diplomats reached a new trade agreement with spain.
representatives from the southern states however blocked the agreement because it did not include the right to use the mississippi river.
the weakness of the confederation and its inability to deal with problems worried many leaders including george washington.
americans began to agree that the country needed a stronger government.
o reading progress check explaining why did the national government under the articles of i confederation have difficulty raising money.
during the early years of the republic john adams served as an ambassador to great britain.
adams was unable to convince the british to honor their promises made in the treaty of paris of 1783 include this lesson s information in your foldable.
a more psf fect unw.
articles of tma anew ratifying the confederation constitution november 1777 1787 1799 lesson 1 review review vocabulary 1 use each of these words in a sentence about the newly independent united states.
3oa job a bicameral b constitutional republic answer the guiding questions 2 describing what caused america to enter a new era as a republic.
i 3 explaining what powers were granted to the congress under the articles of confederation.
1sb 4 summarizing what were some ofthe accomplishments of the national government under the articles of confederation.
15b 29b 5 analyzing view the chart that identifies weaknesses ofthe articles of confederation.
which ofthe weaknesses do you think was the most difficult for the national government to overcome.
explain your choice.
isb 29 persuasive writing you are a delegate to the second continental congress.
congress is debating whether to allow the central government to impose taxes.
take a stand on this issue and write a short essay defending your position.
give specific reasons for your opinion.
sb 29d job lesson 1 233 i networks there s more online.
ef biography george washington ef graph framers of the constitution ef game identification game ef graphic organizer plans for creating a new government ef primarysource plantation life ef self check quiz video la iw 1 lesson 2 forging a new constitution al question how do new ideas change the way people live.
it matters because bold action helped the nation overcome the serious shortcomings of the articles of confederation.
teo texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
the need for change guidingquestion iv jflf problems did the government face under the articles of confederation.
4d analyze the issues of the constitutional convention of 1787 including the great compromise and the three fifths compromise.
5a describe major domestic problems faced by the leaders of the new republic such as maintaining national security building a military creating a stable economic system setting up the court system and defining the authority of the central government.
7b compare the effects of political economic and social factors on slaves and free blacks.
15b summarize the strengths and weaknesses of the articles of confederation.
21c summarize a historical event in which compromise resulted in a peaceful resolution.
29d identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
reading helpdesk a growing number of americans became convinced that the government under the articles of confederation was too weak to deal with the countrys problems.
among these problems were serious economic difficulties.
after the revolutionary war the united states went through a depression a period when economic activity slows and unemployment increases.
wartime damage to southern plantations led to a sharp drop in rice exports.
trade also fell off when the british closed the west indies market to american merchants.
the little money the government did have went to pay debts to foreign countries.
this resulted in a serious shortage of money in the united states.
shays s rebellion economic troubles hit farmers hard.
unable to sell their goods they could not pay their taxes and debts.
this led state officials to seize farmers lands and throw them in jail.
this treatment angered many farmers.
some began to view the new governmed as just another form of tyranny.
they wanted the government to taking notes comparing and contrasting as you read use a diagram like the one shown to take notes about each individual s role for creating a new government.
a more perfect union leader role edmund randolph james madison koqer sherman gouverneur morris content vocabulary depression compron l5 manumission proportional issue paper money and make new policies to help those in debt.
a group of farmers in massachusetts made this plea to state officials primary source w surely your honours are not strangers to the distresses problems of the people but know that many of our good inhabitants are now confined in jail for debt and taxes.
99 from petition from the town of greenwich massachusetts resentment boiled in massachusetts.
in 1786 angry farmers led by former continental army captain daniel shays forced courts in the western part of the state to close.
the goal was to stop judges from legally taking away farmers lands.
the farmers revolt grew.
in january 1787 shays led a force of about 1 200 supporters toward the federal arsenal or weapons storehouse in springfield massachusetts.
the farmers wanted to seize guns and ammunition.
the state militia ordered the advancing farmers to halt and then fired over their heads.
the farmers did not stop.
the militia fired again killing four farmers.
shays and his followers fled and the uprising was over.
still shayss rebellion frightened americans.
concern grew that the government could not handle unrest and prevent violence.
on hearing of the rebellion george washington wondered whether mankind when left to themselves are unfit for their own government slavery in the new republic the revolutionary war called attention to the clash between the american belief in liberty and the practice of slavery.
between 1776 and 1786 11 states all except south carolina and georgia outlawed or taxed the importation of enslaved people.
slavery existed and was legal in every state.
in the north however it was not a major source of labor.
people in that region began working to end slavery in america.
in 1774 quakers in pennsylvania founded the first american antislavery society.
shays s rebellion divided the young country during the difficult 1780s.
depression a period when economic activity slows and unemployment increases skills practice use the words who what when and where to ask questions.
use the words you know in the questions.
lesson 2 235 in the south much ofthe wealth came from large plantations that used enslaved labor to grow valuable crops such as tobacco rice and later cotton.
the reliance on slavery tended to keep southern states from investing in other parts of their economy.
southern cities remained smaller than those in the north because there were fewer businesses in the south.
the south also did not devote itself to improving its transportation systems or training its people to build new businesses and industries.
critical thinking identifying central issues why do you think the white south was so committed to keeping a slave based economy.
six years later pennsylvania passed a law that provided tor the gradual freeing of enslaved people.
between 1783 and 1804 connecticut rhode island new york and new jersey passed laws that gradually ended slavery there.
still free african americans faced discrimination.
they were barred from many public places.
only a few states gave them the right to vote.
most of their children had to attend separate schools from white children.
in response free african americans set up their own churches schools and aid groups.
slavery continued to spread south of pennsylvania.
the plantation system depended on enslaved labor and many white southerners feared their economy could not survive without it.
that fear did not stop a number of slaveholders from freeing enslaved people.
the number of free african americans increased in virginia after that state passed a law that encouraged manumission maneyuh mih shuhn the freeing of individual enslaved persons.
around this time american leaders were deciding that the articles of confederation needed to be strengthened.
the question of slavery would make those discussions more difficult.
reading helpdesk a reading progress check explaining why did farmers in massachusetts rebel in 1787.
manumission the freeing of individual enslaved persons 4 i6 a more perfect union the constitutional convention guiding question how did leaders reshape the government.
although the american revolution led to a union of 13 states it had not yet created a nation.
some leaders were satisfied with independent state governments that were similar to the old colonial governments.
others wanted a strong national government.
they demanded a change in the articles of confederation.
among the leading americans supporting reform were james madison a virginia planter and alexander hamilton a new york lawyer.
the convention begins in september 1786 hamilton called for a convention or meeting in philadelphia to discuss trade issues.
he also suggested that this convention consider what possible changes were needed to make the constitution of the federal government adequate to the exigencies needs of the union george washington at first was not enthusiastic about the meeting.
then news of shayss rebellion made washington change his mind.
he agreed to attend the philadelphia convention and the meeting took on greater importance.
the convention began in may 1787 and continued through one of the hottest summers on record.
the 55 delegates included planters merchants lawyers physicians generals governors and a college president.
three of the delegates were under 30 years of age and one benjamin franklin was over 80 many of the delegates were well educated.
at a time when few people went to college 26 of the delegates had college degrees.
native americans african americans and women were not represented at the convention.
these groups were not considered part of the political process at that time.
having washington and franklin at the convention guaranteed the public trust.
the 55 framers lawyers j merchants other politicians 12 8 4 fudges physicians planters philosopher professor surveyer source fifty five fathers the story ofthe constitutional convention ofthe 55 people attending the constitutional convention nearly half were college educated.
using math skills what was the most common occupation among the men who attended the convention.
critical thinking evaluating why do you think it is important for government leaders to have knowledge of the law.
reading in the content area circle graphs academic vocabulary circle or pie graphs show how a whole is divided into different parts.
to read a circle graph imagine that the circle is a pie.
compare the different sizes ofthe different pieces.
use any numbers or labels to help you measure and compare the sizes of each piece.
convention a meeting lesson 2 237 f trust was important because the convention did not just amend or revise the articles of confederation.
it produced an entirely new constitution.
some questioned whether the convention had such authority.
yet the work went on.
two men from philadelphia also had key roles.
james wilson did important work on the details ofthe constitution and gouverneur morris polished the final draft.
james madison who was a keen supporter of a strong national government kept a record of the conventions work.
madison is often called the father of the constitution because he was the author of the basic plan of government that the convention adopted.
the convention organizes the delegates chose george washington to lead the meetings.
delegates also decided that each state would have one vote on all questions.
decisions would be based on a majority vote ofthe states present.
sessions were not open to the public.
in fact the windows were closed in the sweltering heat to keep anyone from listening in.
this made it possible for the delegates to talk freely.
i f i ii the virginia plan edmund randolph of virginia opened the convention with a surprise.
he proposed the virginia plan which called for a strong national government.
the plan which was largely the work of james madison created a government with three branches a two house legislature a chief executive chosen by the legislature and a court system.
the legislature would have powers to tax regulate trade and veto state laws.
voters would elect members ofthe lower house of the legislature.
the members of the lower house would then choose members of the upper house.
in both houses the number of representatives would be proportional or corresponding in size to the population of each state.
this would give a state such as virginia many more delegates than delaware the state with the fewest number of people.
delegates from the small states objected.
they preferred a system in which all states had equal representation.
opponents of the virginia plan rallied around william paterson of new jersey on june 15 he presented another plan.
this plan amended the articles of confederation which was all the convention had the power to do.
4 reading helpdesk proportional having the proper size in relation to other objects or items academic vocabulary amend to change or revise a more perfect union virginia and new jersey plans virginia plan new jersey plan edmund randolph proposed the virginia plan.
william paterson proposed the new jersey plan.
legislativebrand powerful legislature two houses with membership proportional to state s population lower house elected by the people upper house elected by lower house executive branch chosen by legislature limited power could veto legislation subject to override judicial branch would serve for life could veto legislation subject to override legislative branch one house with equal representation from all states legislature could collect taxes from states executive branch chosen by congress would serve a single term subject to recall on request of state governors judicial branch appointed by executive branch would serve for life both plans were federal systems with three branches legislative executive and judicial gave the federal government more powers than it had under the articles of confederation the new jersey plan under this plan the legislature would have a single house with each state having one vote.
paterson argued that the convention should not deprive smaller states of the equality they had under the articles.
the new jersey plan gave congress the power to set taxes regulate trade and elect an executive branch made up of more than one person.
in sum the new jersey plan favored a more powerful government than existed under the articles but a less powerful government than the virginia plan proposed.
breading progress check explaining why did new jersey s delegates object to the virginia plan.
delegates at the constitutional convention considered different plans.
comparing in what ways were the two plans similar.
critical thinking explaining explain how proportional representation favored larger states.
skills practice before you read text build background by discussing the topic with a partner.
tell your partner what you know listen to what your partner knows and combine your background knowledge.
lesson 2 239 4 ii george washington 1732 1799 george washington s military service is well known.
he also became a key political leader in his later years.
washington did not want to attend the constitutional convention but he did because he worried that the nation would not survive under the weak articles of confederation.
the delegates unanimously chose him as the presiding officer or leader ofthe convention.
washington said very little during the debates but later became one ofthe new constitution s strongest supporters.
he argued that later generations could make any changes necessary.
chical thinking drawing inferences what can you infer from the fact that the other delegates chose washington as the leader of the convention.
reading helpdesk agreeing to compromise guiding question what compromises were reached in the new constitution.
the delegates had to decide whether to revise the articles of confederation or write a new constitution.
on june 19 the states voted to work toward a new constitution based on the virginia plan.
they still had to deal with the difficult issue of representation that divided the large and small states.
the great compromise the convention appointed a committee to settle the disagreement.
roger sherman of connecticut suggested what would later be called the great compromise.
a compromise is the settling of a dispute when each party agrees to give up some of its demands.
shermans compromise proposed different representation in the two house legislature.
in the upper house the senate each state would have two members.
that is the states would be equal in representation.
in the lower house the house of representatives the number of seats for each state would vary based on the states population.
larger states would have more representation.
the three fifths compromise delegates from the south and north disagreed on whether and how to count each states enslaved population.
including enslaved people as part of a states population would increase each southern states size.
this would give southern states more seats in congress.
the southern states liked this but the northern states did not.
at the same time larger populations would increase each southern states taxes because states were to be taxed based on their populations.
the south was not happy about this.
as a solution to this dispute delegates agreed to what was called the three fifths compromise.
as part of this compromise every five enslaved persons would count as three persons in the state s population total.
this population total would be the basis for setting taxes and determining representation in congress.
the question of the slave trade most northern states had already banned the slave trade.
they wanted to prohibit it nationwide.
southern states considered slavery central to their economy.
northerners agreed to keep the new congress from interfering with the slave trade until 1808 compromise a settlement of a dispute by each party giving up some demands a more perfect union 1 debating a bill of rights state constitutions such as those of virginia and massachusetts had a listing of key rights and freedoms.
these are known as a declaration of rights or a bill of rights.
at the convention some delegates worried that without a bill of rights the new national government might abuse its power.
george mason of virginia proposed a bill of rights to be included in the constitution.
the delegates rejected this idea.
most of the delegates believed that the constitution carefully defined government powers and provided enough protection of individual rights.
approving the constitution on september 17 1787 the delegates assembled to sign the constitution they had created.
three delegates refused to sign elbridge gerry of massachusetts and edmund randolph and george mason of virginia.
gerry and mason would not sign because the constitution did not have a bill of rights.
randolph who had put forth the virginia plan felt the final document strayed too far from his own beliefs.
the other delegates did sign the document.
the approved draft of the constitution went out to the states for their approval.
under the articles of confederation all 13 states would have had to agree to any change to the framework of government.
the drafters of the new constitution decided however that the document would go into effect with the approval of just 9 of the 13 states.
o reading progress check explaining what compromises were reached concerning enslaved people.
i i include this lesson s information in your foldable.
a more perfect union articles of tba al lew ratifying the confederation m constitution constitution november n77 ay segembec 1787 1799 i lesson 2 review review vocabulary 1 write a sentence about the constitutional convention that uses both of these terms.
3oa 3ob a proportional b compromise answer the guiding questions 2 summarizing what weaknesses in the national government did shays s rebellion reveal.
5a isb 29b 3 describing why did leading americans decide to create a new constitution.
ia 4 explaining what is the significance of the year 1787 in the nation s history.
ic 5 analyzing why did the constitutional convention adopt the three fifths compromise.
4d expository writing you have been asked to write a short announcement to inform your community about the great compromise.
summarize the key points ofthe agreement.
include any other details you think are important.
4d 21 29b 30d lesson 2 241 t what doyou think.
should the constitution be ratified.
after the delegates in philadelphia wrote the u s constitution it went before the american people for approval.
delegates in each state met at special conventions to decide whether to accept or reject the constitution.
in order for the constitution to become the new plan for the government of the united states 9 of the 13 states had to ratify or approve it.
those who opposed the constitution were called anti federalists.
mercy otis warren and the other anti federalist writers feared a strong national government would take away the rights of citizens.
federalists supported the constitution.
they believed that the constitution would give the national government power to manage the problems facing the united states.
at the same time the federalists argued the constitution would protect the rights of the individual.
primary source the constitutional convention met at independence hall.
mercy otis warren our situation is truly delicate critical.
on the one hand we are in need ofa strong federal government founded on principles that will support the prosperity union ofthe colonies.
on the other we have struggled for liberty made lofty sacrifices at her shrine and there are still many among us who revere her name too much to relinquish beyond a certain medium the rights of man for the dignity of government.
99 l ill iii a more perfect union the original constitution of the united states is on display in the rotunda for the charters of freedom in the national archives building.
james wilson i am satisfied that anything nearer to perfection could not have been accomplished.
if there are errors it should be remembered that the seeds of reformation are sown in the work itself and the concurrence of two thirds of the congress may at any time introduce alterations and amendments i am bold to assert that it is the best form of government which has ever been offered to the world.
99 what do you think.
dbq vocabulary revere deeply love and respect relinquish give up reformation change concurrence agreement 0 identifying according to warren why should people be cautious about the new government.
4e 15a 0 summarizing according to wilson how can the constitution be improved in the future.
4e ua 29b 0 analyzing what are the differences between warren s and wilson s views about ratification of the constitution.
4e lesson 2 243 networks there s more online.
biographies john locke baron de montesquieu et game identification sf graphic organizer branches of the federal government ef primary source the ninth pillar ef self check quiz video reading helpdesk lesson 3 a new plan of government i rial question how do governments change.
otff texas essential knowledge and skills 4e analyze the arguments for and against ratification.
15a identify the influence of ideas from historic documents including the magna carta the english bill of rights the mayflower compact the federalist papers and selected anti federalist writings on the u s system of government.
15c identify colonial grievances listed in the declaration of independence and explain how those grievances were addressed in the u s constitution and the bill of rights.
15d analyze how the u s constitution reflects the principles of limited government republicanism checks and balances federalism separation of powers popular sovereignty and individual rights.
17a analyze the arguments of the federalists and anti federalists including those of alexander hamilton patrick henry james madison and george mason.
20a explain the role of significant individuals such as thomas hooker charles de montesquieu john locke william blackstone and william penn in the development of self government in colonial america.
it matters because the constitution contains features that came from the best political thinkers and that have helped the nation survive and thrive.
the constitution s sources guidingquestion from where did the framers of the constitution borrow their ideas about government.
although an american document the constitution has roots in other civilizations.
the delegates who wrote the document studied the history of political thought in an effort to avoid the mistakes of the past.
many ideas found in the constitution came from european political institutions and writers.
the framers who shaped the document were familiar with the parliamentary system of britain.
many had taken part in their colonial or state assemblies.
they valued the individual rights guaranteed by the british judicial system.
although the americans broke away from british rule they respected many british traditions or cultural beliefs and practices.
european influences the english magna carta 1215 placed limits on the power of the monarch.
parliament englands lawmaking body became a force that the king or queen had to depend on to pay for wars and the royal government.
like parliament colonial assemblies controlled their colonies funds.
the assemblies had some control over colonial governors.
taking notes categorizing as you read use a chart like this one to identify the powers of each branch of the federal government.
a more perfect union branch example executive legislative judicial content vocabulary federalism legislative branch executive branch electoral college judicial branch checks and balan amendment the english bill of rights of 1689 was another model for americans.
in fact many people in the united states felt the constitution also needed a bill of rights.
the framers believed in the ideas about the nature of people and government put forth by european writers of the enlightenment.
the enlightenment was a movement of the 1700s that promoted knowledge reason and science as a means of improving society.
james madison and other framers of the constitution were familiar with the writings of john locke and baron de montesquieu mahn tuhskyoo two philosophers of the enlightenment.
the english philosopher locke wrote that all people have natural rights.
he stated that these natural rights include the rights to life liberty and property.
in his two treatises of civil government 1690 he wrote that government is based on an agreement or contract between the people and their government.
americans interpreted natural rights to mean the rights of britons defined in the magna carta and the english bill of rights.
the framers viewed the constitution as a contract between the american people and their government.
the contract protected peoples natural rights by limiting government power.
the french writer montesquieu declared in the spirit of laws 1748 that the powers of government should be separated and balanced against each other.
this separation would prevent any one person or group from gaining too much power.
the framers of the constitution carefully spelled out and divided the powers of government.
federalism the constitution created a federal system of government that divided powers between the national or federal government and the states.
under the articles of confederation the states held most powers.
under the constitution the states gave up some powers to the federal government and kept others.
federalism fe duh ruh lih zuhm or sharing power between the federal and state governments is one of the key features of the united states government.
under the constitution the federal government gained wide ranging powers to tax regulate trade control the currency raise an army and declare war.
it could also pass laws that were necessary and proper for carrying out its responsibilities.
this power would allow congress to make laws as needed to deal with new situations.
john locke influenced many of the framers of the constitution.
his views on natural rights are reflected in the constitution.
federalism sharing power between the federal and state governments academic vocabulary tradition a longstanding cultural belief and practice lesson 3 245 skills practice use sign language and gestures when you don t know enough words.
point to pictures to tell about your text.
the constitution left some important powers to the states.
the states kept the power to control trade inside their borders.
they also could set up local governments and schools and establish marriage and divorce laws.
the constitution also called for the sharing of some powers between the federal and state governments.
both federal and state governments would have the power to tax and to establish criminal justice systems.
while states had powers and shared others with the federal government the constitution and the laws of congress were to he the supreme law of the land no state could make laws or take actions that went against the constitution.
federal courts would settle disputes between the federal government and the states on the basis of the constitution.
q reading progress check identifying how were the principles of the magna carta reflected in colonial assemblies.
government structure guidingquestion how does the constitution limit the po wer ofthe government.
the declaration of independence had listed the many grievances or complaints americans held against king george iii and parliament.
the grievances included imposing taxes on us without our consent and opposed the rights ofthe people the framers ofthe constitution sought to address these grievances by limiting the power of government and protecting the rights ofthe citizens.
the framers of the constitution used montesquieu s idea of a separation of powers.
they divided the federal government federal and state powers the constitution gives exclusive powers to the state and federal governments and it also calls for some powers to be shared.
o identifying what is an example of a power shared by the federal and state governments.
o critical thinking making generalizations why do you think both the national and state governments have the powerto collect taxes.
national government national and state governments state governments reading helpdesk coin money maintain army and navy declare war regulate trade between states and with foreign nations carry out all expressed powers establish courts enforce laws collect taxes borrow money provide for general welfare regulate trade within a state protect public welfare and safety conduct elections establish local governments legislative branch the lawmaking branch of government executive branch the branch of government that executes or carries out the law headed by the president electoral college the special 0 of electors chosen to vote for president an vice president a more perfect union congress shown here listening to the president deliver the state of the union speech consists of both the house of representatives and the senate.
congress currently has 100 senators and 435 representatives.
into three branches legislative executive and judicial.
the first three articles or parts of the constitution describe each branchs powers and responsibilities.
government branches article i of the constitution declares congress to be the legislative branch or lawmaking branch of the government.
congress is made up of the house of representatives and the senate.
the powers of congress include establishing taxes coining money and regulating trade.
article ii of the constitution sets up the executive branch to carry out the nations laws and policies.
at the head of this branch are the president and vice president.
a special group called the electoral college elects the president and vice president.
today voters in each state choose the electors who make up the electoral college.
article iii deals with the judicial branch or court system.
the nations judicial power resides in one supreme court and any lower federal courts congress creates.
the supreme court and other federal courts hear cases involving the constitution federal laws and disputes between states.
checks and balances the constitution contains a system of checks and balances.
this means each branch of government has ways to check or limit the power of the other branches.
with this system no single branch can gain too much power in the government.
you will learn more about this system in another chapter.
l o o canada i united t states mexico i central i j america south america chapter 13 n w jersey florida territory gulf of mexico atlantic ocean i i ceded by native americans c ceded to native americans 1 common removal route cherokee removal route h chickasaw removal route choctaw removal route creek removal route seminole removal route fort borders as of 1840 the seminole of florida 80w is k 400 miles seminole area 1740 1822 seminole area 1822 1842 r l seminole reservation 1823 1832 fort battle is american settlement spread to the west americans came into conflict with the native americans who lived there.
over time native americans were pushed even farther west.
rhode island connecticut step into the place map focus during the jackson era the indian removal act forced the seminole and other eastern native americans to move from their homelands to new homes west ofthe mississippi river.
region look at the map.
in what part of florida did the seminole live.
10a 29c 29j movement how did the removal route ofthe seminole differ from that of the other groups.
iob human environment interaction what kinds of challenges might native americans have encountered when traveling such long distances.
criticalth1nking analyzing how might the removal ofthe native americans have enabled greater expansion ofthe united states.
29j 95 w 9 rw 85ctf 75w 70w step into the time timeline look at the time line.
what events suggest a weakening of spain s colonial empire in the americas.
29c james monroe 1817 1825 world events 1821 spain officially transfers florida to the united states 1823 monroe doctrine is issued john q adams 1825 1829 1830 congress passes indian removal act andrew jackson 1829 1837 1833 congress passes force bill gulf of mexico n i dade mai au h n 1 inrnln elected martin van buren william henry 1845 florida becomes a state 1834 abraham lincoln 1837 1841 harrison 1841 i to illinois state legislature cz 1845 texas 1838 cherokee forced to move west annexed by united states 1 i 1839 scottish blacksmith networks there s more online.
gf biography kb andrew jackson lf gf graphic organizer a democrats and national republicans image jackson s inauguration gf maps the election of 1824 the election of 1828 self check quiz video il in 3ttt 5 lesson 1 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
5c explain the origin and development of american political parties.
5f explain the impact of the election of andrew jackson including expanded suffrage.
7a analyze the impact of tariff policies on sections of the united states before the civil war.
7d identify the provisions and compare the effects of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the civil war including the roles of john quincy adams john c calhoun henry clay and daniel webster.
8b explain the causes of the civil war including sectionalism states rights and slavery and significant events of the civil war including the firing on fort sumter the battles of antietam gettysburg and vicksburg the announcement of the emancipation proclamation lee s surrender at appomattox court house and the assassination of abraham lincoln.
17b explain constitutional issues arising over the issue of states rights including the nullification crisis and the civil war.
21a identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues.
reading helpdesk jacksonian democracy l question whatarethediaracteristicsofaleader.
it matters because during the jackson era elections became more democratic and our modern political system began to take shape.
new parties emerge guiding question what new ways of campaigning appeared during the elections of 1824 and 1828.
from 1816 to 1824 the united states had only one major political party.
this was the democratic republican party.
the party was far from united.
in 1824 four democratic republican candidates competed for the presidency.
party leaders chose william h crawford a former senator from georgia to be their candidate.
three other candidates were favorite sons that is they received backing from their home states rather than the national party.
their views reflected the interests of their regions.
two favorite sons andrew jackson and henry clay were from the west.
clay of kentucky was speaker of the house of representatives.
jackson of tennessee was a hero of the war of 1812 raised in poverty he claimed to speak for americans who had been left out of politics.
the third favorite son john quincy adams of massachusetts was the son of former president john adams.
he was popular with merchants of the northeast.
the house chooses the president in the election jackson received a plurality pluh raluh tee of the popular vote the largest share.
no candidate received a majority or more than half of the electoral votes.
the content vocabulary favorite son mudslinging nominating plurality.
bureaucracy convention majority.
spoils system the election of 1824 eight electors in maine voted for adams and one voted for jackson.
two electors in delaware voted for jackson and one voted for crawford.
twenty six electors in new york voted for adams five voted for crawford four voted for clay and one voted for jackson t seven electors in maryland voted for jackson three voted for adams and one voted for crawford tt three electors in louisiana voted for jackson and two voted for adams.
ttt two electors in illinois voted for jackson and one voted for adams.
the election of 1824 produced great controversy.
constitution requires that the house of representatives select the president when no candidate has won a majority of the electoral vote.
as the house prepared to vote clay met with adams.
clay agreed to use his influence as speaker to defeat jackson.
with clays help the house chose adams for president.
adams quickly named clay to be secretary of state.
in the past this office had been the stepping stone to the presidency.
jacksons followers accused the two men of making a corrupt bargain and stealing the election.
adams as president adams and clay denied any wrongdoing.
no one ever uncovered any evidence of a bargain.
still the charge cast a shadow over adamss presidency.
in his first message to congress adams announced his plans.
in addition to improving roads and waterways he wanted to build a national university and support scientific research.
adamss proposals upset his opponents.
they wanted a more limited role for the federal government.
it would be wrong they believed for government to spend money on such projects.
congress finally approved funds for improving rivers harbors and roads but this was far less than adams wanted.
favorite son a candidate for national office who has support mostly from his or her home state plurality the largest number of something but less than a majority majority greater than half of a total number of something interpreting graphs in what place did the candidate who won the most electoral votes finish in the house vote.
critical thinking drawing conclusions on what basis might jackson have expected to win the presidency.
lesson 1 375 the election of 1828 andrew jackson won the election of 1828.
0 39 4 443 43 68 501 967 jackson democrat other adams national republican mixed electoral vote total popular vote total 1 149 216 55 93 642 806 six electors in maryland voted for adams and five voted for jackson.
eight electors in maine voted for adams and one voted for jackson.
twenty electors in new york voted for jackson and sixteen voted for adams.
using math skills how many more electoral votes did jackson get than he needed to win the election.
critical thinking comparing how did having only two presidential candidates in 1828 affect the results of this election.
the election of 1828 by 1828 the democratic republican party had split.
jacksons supporters called themselves democrats.
the national republicans supported adams.
most democrats favored states rights and distrusted strong central government.
the national republicans wanted a strong central government.
they supported measures such as building roads and a national bank to facilitate economic growth.
during the campaign both sides resorted to mudslinging or attempts to ruin their opponents reputation with insults.
the candidates also used slogans buttons and rallies.
such practices became a regular part of american political life.
in the election jackson received most of the votes cast in the frontier states.
he also received many votes in the south where his support for states rights was popular.
john c calhoun of south carolina who had been adamss vice president switched parties to run with jackson.
calhoun also supported states rights.
jackson won the election easily.
shortly after the election jacksons supporters officially formed the democratic party.
with the election of jackson a man from humble origins who had the support of the common man the nation entered a new era the age of jackson.
reading progress check reading helpdesk contrasting how did democrats and national republicans differ in their views.
mudslinging amethodinelection campaigns that uses gossip and lies to make an opponent look bad bureaucracy a system of government in which specialized tasks are carried out by appointed officials ratherthan by elected ones academic vocabulary facilitate to help make happen participate to take part in 376 the jackson era jackson as president guidingquestion how did andrew jackson make the american political system more democratic.
andrew jackson had qualities most americans admired.
he was a patriot a self made man and a war hero.
thousands of ordinary people came to washington for his inauguration.
expanded voting rights president andrew jackson promised equal protection and equal benefits for all americans at least all white american men.
jacksons promise reflected the spirit of the times.
in the nations early years only men who owned property or paid taxes could vote.
by the 1820s many states had loosened these requirements.
white male sharecroppers factory workers and others could now participate in the political process.
by 1828 nearly all states let voters rather than state legislatures choose presidential electors.
women still could not vote.
african americans and native americans had few rights of any kind.
making government more democratic jackson disliked interest groups organized groups of people who try to influence government in a way that helps their own interests.
he also disliked people whose power came from privilege.
instead jackson and other democrats wanted to further open government to the people.
they were disturbed that the federal government had become a bureaucracy byuh rahkruhsee a system in which nonelected officials carry out laws.
andrew jackson s supporters gather outside the white house hoping to shake hands with a president who seemed to be just like them.
critical thinking drawing conclusions why do you think people identified so closely with andrew jackson.
andrew jackson 1767 1845 like many of his supporters andrew jackson was born in a log cabin.
a j noted war hero jackson was called old hickory because he was said to be as tough as a hickory stick.
small farmers craftspeople and others who felt left out of the expanding american economy admired jackson.
they felt that his rise from a log cabin to the white house demonstrated the kind of j success story possible only in the united states.
critical thinking drawing inferences why do you think voters would identify with a candidate who was from humble beginnings.
soon after taking office in 1829 jackson fired many federal workers and replaced them with his supporters.
the fired employees protested.
but one jackson supporter said to the victors belong the spoils in other words because jackson had won the election his supporters had the right to the spoils or benefits of victory.
this practice of replacing current government employees with supporters of the winner is called the spoils system.
jacksons supporters also abandoned the unpopular caucus system in which top party leaders chose the partys candidates for office.
instead parties began using nominating conventions nahmih nayting kuhn ven shuhnz where delegates from the states chose the partys presidential candidate.
this system allowed many more people to participate in the selection of candidates.
h reading progress check analyzing why was it important to expand voting rights.
the tariff debate guidingquestion howdida fight over tariffs become a debate about states rights versus federal rights.
a tariff is a tax on imported goods.
in 1828 congress passed a high protective tariff on manufactured goods from europe.
manufacturers in the united states mostly in the northeast welcomed the tariff.
because tariffs made european goods more expensive americans were more likely to buy u s made goods.
southerners however hated the new tariff.
the south traded cotton to europe for manufactured goods and the new tariff would make these items more expensive.
mn ii skills practice read text with a partner.
when the language or sentence structure is challenging paraphrase the difficult sentences.
reading helpdesk spoils system the practice of handing out government jobs to supporters replacing government employees with the winning candidate s supporters vice president calhoun who believed in states rights claimed that a state could nullify or refuse to accept a federal law if it was not in that states best interests.
according to the states rights position the constitution was an agreement among the states to establish a national government.
if an act of the national government went beyond the powers granted by the constitution a state had the right to refuse to obey.
president jackson disagreed.
if a state could nullify any federal law it considered unconstitutional the power of the federal government would cease.
he feared nullification could destroy the union.
nominating convention a meeting in which representative members of a political party choose candidates to run for important elected offices i 378 the jackson era in 1830 at a washington dinner marking thomas jeffersons birthday jackson had a chance to make his feelings on nullification known.
he offered a toast.
looking directly at calhoun the president declared our union.
it must be preserved answering jacksons challenge the vice president rose with a toast of his own the union next to our liberty most dear to make sure his meaning was clear calhoun added it can only be preserved by respecting the rights of the states in 1832 congress passed a lower tariff.
it was not enough to cool the protest.
south carolina passed the nullification act declaring it would not pay the illegal tariffs of 1828 and 1832 the state threatened to secede or break away from the union if the federal government interfered.
to ease the crisis jackson backed a bill that would gradually lower the tariff.
jackson also vowed to uphold the law and asked congress for the power to use the power of the federal government if it was needed.
early in 1833 congress passed the lower tariff bill and also the force bill allowing jackson to use the military to enforce federal law.
south carolina accepted the new tariff but nullified the force bill.
both sides claimed victory and the issue was put to rest at least temporarily.
q reading progress check drawing inferences how might the workers at a factory in the northeast react to the lowering of the tariff.
foldables study organizer jj include this lesson s information in your foldable o jacksonian emocracy.
conflicts over land jackson and the bank lesson 1 review review vocabulary 1 show understanding of the following terms by using them in a sentence about the election of 1824.
30a 30b a plurality b majority 2 use the following terms in a sentence that illustrates how the terms are connected.
joa 3ob a bureaucracy b spoils system answer the guiding questions 3 identifying cause and effect how did the breakup of the democratic republican party affect american democracy.
2i 29b 4 explaining how did the election of 1828 show the growth of democracy.
ia sf 5 explaining how was the fight over tariffs related to the issue of states rights.
bb i7b expository writing andrew jackson once said one man with courage makes a majority.
write a paragraph explaining what you think jackson meant by this quote and how this idea influenced his leadership 5 22 300 lesson 1 379 i networks there s more online.
p game crossword puzzle gf graphic organizer.
seminole and cherokee resistance ef map the removal of native americans 1820 1840 ef primary source osceola self check quiz gf video u j o lesson 2 conflicts over land question what an the consequences when cultures interact.
1 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
5g analyze the reasons for the removal and resettlement of cherokee indians during the jacksonian era including the indian removal act worcester v georgia and the trail of tears.
7d identify the provisions and compare the effects of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the civil war including the roles of john quincy adams john c calhoun henry clay and daniel webster.
9d identify the effects of legislative acts such as the homestead act the dawes act and the morrill act.
10b compare places and regions of the united states in terms of physical and human characteristics.
18a identify the origin of judicial review and analyze examples of congressional and presidential responses.
23c identify ways conflicts between people from various racial ethnic and religious groups were resolved.
it matters because the forced removal and relocation of native americans in the 1830s largely ended the native american presence in the eastern united states.
reading helpdesk removing native americans guidingquestion why were native americans forced to abandon their land and move wesg as the nation expanded west many native americans still remained in the east.
the cherokee creek seminole chickasaw and choctaw peoples lived in the mountains plateaus and swamps of georgia alabama mississippi and florida.
these groups had created successful farming communities that were much like many other american communities.
as a result americans considered them civilized and called them the five civilized tribes though americans recognized the success of the five civilized tribes they did not necessarily respect their rights.
in fact some white people wanted the native americans lands for themselves.
to make this possible they wanted the federal government to force eastern native americans to relocate to lands west of the mississippi river.
andrew jackson supported the white settlers demand for native american land.
he had once fought the creek and seminole in georgia and florida to give the settlers more land.
when he became president in 1829 he stated that he wanted to move all native americans to the great plains.
many people taking notes describing as you read use a graphic organizer like this one to describe how each group of native americans resisted removal and the result.
380 the jackson era like most people of the americas in the early 1800s the seminole in this village lived off the land they farmed.
believed this region to be a wasteland where american settlers would never want to live.
many people thought that if all native americans moved there conflict with them would be ended.
the cherokee versus georgia in 1830 president jackson pushed the indian removal act through congress.
this law allowed the federal government to pay native americans to move west.
jackson then sent officials to make treaties with the native americans in the southeast.
in 1834 congress established the indian territory.
most of the region was located in what is now the state of oklahoma.
this area was to be the new home for the native americans of the southeast.
most eastern native american peoples felt forced to sell their land and move west.
the cherokee refused to do so.
in treaties of the 1790s the federal government had recognized the cherokee as a separate nation.
however the state of georgia in which many cherokee lived refused to accept the cherokees status.
in 1830 georgia made cherokee land part of the state.
it also began to enforce state laws in the cherokee nation.
as pressure for relocation mounted the cherokee appealed to the american people primary source ft we are aware that some persons suppose it will be for our advantage to remove beyond the mississippi our people universally think otherwise we wish to remain on the land of our fathers.
99 appeal of the cherokee nation 1830 relocate to move to another place academic vocabulary federal relating to a national government build vocabulary multiple meaning words the term federal applies to more than just the national government of the united states.
it describes any system of government in which several smaller state or district governments unite but still keep control over their own internal affairs.
lesson 2 381 i this painting depicts the cherokee on the trail of tears.
critical thinking interpreting images what does this image suggest about the native americans experience on the trail of tears.
use details from the painting to explain your answer.
reading helpdesk still georgia pressured the cherokee.
in response the cherokee turned to the u s supreme court.
in worcester v georgia 1832 chief justice john marshall ruled that georgia had no right to interfere with the cherokee.
president jackson who supported georgias efforts to remove the cherokee defiantly opposed the supreme court s ruling.
john marshall has made his decision jackson is said to have declared now let him enforce it no one was willing or able to challenge the failure of the president and congress to enforce the courts ruling.
the trail of tears by 1835 the cherokee were divided about what to do.
that year the federal government convinced a small number of cherokee about 500 of them to sign the treaty of new echota.
in this treaty the group agreed to give up all cherokee land by 1838 cherokee chief john ross sent a protest to the u s senate.
ross explained that the few cherokee who signed the treaty did not speak for all the 17 000 cherokee in the region.
many white americans including senators daniel webster and henry clay also opposed the treaty as unfair.
however their pleas did not change the minds of president jackson or the white settlers.
in 1836 the senate approved the treaty by a single vote.
i reading in the content area bar graphs bar graphs often have vertical bars but they may also appear with horizontal bars as in the graph on the opposite page.
in such graphs the subject of each bar appears on the left.
the item being measured in this case people appears at the bottom of the graph.
382 the jackson era when the treaty s 1838 deadline arrived only about 2 000 cherokee had moved west.
jacksons successor president martin van buren ordered the army to move the rest of them.
in may 1838 general winfield scott arrived in the cherokee nation with 7 000 troops to remove the remaining cherokee by force.
he told them that resistance and escape were hopeless.
the cherokee knew that fighting would lead to their destruction.
filled with sadness and anger cherokee leaders gave in.
between june and december 1838 soldiers rounded up cherokee in north carolina georgia alabama and tennessee.
under guard the cherokee began their march to indian territory in the west.
the forced relocation of some 15 000 cherokee was a terrible ordeal.
most people were not prepared for the journey.
trouble started even before they set out.
as the cherokee crowded into camps and awaited the command to begin their march illness broke out.
as many as 2 000 cherokee died.
once on the trail the cherokee suffered from hunger and from exposure to the weather.
these conditions led to the deaths of another 2 000 people.
when the relocation was over about one quarter of the cherokee population was dead.
the cherokee came to call their forced journey west the trail where they cried.
historians call it the trail of tears.
skills practice work with a partner.
ask your partner for help with the bold faced words in your text.
ask your teacher if your partner does not know a word.
h reading progress check analyzing what was the purpose of the indian removal act.
native american removal forced migration 1830 1840 5 000 10 000 number of people 15 000 20 000 after passage of the indian removal act of 1830 the government began to force the five civilized tribes living east of the mississippi river to move to an area that was located in what is now part of the state of oklahoma.
interpreting graphs about how many native americans had to move to indian territory between 1830 and 1840.
critical thinking drawing inferences which native american groups in the south had the largest population in the early 1800s.
how can you tell.
lesson 2 383 networks there s more online.
graphic organizer jay the bank war et maps election of 1836 ar ms al 4 7 k la 18888 election of 1840 ef primary sources lesson 3 jackson political cartoon harrison campaign poster et self check quiz jackson and the bank itial question how do governments change.
1 it matters because the ongoing struggle over the bank of the united states represented the ongoing struggle over the role of the federal government.
i teks texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
jackson s war against the bank guidingquestion what events occurred when president jackson forced the national bank to close.
5b summarize arguments regarding protective tariffs taxation and the banking system.
5c explain the origin and development of american political parties.
7d identify the provisions and compare the effects of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the civil war including the roles of john quincy adams john c calhoun henry clay and daniel webster.
14b describe the characteristics and the benefits of the u s free enterprise system during the 18th and 19th centuries.
18b summarize the issues decisions and significance of landmark supreme court cases including marbury v madison mcculloch v maryland and gibbons v ogden.
21a identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues.
21c summarize a historical event in which compromise resulted in a peaceful resolution.
reading helpdesk andrew jackson disliked the second bank of the united states long before he became president.
congress had set up the bank in 1816 to hold the federal governments money and to control the nations money supply.
private bankers rather than elected officials ran the bank.
its president nicholas biddle represented everything jackson disliked.
jackson prided himself on being a self made western pioneer who had started with nothing.
biddle came from a wealthy philadelphia family and had a good education and experience in financial matters.
in addition the banks assigned duties made it a powerful institution.
many western settlers depended on being able to borrow money to run their farms.
the banks strict policies made such loans difficult to obtain.
like many other westerners jackson viewed the bank as a monopoly that favored wealthy easterners and limited western growth.
the bank and the election of 1832 jackson s opponents planned to use the bank to defeat him in the 1832 presidential campaign.
senators henry clay and daniel webster were friends of biddle.
they persuaded biddle to apply taking notes identifying use a chart like this one to identify the actions taken by president jackson that put the bank of the united states out of business.
content vocabulary veto r i gankof unitedi states closes i the jackson era early for a new charter a government permit to run the bank even though the banks charter did not expire until 1836 they thought this would force jackson to take action against the bank.
clay and webster believed the bank had the support of the american people.
they thought that if jackson tried to veto or reject the renewal of the banks charter he would lose support.
henry clay wanted to run for president.
he and webster believed that jacksons veto would help clay defeat the president in the 1832 election.
jackson told secretary of state martin van buren the bank is trying to kill me.
but i will kill it jackson vetoed the bill.
he argued that the bank was unconstitutional despite the supreme courts decision to the contrary in mcculloch v maryland 1819.
this case had concerned whether the state of maryland had the right to tax the national bank of the united states.
webster and clay were right about one thing.
the bank did play a large part in the election of 1832 instead of gaining support for clay as president however their plan backfired.
most people supported jacksons veto and jackson was reelected.
jackson then decided to kill the bank even before its current charter ended.
he ordered all government deposits withdrawn from the bank and placed in smaller state banks.
in 1836 he refused to sign a new charter for the bank and it closed.
borin to command.
had i been consulted.
ktnu andrew the first.
jackson s opponents compared him to a bad king a tyrant with too much power.
critical thinking analyzing primary sources what is the meaning of the documents that appear at jackson s feet.
the panic of 1837 jackson decided not to run for a third term in 1836 the democrats chose van buren jacksons vice president during his second term.
the whigs a new party that included former national republicans and other anti jackson forces were the opposition.
the whigs nominated three candidates.
each had support in a different part of the nation.
the whigs hoped this tactic would keep van buren from getting a majority of the electoral votes.
then the election would be decided by the house of representatives which the whigs controlled.
the whigs plan failed.
jacksons popularity and support helped van buren win both the popular and the electoral vote.
van buren had barely taken office when a financial panic hit the nation.
the panic was in part an effect of jackson s victory over the bank of the united states.
when the bank ceased operations in 1836 control over state banks vanis e veto to reject a bill and prevent it from academic vocabulary becoming law institution an organization that has an important purpose in society lesson 3 387 me mmt 4 abt this cartoon blames president van buren s policies for the panic of 1837 van buren is standing second from the right.
some of these banks began issuing huge amounts of banknotes.
concerned that these notes had little value the government stopped accepting them as payment for purchasing public land people began to question the value of their banknotes leading to economic panic.
the panic of 1837 led to a depression a severe economic downturn.
land values dropped and banks failed.
thousands of businesses closed.
many workers lost their jobs and farmers lost their land.
in cities across the nation many people could not afford food or rent.
president van buren did little to ease the crisis.
he believed in the principle of laissez faire that government should interfere as little as possible in the nations economy.
however van buren did persuade congress to create an independent federal treasury in 1840 this meant that the government no longer had to deposit its money in private banks as it had been doing.
it would keep its money in the federal treasury instead.
this new system prevented state and private banks from using government money to back their banknotes.
it helped prevent further bank crises.
calling it a second declaration of independence van buren and his supporters hailed the passing of the federal treasury law.
still members of van burens own democratic party joined the whigs in criticizing the act.
the split in the democratic party gave the whigs a chance to win the presidency in 1840 d reading progress check summarizing how did the closing of the second bank of the united states contribute to the panic of 1837.
reading helpdesk build vocabulary word origins the french term laissez faire is a combination of a form of the verb laisser which means to let or allow and the verb faire meaning to do.
in translation the phrase literally means let them do.
as a policy it has been translated as let them do as they please referring to the people.
in practice it refers to giving the government the smallest role possible.
388 the jackson era the whigs in power guiding question what events occurred during the 1840s that led to the weakening of the whig party.
when van buren ran for reelection in 1840 democrats had held the white house for 12 years.
now with the country still in the depths of depression the whigs thought they had a chance to win the presidency.
election of election of electoral vote total popular vote total 2 402 405 i harrison whig i van buren democrat territories numbers on map show electoral votes per state.
although the whigs tactics or methods failed to win the presidency in 1836 different tactics propelled william henry harrison into the white house in 1840 analyzing visuals which 0 states that supported van buren in 1836 turned to harrison in 1840.
critical thinking drawing conclusions what factors might explain the shift in support for the two parties shown in these maps.
lesson 3 389 during the campaign of 1840 the log cabin image appeared in paintings banners and political cartoons.
the log cabin campaign to run against van buren the whigs united behind one of their 1836 candidates william henry harrison.
like andrew jackson harrison was a hero of the war of 1812 john tyler a planter from virginia was harrisons running mate.
harrison had first gained fame with his victory over tecumsehs followers in the battle of tippecanoe in 1811 the whigs made reference to this event in the campaign slogan tippecanoe and tyler too.
harrison needed the support of the workers and farmers who had voted for jackson in order to win the election.
the whigs portrayed harrison who in reality was a wealthy ohioan as a simple frontiersman like jackson.
the democrats attacked this image.
they said that all harrison was good for was sitting in front of a log cabin and collecting his military pension.
these attacks played right into the hands of the whigs who adopted the log cabin as the symbol of their campaign.
while presenting harrison as a man of the people the whigs portrayed van buren as a wealthy snob with perfume scented whiskers.
they blamed him for the depression and accused him of spending the peoples money on expensive furniture for the white house.
the whigs tactics and the effects of the depression seemed to work.
a record number of voters turned out to elect harrison by a wide margin making him the first whig president.
inauguration day 1841 was bitterly cold.
harrison insisted on delivering his long speech without a hat or coat.
he died of pneumonia 32 days later.
he served the shortest term of any president and john tyler became the first vice president to gain the presidency because of the death of a president.
at age 50 tyler was also the nations youngest president up to that time.
skills practice look for words you know on signs you see.
think about what the words mean.
reading helpdesk academic vocabulary reading strategy sommor ang symbol a word or object that stands for something else a summary is a short restatement of the ideas in a text.
summarizing helps you digest and remember the main points in what you have read.
read the text about the log cabin campaign.
on a separate sheet of paper write one or two sentences that capture the main ideas about the campaign.
390 the jackson era john tyler s presidency john tyler won the vice presidential election as a whig.
however he had once been a democrat and had opposed many whig policies.
whig party leaders had put him on the election ballot with harrison mainly to attract southern voters.
whig party leaders daniel webster and henry clay had believed they could control harrison and run the country behind the scenes.
harrisons death ruined that plan.
president tyler vetoed several bills sponsored by whigs in congress.
his lack of party loyalty outraged many whigs.
when he twice vetoed a bill to renew the charter of the bank of the united states all but one of his cabinet members resigned.
only daniel webster remained as secretary of state.
whig leaders actually expelled tyler from the whig party.
the biggest success of the tyler presidency came in the area of foreign relations.
in 1842 the united states and great britain signed the webster ashburton treaty.
this agreement settled a long dispute over the border between maine and canada and set a firm u s canadian boundary from maine to minnesota.
except for opposing tyler the whigs could not agree on their partys goals.
increasingly they voted by region north south and west not party.
this division may explain why the whig candidate henry clay lost the election of 1844 to democratic candidate james polk.
after only four years the whigs were out of power.
the whigs elected just one more president zachary taylor in 1848 taylor also died in office.
by then the whig party had become badly divided over the issue of slavery.
by the early 1850s the party had nearly disappeared.
many northern whigs left the party and helped to form a new political party the republican party that we have today.
d reading progress check describing how did the whigs lose power in the election of 1844.
i include this lesson s information in your foldable.
jacksonian democracy u conflicts over land jackson and the bank i lesson 3 review review vocabulary 1 use the word veto in a sentence that demonstrates your understanding of the term.
joa job answer the guiding questions 2 summarizing what had the supreme court ruled in mcculloch v maryland regarding a national bank.
did president jackson accept that ruling.
sb 29b 3 identifying why did president tyler a whig oppose the second bank of the united states.
2 persuasive writing write a campaign slogan for martin van buren and one for william henry harrison that each man could have used on campaign signs to attract voter support in 1840.
29d job lesson 3 391 92 the jackson era directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
o use your useejst0 explore the essential questions.
expository writing why do you think andrew jackson was so popular in the 1820s and 1830s.
do you think he would be as popular a leader if he were president today.
research and examine information on the current and most recent past presidents.
then write an essay that examines jackson s popularity and answers these questions.
22a 2 social studies skills formulating questions locate a secondary source such as a database that provides information about the population numbers and geographic distribution of native americans in the united states today.
what are three questions you can ask about your findings.
29 2 j thinking like a historian using a problem solving process john tyler became the first vice president to succeed to the presidency after the death of a president.
in effect tyler had been chosen by the presidential candidate not by the voters.
is there another method by which the vice president might be chosen.
in a small team list and consider different options for choosing the vice president and discuss their advantages and disadvantages.
decide on a solution to the problem.
share your findings with the other teams.
discuss and evaluate the other teams solutions.
31a visual literacy interpreting images this poster advertises a meeting on behalf of presidential candidate william henry harrison.
what is the image of harrison portrayed in this poster.
what elements contribute to producing that image.
ilikitlfiov.
aid reform.
are aae aad all invited attend friend nf a ibe old co kt room.
m r on saturday evening next aw jliaxxj iwxaw aaiwws t mm arrw.
er r ft b sprthafteu com.
aad aba tn attead t titer important itnafaemu a mo8le sry cnai.
f arrange assessment directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
checking for understanding 0 president jackson promised equal protection and equal benefits for ordinary americans.
what do his policies toward native americans suggest about these beliefs.
290 0 using standard punctuation quotation marks are used to set off words that present quoted or spoken language.
write the following sentences adding quotation marks wherever they are needed.
3ob a looking directly at calhoun the president declared our union.
it must be preserved.
b the vice president rose with a toast of his own the union next to our liberty most dear.
review the guiding questions 0 describing how did elections change during the jackson era.
ia sf 0 analyzing what are some qualities that made jackson a popular candidate political leader and president.
ia 0 explaining why did settlers want the federal government to relocate native americans.
sc 0 analyzing why was the removal of the cherokee from tennessee and georgia called the trail of tears.
5c 0 explaining why did henry clay and daniel webster want the second bank of the united states to apply early for a new charter.
7d 0 explaining what was the log cabin campaign and how was it related to the expansion of voting rights.
21a critical thinking g analyzing why did andrew jackson accuse john quincy adams of stealing the election in 1824.
how did this conflict affect the democratic republican party in the next presidential election.
drawing conclusions what are interest groups.
why do you think jackson saw them as a threat to open government.
2ia 2 b speculating how would the owner of a cotton plantation in the south have reacted to higher protective tariffs.
explain your response.
7 hypothesizing why do you think president jackson supported such harsh treatment of the cherokee the seminole and other native american groups.
sg 290 analyzing what are some ways treaties were used to remove the cherokee and other native american groups from their lands.
how do you think native american leaders felt about the process of signing a treaty.
23c contrasting how do the physical characteristics of traditional native american lands east of the mississippi river differ from those in the new indian territory.
why do you think the federal government chose to relocate native americans there.
iob 2 b synthesizing in what ways did the conflict over the second bank of the united states reveal the growing sectionalism in the united states.
sb identifying cause and effectwhy did jackson s decision to close the bank lead to the panic of 1837.
how did the panic cause a depression.
ia sb summarizing what factors led to the decline of the whig party in the early 1850s.
2ia 29b need extra help.
ifyou ve missed question review lesson o o o o o o g g 1 2 3 1 3 1 2 3 2 2 3 3 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 3 393 t assessment continued dbq i short response primary source i we had never sold our country.
we never received any annuities payments from our american father and we are determined to hold on to our village.
black hawk leader of a group of sauk and fox native americans interpreting what do you think black hawk means when he states that his people never sold our country.
290 drawing inferences what does black hawk s statement suggest about native americans level of trust toward the federal government.
29b extended response expository writing use the two primary sources on this page and what you have learned in the chapter to support yi position.
30a critical thinking evaluating explain the concept of due process in fourteenth amendment.
how did the warren court interpret this concept in the 1960s.
describe how the court s decisions marked a shift from a strict construction of the constitution and brought about constitutional change.
21a 21c analyzing what programs of the war on poverty ai great society were intended to increase economic opportunities for americans.
what were the uninten consequences of those programs.
17d making connections explain how space technoloc exploration has improved the quality of life.
28b need extra help.
go to page 45014511453 1 452 1 453 1 458 1 459 1 460 1 460 1 45 6 6 46 6 44 44 45414 3 466 social studies skills q using a problem solving process imagine you work for president kennedy.
the president has explained that the soviets seem to be far ahead in space technology.
their success in putting the first satellite and then the first man into orbit seems to be showing the world that communism is a better system than free enterprise and democracy.
the president asks for ideas on how the united states can beat the soviet union in the space race.
prepare a briefing paper for the president recommending the united states begin work to put the first man on the moon.
in the paper apply a problem solving process that walks the president through your thinking and explains why you are recommending this plan.
8b 24a 32a 0 explaining continuity and change explain the reasons why the united states helped organize and support the bay of pigs invasion.
describe the outcome ofthe invasion.
8d 0 creating graphs conduct research at the library or online.
create a new graph from 1948 to the present showing which years the united states was in recession and which presidents were in power for which years on the graph.
then add a line showing the poverty rate from 1948 to the present.
what conclusions can you draw from your graph.
31a 31b q identifying effective leadership even though many people disagreed with him president johnson was able to push through an ambitious set of domestic programs.
what made president johnson such an effective leader in domestic policy.
what methods did he use to get support for his programs and what personal qualities improved his effectiveness.
24a analyzing primary sources read the excerpt below from president kennedy s inaugural address and then answer the questions that follow.
primary source let every nation know whether it wishes us well or ill that we shall pay any price bear any burden meet any hardship support any friend oppose any foe to assure the survival and the success of liberty in the long history ofthe world only a few generations have been granted the role of defending freedom in its hour of maximum danger.
i do not shrink from this responsibility i welcome it.
i do not believe that any of us would exchange places with any other people or any other generation.
the energy the faith the devotion which we bring to this endeavor will light our country and all who serve it.
and the glow from that fire can truly light the world.
and so my fellow americans ask not what your country can do for you ask what you can do for your country f kennedy inaugural address january 20 1961 analyzing speeches what concerns is president kennedy responding to in this speech.
what is endangered.
and what is he committing the nation to do.
in addition to american citizens what audience kennedy is addressing.
8a 29a 29h evaluating language what words and phrases does kennedy use to evoke patriotism and encourage americans to support his position.
given the language used how would you interpret the validity ofthe president s comment we shall pay any price.
29a 29h read the excerpt below and then answer the questions that follow.
primarysource we have in 1964 a unique opportunity and obligation to prove the success of our system to disprove those cynics and critics at home and abroad who question our purpose and our competence unfortunately many americans live on the outskirts of hope some because of their poverty and some because of their color and all too many because of both.
our task is to help replace their despair with opportunity.
this administration today here and now declares unconditional war on poverty in america it will not be a short or easy struggle no single weapon or strategy will suffice but we shall not rest until that war is won.
the richest nation on earth can afford to win it.
we cannot afford to lose it.
b johnson state ofthe union address 1964 need extra help.
20 21 22 23 24 25 gotopage 461 458 1 447 462 j 467 467 the new frontier and the great society 467 analyzing primary sources what is the historical context of johnson s speech.
explain why the public would likely back the president s plans.
29a 29h evaluating language what metaphor and language does johnson use to get people to support his plan to reduce poverty.
why do you think he uses this kind of language.
29a 29h comparing and corroborating sources compare the excerpts from kennedy and johnson s speeches.
what goals do they share and what does that suggest is an important underlying concern for both administrations.
what is a major difference in approach between the two speeches.
29a 29d 29e 29h analyzing visuals use the cartoon to answer the following question.
herblocks cartoon g analyzing visuals what does the boy represent and why do you think the cartoonist made him so small.
29h making inferences according to the cartoon what is johnson trying to do.
29h extended response questions evaluating write an essay describing the impact of warren court in the early 1960s.
do you think the sup court followed a strict construction interpretation of 1 constitution or that judicial interpretation changed tl way the constitution was applied.
be sure to discuss t court s impact on the first amendment on voting rig and on the rights of people accused of crimes.
youres should have an introduction at least three paragraph and a conclusion.
21a 21c explaining imagine you are a reporter shortly after cuban missile crisis has ended.
write an article descri soviet actions in cuba and president kennedy s roleii resolving the crisis.
your essay should have an introduction at least three paragraphs and a condu 8a standardized test practice in which case did the supreme court extend the due process rights of someone accused of a crime by ded that defendants had a right to a lawyer even if they not afford one.
21a a mapp v ohio b gideon v wainwright c baker v carr d engelv vitale what achievement by the united states in 1969 mar important turning point in history.
2d f the united states entered the war in vietnam.
6 the united states launched the first satellite in orbit.
h the united states landed men on the moon.
j the united state ended segregation in the sou need extra help.
26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 i go to page lw w 7 l9 454 457 16 the civil rights movement 1954 1968 networks there s more online about the civil rights movement.
chapter 16 place andtime united states 1954 1968 rosa parks made a decision in december 1955 that ignited a movement to end segregation and achieve civil liberties for all americans.
a young pastor by the name of martin luther king jr spearheaded efforts to reach these goals.
by the mid 1960s civil rights activists had gained two important pieces of legislation the civil rights act of 1964 and the voting rights act of 1965 step into the place read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map.
ss3 9a 9b 9c 9g 29a 29e 29f analyzing historical documents daisy bates and orval faubus both describe the situation in little rock arkansas in 1957 how do the two quotes reflect different perspectives.
primary source 6 suddenly i realized that this calm i had so taken for granted was only the calm before the storm that this was war and that as state president of the national association for the advancement of colored people i was in the front line trenches.
was i ready for war.
who was i really and what did i stand for.
m y mind ranged over these questions and over the whole course of my life.
toward dawn i knew i had found the answer.
i was ready.
i drifted off into the sleep of a mind no longer torn by doubt i or indecision daisy bates from the long shadow of little rock a memoir 1962 primary source 66malice envy hate is deplorable in any place or in any circumstances but as president eisenhower has said himself you can t change the hearts of people by law.
now in view of the progress that we have made all i ask for in this situation and all i ve ever asked for is some time for the situation to change for it to become acceptable so that there would not be disorder and violence so why should we be so impatient as to want to force it because force begets force hate begets hate malice begets malice.
but if time was given for an adjustment of the attitudes and the feelings of people then it can be peacefully accomplished which would be better for all concerned orval faubus from an interview with news commentator mike wallace september 15 1957 step into the time september 1957 making connections research an individual featured on the time line.
write a eisenhower may 17 1954 brown v board of 1953 1961 education ruling is issued december 1955 montgomery alabama bus boycott begins eisenhower sends federal 1960 troops to ensure integration of a little rock high school sit in b networks there s more online.
r s map explore the l i intprartiwo unrein.
interactive version of this map on networks.
400 miles j 0 400 km lambert azimuthal equal area projection kennedy 1961 1963 l johnson 1963 1969 august 28 1963 the march on washington d c is held to support the civil rights bill july 1964 civil rights act of 1964 august 1965 voting passes rights act passes april 4 1968 martin luther king jr is assassinated april 11 1968 civil rights act of 1968 is passed t r.
5 networks there s more online.
biography martin luther king jr sf biography thurgood marshall sf biography rosa parks gf biography linda brown thompson ef image montgomery bus boycott bf primarysource excerpts from the brown v board of education supreme court ruling sf video civil rights interactive self check quiz ir reading helpdesk academic vocabulary facility content vocabulary separate but equal de facto segregation taking notes key ideas and details organizing as you read complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below by listing the techniques used to challenge segregation.
civil rights movement teks texas essential knowledge and skills 9a trace the historical development of the civil rights movement in the 19th 20th and 21st centuries including the 13th 14th 15th and 19th amendments 9b describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights including ones from african american chicano american indian womens and other civil rights movements 9c identify the roles of significant leaders who supported various rights movements including martin luther king jr cesar chavez rosa parks hector p garcia and betty friedan continued on the next page 2g.
lesson 1 the movement begins youthinkthecivilrightsmovement otivatesasocietytomakediang it matters because after world war ii african americans and other civil rights supporters challenged segregation in the united states.
their efforts were strongly opposed by southern segregationists.
eventually the federal government begar to take a firmer stand for civil rights.
the origins of the movement guidingquestion what techniques did the civil rights movement useto challenge segregatioi on december 1 1955 rosa parks left her job as a seamstress in montgomery alabama and boarded a bus to go home.
in 1955 buses in montgomery reserved seats in the front for whites and seats in the rear for african americans.
seats in the middle were available to african americans only if there were few whites on the bus.
parks took a seat just behind the white section and soon all ol the seats on the bus were filled.
when the driver noticed a white man standing he told parks and three other african americans in her row to get up so the white man could sit down.
when parks did not move the driver called the police.
news of parkss arrest reached the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp which asked parks whether her case could be used to challenge segregation.
parks replied if you think it will mean something to montgomery and do some good ill be happy to go along with it parkss decision would spark a new era in the civil rights movement.
the struggle would not be easy.
in 1896 the supreme court had declared segregation to be constitutional in plessy v ferguson which established the separate but equal doctrine.
laws that segregated african americans were permitted as long as equal facilities were provided.
the facilities provided for africa americans however were usually of poorer quality than those provided for whites.
areas without laws requiring segregation often had de facto segregation segregation by custom and tradition.
472 court challenges begin aw pp movement had been building for a long time.
since 1909 6 a supported court cases aimed at overturning segregation.
over the years the naacp had achieved some victories.
in 1935 for example the supreme court ruled in norris v alabama that exclusion of african americans from juries violated their rights to equal protection under the law.
new political power african americans also enjoyed increased political power.
northern politicians increasingly sought their votes and listened to their concerns.
during the 1930s many african americans benefited from new deal programs and began supporting the democratic party.
this gave the party new strength in the north.
the northern wing of the party was now able to counter southern democrats who often supported segregation.
the push for desegregation during world war ii african american leaders began to use their political power to help end discrimination in wartime factories.
they also increased opportunities for african americans in the military.
in 1942 james farmer and george houser founded the congress of racial equality core in chicago.
core began using sit ins a form of protest first popularized by union workers in the 1930s to desegregate restaurants that refused to serve african americans.
using the sit in strategy continued from p 472 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 9f describe presidential actions and congressional votes to address minority rights in the united states including desegregation of the armed forces the civil rights acts of 1957 and 1964 and the voting rights act of 1965 continued on the next page separate but equal a doctrine established by the 1896 supreme court case plessy v ferguson that permitted laws segregating african americans as long as equal facilities were provided facility something that is built installed or established to serve a particular purpose de facto segregation segregation by custom and tradition iiiiiiii analyzing supreme court cases brown v board of education 1954 background of the case one of the most important supreme court cases in american history began in 1952 when the supreme court agreed to hear the naacp s case brown v board ofeducation of topeka kansas and three other cases.
they all dealt with the question of whether the principle separate but equal established in plessy v ferguson was constitutional with regard to public schools.
how the court ruled in a unanimous decision in 1954 the court ruled in favor of linda brown and the other plaintiffs.
in doing so it overruled plessy v ferguson.
it rejected the idea that equivalent but separate schools for african american and white students were constitutional.
the court held that racial segregation in public schools violated the fourteenth amendments equal protection clause.
chief justice earl warren summed up the courts decision declaring i n the field of public education the doctrine of separate but equal has no place.
separate educational facilities are inherently unequal.
the court s rejection of separate but equal was a major victory for the civil rights movement.
it led to the overturning of laws requiring segregation in other public places.
the children involved in the brown v board of education case are shown in this 1953 photograph.
they are from front to back vicki henderson donald henderson linda brown of the case title james emanuel nancy todd and katherine carper.
together their cases led to the supreme court decision that public schools could not be segregated on the basis of race.
dbq analyzing historical documents q explaining why did the supreme court find in favor of linda brown.
q examining why was the ruling in brown v board of education so important.
the civil rights movement 473 continued from p 473 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 9g describe the role of individuals such as governors george wallace orval faubus and lester maddox and groups including the congressional bloc of southern democrats that sought to maintain the status quo 91 describe how litigation such as the landmark cases of brown v board of education mendez v westminster hernandez v texas delgado v bastrop i s d edgewood i s d.
v kirby and sweatt v painter played a role in protecting the rights of the minority during the civil rights movement members of core went to segregated restaurants.
they sat down and refused to leave.
the sit ins were intended to shame managers into integrat their restaurants.
core successfully integrated many public facilities in northern cities including chicago detroit denver and syracuse.
brown v board of education after world war ii the naacp continued to challenge segregation in th courts.
from 1939 to 1961 the naacps chief counsel and director of its legal defense and educational fund was african american attorney thurgood marshall.
after the war marshall focused his efforts on ending segregation in public schools.
in 1954 the supreme court decided to combine several cases and isst general ruling on segregation in schools.
one of the cases involved a youi african american girl named linda brown who was denied admission t her neighborhood school in topeka kansas because of her race.
she was told to attend an all black school across town.
with the help of the naa her parents sued the topeka school board.
on may 17 1954 the supremi court ruled unanimously in brown v board of education of topeka kans that segregation in public schools was unconstitutional.
dr martin luther king jr used his position as a minister to preach his message of nonviolent resistance.
criticalthinking drawing conclusions why do you think dr king was effective in getting his message across.
southern resistance the brown decision marked a dramatic reversal of the precedent establisl in the plessy v ferguson case in 1896 brown v board of education applies only to public schools but the ruling threatened the entire system of segregation.
although it convinced many african americans that the tirr had come to challenge segregation it also angered many white southerm some became even more determined to defend segregation regardless of what the supreme court ruled.
although some school districts in the upper south integrated their schools anger and opposition was a far more common reaction.
senator harry f byrd of virginia called on southerners to adopt massive resistance against the ruling.
across the south hundreds of thousands c white americans joined citizens councils to pressure their local governments and school boards into defying the supreme court.
many states adopted pupil assignment laws which established elaborate requirements other than race that schools could use to prevent african americans from attending white schools.
the supreme court inadvertently encouraged white resistance when followed up its decision in brown v board of education a year later.
the court ordered school districts to proceed with all deliberate speed to e school segregation.
the wording was vague enough that many districts were able to keep their schools segregated for many more years.
massive resistance also appeared in congress.
in 1956 a group of 101 southern members of congress signed the southern manifesto it denounced the supreme courts ruling as a clear abuse of judicial power and pledged to use all lawful means to reverse the decision.
not until 1969 did the supreme court order all school systems to desegregate at once and operate integrated schools now and hereafter h reading progress check examining what two types of segregation were practiced in the sc 7 the civil rights movement begins guiding question why was the montgomery bus boycott successful.
in the midst of the uproar over the brown v board of education case rosa parks made her decision to challenge segregation of public transportation.
jo ann robinson head of a local group called the womens political council called on african americans to boycott montgomerys buses on the day rosa parks appeared in court.
the boycott marked the start of a new era of the civil rights movement among african americans.
the montgomery bus boycott the montgomery bus boycott had a successful outcome.
several african american leaders formed the montgomery improvement association to run the boycott and to negotiate with city leaders.
they elected a 26 year old pastor named martin luther king jr to lead them.
dr king encouraged the people to continue their protest but cautioned that the protest had to be peaceful primary source african americans walk to work during the third month of the montgomery bus boycott.
critical thinking determining cause and effect consider the number of people you see walking in this photograph.
why do you think the bus boycott was effective.
now let us say that we are not advocating violence the only weapon that we have in our hands this evening is the weapon of protest if we were incarcerated behind the iron curtains of a communistic nation we couldn t do this.
if we were trapped in the dungeon of a totalitarian regime we couldn t do this.
but the great glory of american democracy is the right to protest for right.
w quoted in parting the waters america in the king years 1989 king had earned a ph d in theology from boston university.
he believed that the only moral way to end segregation and racism was through nonviolent passive resistance.
african americans he urged must say to racists w e will soon wear you down by our capacity to suffer.
and in winning our freedom we will so appeal to your heart and conscience that we will win you in the process kings powerful words stirred african americans in montgomery to continue their boycott for over a year.
in november 1956 the supreme court declared alabamas laws requiring segregation on buses unconstitutional.
after the courts ruling the montgomery boycott was ended.
many other cities in the south however successfully resisted integrating their public transportation systems for years.
african american churches martin luther king jr was not the only local minister in the bus boycott.
many of the other leaders were african american ministers.
african american churches served as forums for protests and planning meetings and mobilized volunteers.
the montgomery bus boycott had demonstrated that nonviolent protest could be successful.
dr king reverend fred shuttlesworth of birmingham alabama and other african american ministers and civil rights activists established the southern christian leadership conference sclc in 1957 the sclc set out to eliminate segregation and to encourage african americans to register to vote.
dr king served as the sclcs first president.
the organization challenged segregation at voting booths and in public transportation housing and accommodations.
b reading progress check drawing conclusions how did the bus boycott create a mass movement for change.
the civil rights movement 475 eisenhower responds guiding question how did president eisenhower respond to the civil rights movement.
president eisenhower sympathized with the civil rights movement yet he feared the possible effect of a court ruling overturning segregation.
following the precedent set by president truman he ordered navy shipyards and veterans hospitals to desegregate.
at the same time eisenhower disagreed with using protests and court rulings.
he believed segregation and racism would end gradually as values changed.
with the nation in the midst of the cold war he worried that challenging white southerners might divide the nation.
publicly he refused to endorse the brown v board of education decision remarking i dont believe you car change the hearts of men with laws or decisions regardless eisenhowei knew he had to uphold the authority of the federal government.
as a result he became the first president since reconstruction to send troops into the south to protect the rights of african americans.
arkansas governor orval faubus is shown holding up a paper arguing that the federal government was abusing its power by forcibly integrating central high.
critical thinking identifying central ideas why did president eisenhower send troops to little rock.
crisis in little rock in september 1957 the school board in little rock arkansas was under federal court order requiring that nine african american students be admitted to central high.
the governor of arkansas orval faubus was determined to win reelection.
he began to campaign as a defender of wh supremacy.
he ordered troops from the arkansas national guard to prevent the nine students from entering the school the national guard troops surrounded the school an angry white mob gathered to intimidate students.
faubus had used the armed forces of a state to oppose the federal government the first such challenge to the constitution since the civil war.
eisenhower knew that he could not allow faubus to defy the federal government.
after a conference between eisenhower and faubus proved fruitless the district court ordered the governor to remove the troops.
instead of ending the crisis however faubus simply left the school to tl mob.
after the african american students entered the building angry whites beat at least two african american reporters and broke many windows.
the violence finally convinced president eisenhower th he had to act.
federal authority had to be upheld.
he immediately ordered the u s army to send troops to little rock and federalized the arkansas national guard.
by nightfall more th 1 000 soldiers of the 101st airborne division had arrived.
by 5 00 a m tl troops had encircled the school bayonets ready.
a few hours later the ni african american students arrived in an army station wagon and walked into the high school.
federal authority had been upheld but the troops h to stay in little rock for the rest of the school year.
new civil rights legislation in the same year that the little rock crisis began congress passed the first civil rights law since reconstruction.
the civil rights act of 1957 intended to protect the right of african americans to vote.
eisenhower believed firmly in the right to vote and he viewed it as his responsibilit to protect voting rights.
he also knew that if he sent a civil rights bill tc congress conservative southern democrats would try to block the 476 in 1957 elizabeth eckford left center was one of the little rock nine those african american students determined to integrate central high school in little rock.
critical thinking making inferences why do you think the crowd is shouting at elizabeth eckford.
legislation.
in 1956 he did send the bill to congress hoping not only to split the democratic party but also to convince more african americans to vote republican.
several southern senators did try to stop the civil rights act of 1957 senate majority leader democrat lyndon johnson however put together a compromise that enabled the act to pass.
although its final form was much weaker than originally intended the act still brought the power of the federal government into the civil rights debate.
it created a civil rights division within the department of justice and gave it the authority to seek court injunctions against anyone interfering with the right to vote.
it also created the united states commission on civil rights to investigate any denial of voting rights.
after the bill passed the sclc announced a campaign to register 2 million new african american voters.
reading progress check o explaining why did eisenhower intervene in the little rock controversy.
skills practice was this lesson hard to read.
look back through the lesson at the pictures.
what do you see.
use the pictures to help explain the lesson.
lesson 1 review reviewing vocabulary 1 explaining why was the struggle for civil rights more difficult because of the separate but equal doctrine established in the plessy v ferguson case.
9a using your notes 2 explaining use the notes you completed during the lesson to write a paragraph explaining the different tactics used during civil rights protests and why they were successful.
9a 9b 91 answering the guiding questions 3 interpreting what techniques did the civil rights movement use to challenge segregation.
91 4 analyzing why was the montgomery bus boycott successful.
9a 9b 9c 5 summarizing how did president eisenhower respond to the civil rights movement.
9a 9f writing activity argument assume the role of an african american soldier returning from world war ii.
write a letter to the editor of a newspaper describing your expectations of civil rights and why you should have those rights.
9a the civil rights movement 477 vocabulary the civil rights movement although major figures of the civil rights movement such as martin luther king jr are widely remembered today the movement drew its strength from the dedication of grassroots supporters.
in rural and urban areas across the south ordinary individuals advanced the movement through their participation in marches boycotts and voter registration drives.
those who dared to make a stand against discrimination risked being fired from their job evicted from their home and becoming the target of physical violence.
public testimony 1964 m y husband came and said the plantation owner was raising cain because i had tried to register and before he quit talking the plantation owner came and said fannie lou do you know did pap tell you what i said and i said yes sir he said i mean that if you dont go down and withdraw well you might have to go because we are not ready for that and i addressed him and told him and said i didnt try to register for you.
i tried to register for myself i had to leave that same night.
on the 10th of september 1962 16 bullets were fired into the home of mr and mrs robert tucker for me.
that same night two girls were shot in ruleville mississippi.
also mr joe mcdonalds house was shot in.
and in june the 9th 1963 1 had attended a voter registration workshop was returning back to mississippi i stepped off the bus and somebody screamed get that one there and when i went to get in the car when the man told me i was under arrest he kicked me.
i was carried to the county jail the patrolmen left my cell and it wasnt too long before they came back.
he said you are from ruleville all right and he used a curse word plantation an agricultural estate worked by laborers decent agreeing with standards of proper behavior good taste or morality testifying making a statement based on personal knowledge or belief canvassers a person who asks for votes contributions or support to determine public opinion adjoining to sit next to or in contact with incurable unable to cure he said we are going to beat you until you wish you were dead all of this on account we want to register become first class citizens and if the freedoi democratic party is not seated now i questir america is this america the land of the free and the home of the brave where we havetc sleep with our telephones off the hooks because our lives be threatened daily becau we want to live as decent human beings in america fannie lou hamer testifying before 1 credentials committee of the democrt national convention august 22 15 strategy memo april 1960 the choice of the non violent method the in symbolizes both judgment and promise.
i a judgment upon middle class conventional half way efforts to deal with radical social ev it is specifically a judgment upon contempor civil rights attempts.
as one high school student from chattanooga exclaimed we started because we were tired of waiting for you to act m lawson jr from a lun counter stool april 1960 student nonviol coordinating committee pap 478 autobiography 1968 all during the years while the naacp conducted a boycott of the downtown stores in jackson i had been one of john salters most faithful canvassers and church speakers.
during the last week of school he told me that sit in demonstrations were about to start in jackson and that he wanted me to be the spokesman for a team that would sit in at woolworths lunch counter.
seconds before 11 15 we were occupying three seats at the previously segregated woolworths lunch counter.
in the beginning the waitresses seemed to ignore us as if they really didnt know what was going on.
our waitress walked past us a couple of times before she noticed we had started to write our own orders down and realized we wanted service.
she asked us what we wanted.
we began to read to her from our order slips.
she told us that we would be served at the back counter which was for negroes.
we would like to be served here i said.
the waitress started to repeat what she had said then stopped in the middle ofthe sentence.
she turned the lights out behind the counter and she and the other waitresses almost ran to the back ofthe store deserting all their white customers.
i 2223 analyzing historical documents 1 comparing and contrasting compare and contrast the accounts of fannie lou hamer and anne moody.
what do they have in common.
how do they differ.
what do the similarities of their accounts help corroborate.
2 evaluating validity based on context based on prior knowledge you have about the civil rights movement why would you tend to believe the account of events by anne moody.
3 acquiring information who does james lawson indicate were the leaders of the sit in movement.
what explanation does he give for the start of the sit in movement.
4 analyzing historical questions combine the information from all three sources.
explain why segregation remained in place for so long in the american south.
who resisted change.
guess they thought that violence would start immediately after the whites at the counter realized what was going on at noon students from a nearby white high school started pouring in to woolworths.
when they first saw us they were sort of surprised t he white students started chanting all kinds of anti negro slogans.
we were called a little bit of everything a man rushed forward threw memphis from his seat and slapped my face.
then another man who worked in the store threw me against adjoining counter the mob started smearing us with ketchup mustard sugar pies and everything on the counter about ninety policemen were standing outside the store they had been watching the whole thing through the windows but had not come in to stop the mob or do anything after the sit in all i could think of was how sick mississippi whites were now i knew it was impossible for me to hate sickness.
the whites had a disease an incurable disease in its final stages.
what were our chances against such a disease anne moody coming of age in mississippi 5 making generalizations martin luther king jr in his letter from birmingham jail said that segregation distorts the soul and damages the personality in her final paragraph moody states that the whites had a disease an incurable disease in its final stages what are king and moody trying to say about how people behave when laws are unjust.
why might people act irrationally.
6 transferring information moody and hamer use words to describe how people reacted to their civil rights activities.
take their descriptions and your impressions of their experiences and transfer them to a visual form.
there are many historical photos from the civil rights movement available online.
locate appropriate images and use presentation software to show visually the kind of reactions african american civil rights protestors such as moody and hamer experienced.
479 image lunch counter sit in e image the march on washington ef primary source excerpt from coming of age in mississippi networks there s more online.
sf biography james meredith ef chart graph civil rights act and voting rights act lesson 2 challenging segregation timeline key events of the civil rights movement ef video freedom riders interactive self check quiz f doyouthinkthe civil rights movemeni mt k m m ifa sfism it matters because reading helpdesk academic vocabulary register in the early 1960s the struggle for civil rights intensifiec african american citizens and white supporters created organizations that directed protests targeted inequalit and attracted the attention of the mass media and the government.
content vocabulary filibuster cloture taking notes key ideas and details organizing as you read about the struggle for civil rights use the following graphic organizer to identify challenges to segregation in the south.
challenge result sit in movement freedom riders os teks texas essential knowledge and skills 1b analyze and evaluate the application of these founding principles to historical events in u s history 9a trace the historical development of the civil rights movement in the 19th 20th and 21st centuries including the 13th 14th 15th and 19th amendments the sit in movement guiding question were the goals of the student nonviolent coordinating commit in the fall of 1959 four young african americans joseph mcn ezell blair jr david richmond and franklin mccain enrolled at north carolina agricultural and technical college an african american college in greensboro.
the four freshmen often talked about the civil rights movement.
in january 1960 mcneil suggested a sit in.
all of us were afraid richmond later recalled.
but w went and did it on february 1 1960 the four friends entered the nearby woolworths department store.
they purchased school supplies and then sat at the whites only lunch counter and ordered coffee when they were refused service blair asked i beg your pardon but you just served us at the checkout counter.
why cant we be served at the counter here the students stayed at the counter unt it closed.
they then stated that they would sit there daily until th got the same service as white customers.
they left the store excite mcneil recalled i just felt i had powers within me a superhuma strength that would come forward mccain noted i probably fe better that day than ive ever felt in my life news of the daring sit in spread quickly.
the following day 29 african american students arrived at woolworths determined t 9b describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights including ones from african american chicano american indian womens and other civil rights movements continued on the next page sit at the counter until served.
by the end of the week more than 31 students were taking part.
a new mass movement for civil right.
within two months sit ins had spread to 54 cities in ni states.
they were staged at segregated stores restaurants hotels an movie theaters.
by 1961 sit ins had been held in more than 100 cit.
480 the sit in movement brought large numbers of idealistic and energized college students into the civil rights struggle.
many were discouraged by the slow pace of desegregation.
sit ins offered them a way to dictate the pace of change.
at first the leaders of the naacp and the sclc were nervous about the sit in campaign.
those conducting sit ins were heckled punched kicked beaten with clubs and burned with cigarettes hot coffee and acid.
most did not fight back.
urged on by former naacp official and sclc executive director ella baker students established the student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc in 1960 african american college students from all across the south made up the majority of snccs members.
many whites also joined.
sncc became an important civil rights group.
volunteer robert moses urged the sncc to start helping rural southern african americans who often faced violence if they tried to register to vote.
many sncc volunteers including moses bravely headed south as part of a voter education project.
during a period of registration efforts in 1964 known as freedom summer the ku klux kian brutally murdered three sncc workers with the complicity of local officials.
sncc organizer and sharecropper fannie lou hamer was evicted from her farm after registering to vote.
police arrested her in mississippi as she was returning from a voter registration workshop in 1963 they beat her while she was in jail.
she still went on to help organize the mississippi freedom democratic party and challenged the legality of the states segregated democratic party at the 1964 national convention.
reading progress check register to file personal information in order to become eligible for an official event nonviolent protests such as this pray in in albany georgia in 1962 spread across the nation as the civil rights movement gained momentum.
criticalthinking drawing conclusions what details in this photograph suggest that it was an effective form of protest.
making inferences why were sncc organizers willing to put themselves at such personal risk.
the freedom riders guidingquestion howdid the kennedy administration s justice department help the civil rights movement.
despite rulings outlawing segregation in interstate bus service bus travel remained segregated in much of the south.
alabama was one state in which many bus terminals were still segregated.
alabamas governor john patterson was known to be in favor of segregation.
as attorney general of the state he had banned the naacp from being active in alabama and he had fought the bus boycotts.
in early may 1961 teams of african american and white volunteers who became known as freedom riders boarded several southbound interstate buses.
buses were met by angry white mobs in anniston birmingham and montgomery alabama.
the mobs slit bus tires and threw rocks at the windows.
in anniston someone threw a firebomb into one bus.
fortunately no one was killed.
in birmingham riders emerged from a bus to face a gang of young men armed with baseball bats chains and lead pipes.
the gang beat the riders viciously.
birmingham public safety commissioner theophilus eugene 1 bull connor claimed that there had been no police at the bus station i because it was mothers day and he had given many officers the day off.
continued from p 480 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 9c identify the roles of significant leaders who supported various rights movements including martin luther king jr cesar chavez rosa parks hector p garcia and betty friedan 9e discuss the impact of the writings of martin luther king jr such as his i have a dream speech and letter from birmingham jail on the civil rights movement 9f describe presidential actions and congressional votes to address minority rights in the united states including desegregation ofthe armed forces the civil rights acts of 1957 and 1964 and the voting rights act of 1965 continued on the next page the civil rights movement 481 continued from p 481 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 9g describe the role of individuals such as governors george wallace orval faubus and lester maddox and groups including the congressional bloc of southern democrats that sought to maintain the status quo 9h evaluate changes and events in the united states that have resulted from the civil rights movement including increased participation of minorities in the political process continued on the next page skills practice as you read about the events of the civil rights movement look for connecting words such as by and but because before after with and next.
make a chart and write down the sentences.
then write down what type of connection they show for example cause comparison or sequence.
a young protester in birmingham alabama is attacked by police dogs.
millions of americans watched the graphic violence on televised nightly news.
crmcalthbnking drawing conclusions in what ways might these violent images have helped the civil rights movement.
fbi evidence later showed that connor had told the local kian to beat the rid until it looked like a bulldog got a hold of them the violence made national news shocking many americans and drawing the federal governments attention to the plight of african americans in the south.
kennedy and civil rights while campaigning for the presidency in 1960 john f kennedy had promised to support civil rights.
civil rights leaders such as naacp executive director roy wilkins urged kennedy to support civil rights legislation after taking office.
however kennedy knew he needed the support of southern senators to get other programs through congress and any new civil rights legislation would anger them.
kennedy did however bring approximately 40 african americans into high level government positions.
he appointed thurgood marshall to a federal judgeship on the second circuit appeals court in new york.
kennedy also created the committee on equal employment opportunity ceeo.
he allowed the justice department run by his brother robert t actively support the civil rights movement.
the department tried to help african americans register to vote by filing lawsuits across the south.
after the attacks on the freedom riders in montgomery both kennedys publicly urged them to have a cooling off period.
core leader james farmer rejected the idea and announced that the riders would heac into mississippi.
to stop the violence president kennedy made a deal with mississippi senator james eastland.
no violence occurred when buses arrived in jackson but kennedy did not protest the riders arrests.
the cost of bailing the freedom riders out of jail used up most of cores funds.
when thurgood marshall learned of the situation he offered farmer the use of the naacp legal defense funds huge bail boi account to keep the rides going.
when president kennedy found that th freedom riders were still active he ordered the interstate commerce commission icc to tighten its regulations against segregated bus terminals.
robert kennedy ordered the justice department to take lega action against southern cities that maintained segregated bus terminals by late 1962 segregation in interstate bus travel had virtually ended.
violence in birmingh martin luther king jr decided in the spring of 1 to launch demonstrations birmingham alabama.
h knew they would provoke violent response but he believed it was the only w to get the president to actively support civil rights.
eight days after tl protests began king was arrested.
while in jail he began writing the letter from birmingham jail it was an eloquent defense nonviolent protest.
in his letter king argued that there are two types of la just and unjust.
and one has a moral responsibility to disobey unjust laws.
any law that uplifts human personality is just.
any law that degrades human personality is unjust.
all segregation statutes are unjust because segregation distorts the soul and damages the personality after king was released the protests began to grow again.
public safety commissioner connor responded with force.
he ordered police to use clubs police dogs and high pressure fire hoses on the demonstrators.
one powerful demonstration was called the childrens march.
on may 2 heroic young people marched in groups from churches to downtown businesses.
many were attacked by police and many were arrested.
on september 15 1963 the ku klux kian bombed birminghams sixteenth street baptist church killing four young girls.
news reports of these attacks on children led to greater support for the civil rights movement.
g reading progress check explaining why do you think there was such a violent reaction to the civil rights movement.
the civil rights act of 1964 guidingquestion how did the civil rights act of 1964 allow the federal government to fight racial discrimination.
events in alabama grew more and more tragic.
at his inauguration as alabamas governor george wallace had stated i draw a line in the dust.
and i say segregation now.
segregation tomorrow.
segregation forever on june 11 1963 federal marshals had to order wallace to move from where he stood in front of the university of alabamas admissions office to block two african americans from enrolling.
the next day a white segregationist murdered civil rights activist medgar evers in mississippi.
evers had been the naacps first field secretary and had focused his efforts on voter registration and boycotts.
his death made him a martyr of the civil rights movement.
amid these events president kennedy announced a civil rights bill.
the march on washington civil rights leaders kept the pressure on legislators and the president by planning a large scale march on washington.
on august 28 1963 more than 250 000 demonstrators african american and white gathered near the lincoln memorial.
they heard speeches and sang songs.
dr king then delivered a powerful speech calling for freedom and equality for all americans.
analyzing primary sources i have a dream speech have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal i have a dream that one day on the red hills of georgia the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slave owners will be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood.
i have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character.
m martin luther king jr from the address in washington august 28 1963 dbq analyzing primary sources what is the dream king refers to in his speech.
martin luther king jr speaks to the assembled crowd in washington d c critical thinking making inferences what details about the march on washington encouraged more public support for the civil rights movement and put pressure on congress to act on the civil rights bill.
the civil rights movement 483 continued from p 482 tens texas essential knowledge and skills 19b explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events including world war i the great depression world war ii the 1960s and 9 11 21b discuss historical reasons why the constitution has been amended 23a identify and analyze methods of expanding the right to participate in the democratic process including lobbying non violent protesting litigation and amendments to the u s constitution continued on the next page 1 h continued from p 483 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 23b evaluate various means of achieving equality of political rights including the 19th 24th and 26th amendments and congressional acts such as the american indian citizenship act of 1924 26a explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights including those for racial ethnic and religious minorities as well as women in american society filibuster an attempt to kill a bill by having a group of senators take turns speaking continuously so that a vote cannot take place cloture a motion that ends debate and calls for an immediate vote charts graphs the bill becomes law kennedy tried and failed to win passage of civil rights legislation.
after h assassination in november 1963 lyndon johnson former leader of the senate democrats became president.
he had helped pass the civil right acts of 1957 and 1960 but had done so by weakening their provisions an by compromising with other southern senators.
nevertheless johnson worked to get kennedys civil rights legislatic through congress.
the bill passed the house of representatives in february 1964 then it stalled in the senate for several weeks.
its opponents used a filibuster a tactic in which senators speak continuously to preven vote.
in june the senate voted for cloture to end debate and take a vote with a vote of 71 for and 29 against.
the senate then easily passed the bil on july 2 1964 johnson signed the civil rights act of 1964 into law.
the civil rights act of 1964 was the most comprehensive civil rights law congress had ever enacted.
the law made segregation illegal in most places of public accommodation and it gave citizens of all races and nationalities eqw access to public facilities.
the law gave the u s attorney general more power to bring lawsuits to force school desegregation and required private employers i end discrimination in the workplace.
it also established the equal employment opportunity commission eeoc as a permanent federal agency.
the law also went further than simply banning discrimination based race.
it also banned discrimination based on religion gender and nation origin.
for religious minorities for immigrants and for women the act represented a dramatic step forward in expanding their political rights ai economic opportunities as well.
the passage of the civil rights act of 1964 immediately raised constitutional issues.
the act banned racial discrimination in facilities ar businesses that served the general public.
it specifically banned any type hotel restaurant theater or entertainment venue from discrimination.
y was unclear whether the federal government had jurisdiction under the constitution to regulate these businesses.
article 1 section 8 gives congress the power to regulate interstate commerce but prior to 1964 hotels restaurants and theaters had been regulated by state governments and few would have argued that they were engaged in interstate commerce.
as a result challenges to the laws constitutionality began immediately.
the owner of the heart of atlanta m marching for freedom selma 1965 marchers in selma alabama hoped to build support for a new voting rights law.
1 identifying central ideas how did the civil rights act of 1964 work to end segregation.
2 drawing conclusions why do you think counties where less than half of all adults were registered to vote were a focus of the voting rights act of 1965.
the civil rights act of 1964 gave the federal government power to prevent racial discrimination and established the equal employment opportunity commission eeoc.
made segregation illegal in most places of public accommodation.
gave the u s attorney general more power to bring lawsuits to force school desegregation.
required employers to end workplace discrimination.
the voting rights act of 1965 authorized the u s attorney general to sen federal examiners to register qualified vote suspended discriminatory devices such as literacy tests in counties where less than h of all adults were registered to vote.
484 refused to allow african americans to stay at his hotel and filed suit in federal court.
the case rapidly advanced to the supreme court.
in december 1964 in the case heart of atlanta motel v united states the supreme court ruled that the interstate commerce clause did indeed give congress the power to ban discrimination in facilities serving the public.
p reading progress check assessing did government support for civil rights come from the federal or state level.
the struggle for voting rights guidingquestion why was the passage of the voting rights act of 1965 a turning point in the civil rights movement.
despite the passage of the civil rights act of 1964 voting rights remained an issue.
the twenty fourth amendment ratified in 1964 helped somewhat.
it eliminated poll taxes in federal but not state elections.
convinced that a new law was needed to protect african american voting rights dr king decided to hold another dramatic protest.
the selma march in december 1964 dr king received the nobel peace prize in oslo norway for his work in the civil rights movement.
a few weeks later he announced we are not asking we are demanding the ballot in january 1965 the sclc and dr king selected selma alabama as the focal point for their campaign for voting rights.
although african americans made up a majority of selmas population they made up only 3 percent of registered voters.
to prevent african americans from registering to vote sheriff jim clark had deputized and armed dozens of white citizens.
his posse terrorized african americans.
on one occasion they even used clubs and cattle prods on them.
kings demonstrations in selma led to the arrest of more than 3 000 african americans including schoolchildren by sheriff clark.
to keep pressure on the president and congress to act dr king joined with sncc activists and organized a march for freedom from selma to the state capitol in montgomery a distance of about 50 miles 80 km.
on sunday march 7 1965 the march began.
the sclcs hosea williams and sncc s john president johnson signs the voting rights act into law on august 6 1965 critical thinking comparing and contrasting how were the civil rights act of 1964 and the voting rights act of 1965 similar and different.
lewis led some 600 protesters toward montgomery.
as the protesters approached the edmund pettus bridge which led out of selma sheriff clark ordered them to disperse.
many protesters were beaten in full view of television cameras.
this brutal attack known later as bloody sunday left 70 marchers hospitalized and another 70 injured.
the nation was stunned as it viewed the shocking footage of law enforcement officers beating peaceful demonstrators.
watching the events from the white house president johnson became furious.
eight days later j he appeared before a nationally televised joint session of congress to propose a new voting rights law.
the civil rights movement 485 the voting rights act of 1965 on august 3 1965 the house of representatives passed the voting rights bill by a wide margin.
the following day the senate also passed the bill.
the voting rights act of 1965 authorized the u s attorney general to sen federal examiners to register qualified voters bypassing local officials whi often refused to register african americans.
the law also suspended discriminatory devices such as literacy tests in counties where less than half of all adults had been registered to vote.
the results were dramatic.
by the end of the year almost 250 000 african americans had registered as new voters.
the number of african american elected officials in the south also increased.
in 1960 for examf no african american from the south held a seat in the u s congress.
by 2011 there were 44 african american members of congress.
the passage of the voting rights act of 1965 marked a turning point the civil rights movement.
the movement had now achieved two major legislative goals.
segregation had been outlawed and new federal laws were in place to prevent discrimination and protect voting rights.
after 1965 the movement began to shift its focus.
it turned its attention to the problems of african americans trapped in poverty and living in ghettos many of the nations major cities.
the voting rights act of 1965 like the civil rights act of 1964 immediately raised constitutional questions.
historically each state had been allowed to set the rules regarding eligibility to vote.
article 1 sectio of the constitution only specifies that each state has to use the same rule for choosing members of congress as it uses for choosing members of it.
state legislature.
article 2 section 1 specifies that each state gets to choos how to select the electors who vote for the president.
by banning literacy tests congress was imposing a rule on voting and it was unclear whethi this violated the rights of the states to set voting rules.
in 1966 in katzenbach v morgan the supreme court ruled that the 14th amendm gave congress the authority to ban literacy tests and impose voting rule the state governments.
hreading progress check summarizing what was the positive outcome of the brutal response of police to rights protests.
reviewing vocabulary 1 explaining how did opponents of the civil rights act of 1964 use 4 analyzing how did the kennedy administration s justice department help the civil rights movement.
9f 26a the filibuster to try to block its passage.
9a 9g using your notes 2 summarizing use the notes you completed during the lesson on challenges to segregation to write a paragraph summarizing how the freedom riders helped the civil rights movement.
answering the guiding questions 9a 9b 9c 23a 26a 3 identifying what were the goals of the student nonviolent coordinating committee.
9a 9b 9c 23a 26a 5 5 interpreting how did the civil rights act of 1964 allow th federal government to fight racial discrimination.
9f 23b 2 6.
6 evaluating why was the passage of the voting rights act a turning point in the civil rights movement.
9f 23b 26a writing activity informative explanatory assume the role of a journ working for a college newspaper in 1960 write an article ft newspaper describing the sit in movement including its participants goals and achievements.
9a 9b 9c 23a 26a 486 networks there s more online.
biography stokely carmichael ef biography bobby seale et biography malcolm x image black power sf primary source watts riot ef video martin luther king ef interactive self check quiz reading helpdesk academic vocabulary enforcement content vocabulary racism black power taking notes key ideas and details organizing as you read use the following graphic organizer to list major violent events in the civil rights movement and their results.
event result harlem july 18 20 1964 i york lesson 3 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 2d explain the significance of the following years as turning points 1898 spanish american war 1914 1918 world war i 1929 the great depression begins 1939 1945 world war ii 1957 sputnik launch ignites u s soviet space race 1968 1969 martin luther king jr assassination and u s lands on the moon 1991 cold war ends 2001 terrorist attacks on world trade center and the pentagon and 2008 election of first black president barack obama continued on the next page ay w ft i w 5 t 1 i i s 1 fr.
ik s i t r new civil rights issues r w hi ih r i f i r i 1 1 ij.
h hhu ns why do you think the civil rights movement america.
whatmotivatesasodetytomakechanges.
it matters because by the mid 1960s much progress had been made in the area of civil rights.
however leaders of the movement began to understand that merely winning political rights for african americans would not completely solve their economic problems.
african american leaders would continue to try to end economic inequality.
urban problems guiding question why did riots break out in dozens of u s cities in the late 1960s.
despite the passage of civil rights laws in the 1950s and 1960s racism was still common in american society.
changing the law could not change peoples attitudes nor did it end urban poverty.
in 1965 approximately 70 percent of african americans lived in large cities.
even if african americans had been allowed to move into white neighborhoods many were stuck in low paying jobs with little chance of advancement.
in 1960 only 15 percent of african americans held professional managerial or clerical jobs compared to 44 percent of whites.
the average income of african american families was only 55 percent of that of the average income for white families.
almost half of african americans lived in poverty with an unemployment rate typically twice that of whites.
poor neighborhoods in the nations major cities were overcrowded and dirty leading to higher rates of illness and infant mortality.
juvenile delinquency rates rose as did the rate of young people dropping out of school.
complicating matters even more was a rise in the number of single parent households.
the watts riot just five days after president johnson signed the voting rights act a riot erupted in watts an african american neighborhood in los angeles.
allegations of police brutality served as the catalyst for this uprising.
it lasted for six days and required more than 14 000 members of the national guard and 1 500 law officers to restore the civil rights movement 487 racism prejudice or discrimination against a person because of his or her race continued from p 487 tob texas essential knowledge and skills 9a trace the historical development of the civil rights movement in the 19th 20th and 21st centuries including the 13th 14th 15th and 19th amendments 9b describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights including ones from african american chicano american indian womens and other civil rights movements 9c identify the roles of significant leaders who supported various rights movements including martin luther king jr cesar chavez rosa parks hector p garcia and betty friedan 9d compare and contrast the approach taken by some civil rights groups such as the black panthers with the nonviolent approach of martin luther king jr 26a explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights including those for racial ethnic and religious minorities as well as women in american society order.
riots broke out in dozens of other american cities between 1964 anc 1968 in detroit burning looting and conflicts with police and the national guard resulted in 43 deaths and more than 1 000 wounded in 1967 property loss was estimated at almost 200 million.
the kerner commission in the same year president johnson appointed the national advisory commission on civil disorders headed by governor otto kerner of illinois to study the causes of the urban riots and to make recommendations.
the kerner commission as it became known blamed racism for most inner city problems.
our nation is moving toward two societies one black one white separate and unequal it concluded.
the commission recommended the creation of inner city jobs and the construction of new public housing but with the spending for the vietnar war johnson never endorsed the recommendations of the commission.
the shift to economic rights in the mid 1960s dr martin luther king jr decided to focus on the economic problems that african americans faced.
to call attention to deplorable housing conditions dr king and his wife coretta moved into a slum apartment in an african american neighborhood in chicago.
he and the sclc hoped to improve the economic status of african americans in poor neighborhoods.
the chicago movement however made little headway.
when dr king led a march through the all white suburb of marquette park to demonstrat the need for open housing he was met by angry white mobs more hostile than those in birmingham and selma.
mayor richard j daley met with dr king and discussed a new program to clean up the slums.
associations o realtors and bankers also agreed to promote open housing.
in theory mortgages and rental property would be available to everyone regardless race.
in practice little changed.
h reaping progress check identifying in what way did poverty contribute to the racial divide.
frustration and anger led to rioting in seve african american communities during the places and regions according to the map riots were me.
common in which part of the countr the world in spatial tl according to the map where was th location of the first riot.
stokely carmichael 1941 1998 stokely carmichael was the founder of the 1960s black power movement.
as a freedom rider he traveled to the south to ride on buses in protest of interstate transportation segregation laws.
in 1964 carmichael traveled to alabama where he organized an independent political party called the lowndes county freedom organization.
the organization s symbol was a black panther.
in 1966 he first spoke of a new black power movement which both promoted african american pride and advocated the necessity of self defense in violent situations.
eventually carmichael relocated to guinea west africa where he changed his name to kwame ture.
he died of cancer in guinea in 1998 malcolm x 1925 1965 malcolm x was one of the most controversial black activists of the mid twentieth century.
he converted to the nation of islam while imprisoned in the 1940s.
paroled in 1952 he became an anti white muslim activist calling himself malcolm x.
distancing himself from the nation of islam he created his own group called the organization of afro american unity.
during a pilgrimage he began to rethink his social policies.
he decided that white people were not inherently evil and that african americans could enact change through traditional means.
malcolm x s new viewpoints drew harsh criticism from the nation of islam.
on february 21 1965 three african american gunmen assassinated him.
black power guidingquestion why did many young african americans join the black power movement.
dr kings lack of progress in chicago seemed to show that nonviolent protests could do little to solve economic problems.
after 1965 many african americans especially urban young people began to turn away from king.
some leaders called for more aggressive forms of protest.
some organizations including core and sncc believed that african americans alone should lead their struggle.
many young african americans called for black power a term that had many meanings.
a few including robert f williams and h rap brown interpreted black power to mean that physical self defense was acceptable.
to most including stokely carmichael the leader of sncc in 1966 the term meant that african americans should control the social political and economic direction of their struggle black power the mobilization of the political and economic power of african americans especially to compel respect for their rights and to improve their condition primary source mthis is the significance of black power as a slogan.
for once black people are going to use the words they want to use not just the words whites want to hear the need for psychological equality is the reason why sncc today believes that blacks must organize in the black community.
only black people can create in the community an aroused and continuing black consciousness.
from what we want the new york review of books september 1966 black power stressed pride in the african american cultural group.
it emphasized racial distinctiveness rather than adapting to the dominant culture.
african americans showed pride in their racial heritage by adopting new afro hairstyles and african style clothing.
many also took the civil rights movement 489 enforcement the act of urging or carrying out by force african names.
dr king and some other leaders criticized black power as philosophy of hopelessness and despair.
malcolm x by the early 1960s a young man named malcolm x had become a symb of the black power movement.
born malcolm little in omaha nebraska experienced a difficult childhood and adolescence.
in 1946 he was senttc prison for burglary.
prison transformed malcolm.
he educated himself ai played an active role in the prison debate society.
eventually he joined the nation of islam commonly known as the black muslims.
despite the name the nation of islam is very different fn mainstream islam.
the nation of islam preached black nationalism.
afte joining the nation of islam malcolm little changed his name to malcoln the x symbolized the family name of his enslaved african ancestors.
he declared that his true name had been stolen from him by slavery and he would no longer use the name white society had given him.
malcolm xs criticisms of white society and the mainstream civil rights movement gained national attention for the nation of islam.
by 1964 malcolm x had broken with the black muslims.
discouraged scandals involving the nation of islams leader he went to the muslim holy city of makkah mecca in saudi arabia.
after seeing muslims from mar races worshipping together he no longer promoted separatism.
after male x broke with the nation of islam he continued to criticize the organizati because of this organization members shot and killed him in february 1965 malcolm xs speeches and ideas influenced a new generation of militant african american leaders who preached black power black nationalism and economic self sufficiency.
in 1966 in oakland califorr huey p newton and bobby seale organized the black panthers.
black panther leaders called for an end to racial oppression and for control of major institutions in the african american community such as schools enforcement housing and hospitals.
b reading progress check summarizing how did the black power movement lead african americans av from dr king s message of nonviolent disobedience and the goal of integral dr king is assassinated guidingquestion how did martin luther king jr s death affect the civil rights movement.
in march 1968 dr king went to memphis tennessee to support a strike c african american sanitation workers.
at the time the sclc had been planning a national poor peoples campaign to promote economic advancement for impoverished americans.
the purpose of this campaig was to lobby the federal government to commit billions of dollars to end poverty and unemployment in the united states.
people of all races and nationalities were to converge on washington d c where they would camp out until both congress and president johnson agreed to pass the requested legislation to fund the proposal.
on april 4 1968 as he stood on his hotel balcony in memphis dr kin was assassinated by a sniper.
in a speech the previous night he had told gathering at a local church ive been to the mountaintop ive looke over.
and i ve seen the promised land.
i may not get there with you but want you to know tonight that we as a people will get to the promised land 490 j dr kings death touched off both national mourning and riots in more than 100 cities including washington d c the reverend ralph abernathy who had served as a trusted assistant to dr king for many years led the poor peoples campaign in kings absence.
however the demonstration did not achieve any of the major objectives that either king or the sclc had hoped it would.
in the wake of dr kings death congress did pass the civil rights act of 1968 this law sometimes known as the fair housing act of 1968 outlawed discrimination on the basis of race color religion or national origin when selling renting or financing housing.
in many communities across the nation racism had led to an informal segregation.
people would simply refuse to sell their homes or rent property to people based on their race.
sometime banks would not approve loans because of racist attitudes or assumptions that affected the thinking of the loan officers.
the civil rights act of 1968 put an end to these practices.
the law also benefited immigrants and religious minorities.
historically in many places in the united states jewish americans had encountered rules preventing them from buying or renting property in certain neighborhoods.
the civil rights act of 1968 expanded their economic opportunities as well.
the assassination of dr king in 1968 marked a turning point in the civil rights movement.
after his death the movement began to fragment.
with formal laws in place banning segregation and discrimination and guaranteeing voting rights the movement lost some of its unity of purpose and the vision he had given it.
the shift to economic rights was already underway at the time of his death and it was clear that the struggle to end poverty and provide more economic opportunity would be very difficult and would have to involve very different approaches than the movement had used in the past.
d reading progress check explaining in what way was dr king s mountaintop speech prophetic.
the assassination of dr martin luther king jr shocked the nation.
on april 9 1968 the country joined in sorrow to mourn his death.
critical thinking predicting consequences how do you think the violence that erupted after dr king s death affected the civil rights movement.
lesson 3 review reviewing vocabulary 1 explaining explain how the findings and recommendations of the kerner commission related to racism.
9a 26a using your notes 2 assessing use your notes on violent events during the civil rights movement to write a paragraph assessing the result of each event.
answering the guiding questions 3 identifying why did riots break out in dozens of american cities in the late 1960s.
9a 4 analyzing why did many young african americans join the black power movement.
9a 9b 9d 26a 5 making connections how did dr martin luther king jr s death affect the civil rights movement.
9a 9c writing activity informative explanatory assume the role of a reporter in the late 1960s.
suppose that you have interviewed both a follower of dr king and a member of the black panthers.
write a transcript of each interview.
9a 9b 9c 9d the civil rights movement 491 j u k u t i t sequencing and reading a time line why learn this skill.
many people complain that history is just a bunch of dates they have to memorize.
in fact the relationship between events is what really matters to historians.
they want to explain what caused something to happen or how something affected something else over time.
history is a series of causes and effects that happen over time in a sequence.
unlike science where you can repeat an experiment in history everything happens once in a particular order.
if you want to know what caused something you have to know the sequence of events.
learning the skill sequencing is simply putting things in the correct order.
what came first.
what came next.
did an event happen before or after another event.
putting historical events in the correct 2c 29b sequence will often reveal a possible relationship between them.
historians then look at the historical evidence to see if they can prove that there is a cause and effect relationship in the sequence.
sequencing involves two types of chronology absolute chronology and relative chronology.
absolute chronology is when something happened.
generally we use a specific date and time to establish absolute chronology.
relative chronology tells when something happened compared to something else.
if you give the year president obama was first elected you are using absolute chronology.
if you are asked whether president reagan came before or after president clinton you use relative chronology to answer.
a very common way to present a sequence of related historical events and teach their relative and absolute chronology is to use a time line.
a time line is a kind of chart that can be key events of the civil rights movement 1954 1965 492 presented on a horizontal or vertical line.
it lists events that occurred between specific dates in order.
the number of years between these dates is called the time span.
for example a time line that begins in 1400 and ends in 1500 has a time span of 100 years.
time lines are usually divided into smaller segments or time intervals.
intervals can be vast each interval being an entire historical era or they can be small a year a month a day whatever is needed to sequence the events.
a time line is a visual aid it helps you remember the correct order of events and people and also the dates associated with them.
it often includes captions with each event giving a quick summary of what happened.
practicing this skill look at the time line on key events of the civil rights movement and then answer the questions that follow 1 what is the time span of this time line.
2 what intervals is the time line using.
3 when did martin luther king deliver his i have a dream speech.
what major legislation was passed the year after the speech.
4 use the time line to put these people and events in the correct relative chronology freedom summer james farmer greensboro sit ins rosa parks 5 what major event happened just before congress passed the voting rights act.
what relationship is there between the two events.
6 what possible cause and effect sequence does the time line show between court decisions protests and legislation.
applying the skill sequencing using absolute and relative chronology now that you understand sequencing time lines and absolute and relative chronology read through lesson 3 new civil rights issues.
then go to the lesson new approaches to civil rights in the chapter i6 assessment directions on a separate sheet of paper answer the questions below.
make sure you read carefully and answer all parts of the questions.
lesson review lesson 1 0 summarizing explain the events leading up to the brown v board of education decision and summarize the supreme court s ruling.
21a 23a 23b 0 analyzing cause and effect what role did rosa parts play in the bus boycott in montgomery alabama.
9c 23a 26a 26d 0 explaining what were the goals of the southern christian leadership conference sclc.
9b 0 evaluating what contributions did thurgood marshall make to ending segregation and advancing the cause of african american civil rights.
9i 23a 23b 0 describing how did many white southerners react to the brown v board ruling.
what actions did they take in response.
identify two southern governors who sought to preserve the status quo in southern schools.
what did they do.
9g 0 describing what actions did president eisenhower take to address minority rights.
be sure to discuss direct presidential actions as well as legislation he supported.
be sure to explain the obstacles he faced in congress and explain why he was able to get legislation passed.
9f 9g lesson 2 0 evaluating what made the sit in strategy an effective form of protest.
23a 26a 0 identifying cause and effect how did the arrests of freedom riders in mississippi begin a chain of decisions and actions that ultimately led to the collapse or near collapse of segregated busing.
23a 26a 0 describing who tried to stop the civil rights act of 1964 from passing the united states senate and what tactic did they use.
how was their opposition overcome.
describing why was it so difficult for african americans in southern states to register to vote.
9a summarizing write a sentence for each of the following people summarizing how they tried to expand political rights for african americans james farmer elizabeth eckford robert moses medger evers.
26a evaluating what was the significance of the selma march of 1965 and how did it help to increase participation of minorities in the political process.
9g 9h 23a 26a describing what prompted president johnson to propose a new voting rights law.
what were the terms of the new law and what did congress do in response to johnson s proposal.
what did the congressional response indicate.
9f 9g analyzing why was the twenty fourth amendment passed.
how did the amendment expand the right to participate in the democratic process and help ensure equal political rights for african americans and others.
21b 23a 23b lesson 3 explaining what conditions led to riots in urban african american communities in the 1960s.
interpreting what was the purpose of the kerner commission.
26a identifying and describing how did malcolm x s speeches and ideas influence a new generation of african american leaders.
9c identifying central issues what were the main ideas of black power.
drawing conclusions why was 1968 the year of dr martin luther king s death a turning point for the civil rights movement.
2d explaining what was the goal of the poor people s campaign.
26a need extra help.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 tl 12 13 14 15 15 17 18 19 20 6o to page 147314721475147414741476148014811 48514801485 486 w 487tz8t49ot4wt490r 494 explaining how did the civil rights act of 1968 expand economic opportunities for religious minorities.
26a answering the essential questions 0 conducting an historical inquiry segregation began to be imposed in the late 1800s.
african americans began resisting it shortly afterward.
but from 1900 to 1950 they made only small gains in their efforts to roll back segregation and regain their civil rights.
what changed in the 1950s and 1960s.
why was the civil rights movement able to make gains in post war america.
conduct research at the library or online.
identify the types of evidence you need and prepare a research essay paper answering these questions.
your paper should follow proper essay form.
sources should be cited and a bibliography attached.
the essay should have an introduction argument and presentation of evidence and a conclusion.
9a 9b 29a 29b 29d 29e 29h 0 analyzing identify the different types of non violent protest used during the civil rights movement and explain what each group was trying to achieve with their protest.
23a critical thinking analyzing effects why was the supreme court s decision in brown v board of education significant.
91 21a identifying describe martin luther king s role in the civil rights movement.
what were his successes and what qualities made him an effective leader.
9c 24a 26a 0 analyzing describe the role litigation played in protecting minority rights during the civil rights movement and expanding the right to participate in the democratic process.
how effective were lawsuits in bringing about change.
9i evaluating what changes resulted from the civil rights movement.
did these changes increase minority participation in the political process.
9a 9h explaining what constitutional issues were raised by the passage of the civil rights act of 1964 and the voting rights act of 1965.
name the two important cases from the 1960s where the supreme court addressed the issues raised and explain the reason the court upheld both laws.
19b social studies skills organizing make a chart that lists each of the major pieces of legislation passed by congress during the civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s.
summarize what each piece of legislation contributed to achieving equal political rights for african americans.
9f 23b 29b j using absolute and relative chronology create a timeline listing the following people and their role in the civil rights movement in the correct chronological sequence.
beside each name or event write the year when the person made his or her contribution.
2c 9c president eisenhower sends troops to little rock martin luther king helps organize montgomery bus boycott rosa parks is arrested the freedom riders begin their trips into the south thurgood marshall wins brown v board james farmer founds congress on racial equality president johnson signs the voting rights act four men begin the sit in movement in greensboro north carolina the march on washington takes place dr king is assassinated filibuster by southern senators is shut down allowing a new civil rights act to pass african americans march on selma e comparing and contrasting what were the differences between the leaders of the black power movement and dr martin luther king jr.
what goals did they share.
describe the two approaches to expanding african american civil rights and economic opportunities and explain which was more effective and why.
9d 26a need extra help.
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 1 go to page 491 469 469 473 475 469 469 469 469 i 475 the civil rights movement 495 analyzing primary sources read the excerpt below from martin luther king jr s letter from birmingham jail and then answer the questions that follow primarysource one may well ask how can you advocate breaking some laws and obeying others.
the answer lies in the fact that there are two types of laws just and unjust and one has a moral responsibility to disobey unjust laws.
i would agree with st augustine that an unjust law is no law at all.
any law that uplifts human personality is just.
any law that degrades human personality is unjust.
all segregation statutes are unjust because segregation distorts the soul and damages the personality.
martin luther king jr from letter from birmingham jail q generalizing how did the philosophy dr king describes in his letter shape the civil rights movement.
9e 29a 29b j interpreting primary sources what do you think dr king meant when he wrote that an unjust law degrades human personality.
29a 29b read the excerpt below from president lyndon johnson s speech at the time of signing the civil rights act of 1964 and then answer the questions that follow primarysource one hundred and eighty eight years ago this week a small band of valiant men began a long struggle for freedom.
they pledged their lives their fortunes and their sacred honor not only to found a nation but to forge an ideal of freedom we believe that all men are created equal.
yet many are denied equal treatment.
we believe that all men have certain unalienable rights.
yet many americans do not enjoy those rights.
we believe that all men are entitled to the blessings of liberty.
yet millions are being deprived of those blessings not because of their own failures but because of the color of their skin.
the reasons are deeply imbedded in history and tradition and the nature of man.
we can understand without rancor or hatred how this all happened.
but it cannot continue.
our constitution the foundation of our republic forbids it.
the principles of our freedom forbid it.
morality forbids it.
and the law i will sign tonight forbids it.
remarks upon signing the civil rights bill july 2 1964 interpreting primary sources what event is johnson referencing that had happened 188 years previously.
who are the valiant men he mentions.
1a 29a analyzing primary sources how does johnson s speech show that the founding principles of the united states were still being applied to decision making in the 1960s.
1a 1b 29a evaluating what did the civil rights act of 1964 accomplish.
was it a success.
1b 9f 29a extended response question summarizing identify each of the following organizations naacp sncc sclc and core.
write a paragraph about each organization describing its contribution to the civil rights movement and describing its approach to expanding the civil rights of african americans.
9b 29b standardized test practice what did governor george wallace do in an attempt to maintain the status quo at the university of alabama in 1963.
9g a he allowed african americans to enroll at the university.
b he put a poll tax in place so students could not register.
c he put national guardsmen onto the campus.
d he tried to block african americans from registering.
which landmark case did naacp attorney thurgood marshall argue before the supreme court.
f heart of atlanta motel v united states g brown v board of education h katzenbach v morgan j white v regester need extra help.
32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 go to page 1496 14961 496 483 483 474 i 496 the vietnam war networks there s more online about how the vietnam war changed the united states.
1954 1975 chapter 10 place and time united states 1931 1941 franklin d roosevelt and his administration had a monumental task in 1933 the great depression had affected millions of americans.
people began to demand help from the federal government.
promising a new deal for the american people president roosevelt took immediate steps to put people back to work strengthen the economy and establish a safety net for the nation.
roosevelt s critics challenged his plan because never before had the federal government intervened so directly in the economy.
step into the place read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map.
sh316d 16e 29a 29b dbq analyzing historical documents what different perspectives do these excerpts reveal about the role of government in the economy.
primary source so first of all let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself nameless unreasoning unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance our greatest primary task is to put people to work.
this is no unsolvable problem if we face it wisely and courageously.
it can be accomplished in part by direct recruiting by the government itself treating the task as we would treat the emergency of a war but at the same time through this employment accomplishing greatly needed projects to stimulate and reorganize the use of our natural resources w president franklin d roosevelt from his first inaugural address march 4 1933 primary source now what would i have my party do.
i would have them re dedare the principles that they put forth in that 1932 platform reduce the size of government balance the federal budget just get the platform of the democratic party and get the platform of the socialist party and make your mind up to pick up the platform that more nearly squares with the record and you will have your hand on the socialist platform.
i t is all right with me if they want to disguise themselves as karl marx or lenin or any of the rest of that bunch but i won t stand for their allowing them to march under the banner of jackson or cleveland.
e smith former democratic presidential candidate from a sdeech delivered january 25 1936 0 200 km lambert azimuthal equal area projection academic vocabulary apparent ideology fundamental content vocabulary ament fix the economy.
omic well being of its citizens.
it matters because franklin delano roosevelt was elected president in 1932 following his promise of a new deal for americans.
in his first hundred days in office he introduced a flood of legislation designed to rescue banks industry and agriculture and provide jobs for the unemployed.
polio gold standard bank holiday fireside chats taking notes key ideas and details sequencing as you read about roosevelt s first three months in office complete a time line to record the major problems he addressed during this time.
teks texas essential knowledge and skills 14a identify the effects of population growth and distribution on the physical environment 15e describe the emergence of monetary policy in the united states including the federal reserve act of 1913 and the shifting trend from a gold standard to fiat money continued on p 312 roosevelt s rise to power guiding question what qualities make an effective leader.
a distant cousin of theodore roosevelt franklin delano roosevelt grew up in hyde park new york.
in his youth franklin learned to hunt ride horses and sail he also developed a lifelong commitment to conservation and a love of rural areas in the united states.
roosevelt was educated at harvard and then at columbia law school.
while at harvard he became friends with theodore roosevelts niece eleanor whom he later married.
intensely competitive roosevelt liked to be in control.
he also liked being around people.
his charming personality deep rich voice and wide smile expressed confidence and optimism.
in short his personality seemed made for a life in politics.
roosevelt began his political career in 1910 when he was elected to the new york state senate.
he earned a reputation as a progressive reformer.
three years later he became assistant secretary of the navy in the wilson administration.
in 1920 his reputation and famous surname helped him win the vice presidential nomination on the unsuccessful democratic ticket.
after losing the election roosevelt temporarily withdrew from politics.
the next year he caught the dreaded paralyzing disease polio.
although there was no cure roosevelt refused to give in.
he began a vigorous exercise program to restore muscle control.
with heavy steel braces on his legs he was able to seem to walk short distances by leaning on a cane and someones arm and swinging his legs forward from his hips.
310 while recovering from polio roosevelt depended on his wife and his aide louis howe to keep his name prominent in the new york democratic party.
eleanor roosevelt became an effective public speaker and her efforts kept her husband s political career alive.
by the mid 1920s roosevelt was again active in the democratic party.
in 1928 he ran for governor of new york.
he campaigned hard to show that his illness had not slowed him down and he narrowly won the election.
two years later he was reelected in a landslide.
as governor roosevelt oversaw the creation of the first state relief agency to aid the unemployed.
roosevelts popularity in new york paved the way for his presidential nomination in 1932 americans saw in him an energy and optimism that gave them hope despite the tough economic times.
after roosevelt became president his serenity and confidence amazed people.
when one aide commented on his attitude roosevelt replied if you had spent two years in bed trying to wiggle your big toe after that anything else would seem easy in mid june 1932 when the country was deep in the depression republicans gathered in chicago and nominated herbert hoover to run for a second term as president.
later that month the democrats also held their national convention in chicago.
when roosevelt won the nomination he broke with tradition by flying to chicago to accept it in person.
his speech set the tone for his campaign eleanor roosevelt 1884 1962 eleanor roosevelt transformed the role of first lady.
she traveled toured factories and coal mines.
and met with workers then told her husband what people were thinking.
she was a strong i supporter of civil rights and urged him to stop discrimination in new deal programs.
after president roosevelt s death she was appointed a delegate to the united nations in 1946 where she helped draft the universal declaration of human rights.
critical thinking predicting consequences how might franklin roosevelt s political career have been different if eleanor t had not been his wife.
primarysource let it be from now on the task of our party to break foolish traditions i t is inevitable that the main issue of this campaign should revolve about a depression so deep that it is without precedent republican leaders not only have failed in material things they have failed in national vision because in disaster they have held out no hope i pledge you i pledge myself to a new deal for the american people.
speech delivered to the democratic national convention july 2 1932 from that point forward roosevelts policies for ending the depression became known as the new deal.
roosevelts confidence that he could make things better contrasted sharply with herbert hoovers apparent failure to do anything effective.
on election day roosevelt won in a landslide winning the electoral vote in all but six states.
h reading progress check interpreting what characteristics did roosevelt have that made him popular with americans.
polio abbreviated term for poliomyelitis an acute infectious disease affecting the skeletal muscles often resulting in permanent disability and deformity apparent appearing to be fact as far as can be understood franklin roosevelt delivers his first inaugural address.
critical thinking interpreting why was it important that franklin roosevelt inspired optimism among so many americans.
roosevelt and the new deal 311 continued from p 310 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 16d compare the new deal policies and its opponents approaches to resolving the economic effects of the great depression 16e describe how various new deal agencies and programs including the federal deposit insurance corporation the securities and exchange commission and the social security administration continue to affect the lives of u s citizens 19a evaluate the impact of new deal legislation on the historical roles of state and federal government 26d identify the political social and economic contributions of women such as frances willard jane addams eleanor roosevelt dolores huerta sonia sotomayor and oprah winfrey to american society gold standard a monetary standard in which one ounce of gold equals a set number of dollars bank holiday closing of banks during the great depression to avoid bank runs ideology a system of thought that is held by an individual group or culture the hundred days guiding question why are the first hundred days so important for a president.
roosevelt won the presidency in november 1932 but the situation grew worse between the election and his inauguration.
unemployment continued to rise and bank runs increased.
people feared that roosevelt would abandon the gold standard and reduce the value of the dollar to fight the depression.
under the gold standard one ounce of gold equaled a set number of dollars.
to reduce the value of the dollar the united states would have to stop exchanging dollars for gold.
many americans and foreign investors with deposits in american banks decided to take their money out of the banks and convert it to gold before it lost its value.
across the nation people stood in long lines with paper bags and suitcases waiting to withdraw their money from banks.
by march 1933 more than 4 000 banks had collapsed wiping out nine million savings accounts.
in 38 states governors declared bank holidays closing the remaining banks before bank runs could put them out of business.
by the day of roosevelts inauguration most of the nations banks were closed.
one in four workers was unemployed.
roosevelt knew he had to restore the nations confidence.
first of all he declared in his inaugural address let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself this nation asks for action and action now skills practice as you read about the first new deal use a graphic organizer of your choice to take notes about the different approaches to ending the depression.
after completing the lesson use your notes to write a summary of what you read.
the new deal begins roosevelt and his advisers came into office bursting with ideas about how to end the depression.
roosevelt had no clear agenda nor did he have a strong political ideology.
he argued the country needs bold persistent experimentation.
above all try something the new president sent bill after bill to congress.
between march 9 and june 16 1933 which came to be called the hundred days congress passed 15 major acts to resolve the economic crisis.
these programs made up what would be called the first new deal.
a divided administration although he alone made the final decision about what policies and programs to pursue roosevelt depended on his advisers for new ideas.
he deliberately chose advisers who disagreed with one another because he wanted to hear many different points of view.
one influential group of president roosevelts advisers supported the belief that if the government agencies worked with businesses to regulate wages prices and production they could lift the economy out of the depression.
a second group of advisers who distrusted big business and felt business leaders had caused the depression wanted government planners to run key parts of the economy.
a third group of advisers supported former president woodrow wilsons new freedom philosophy.
they wanted roosevelt to break up big companies and allow competition to set wages prices and production levels.
this group of advisers also thought that the government should impose regulations to keep economic competition fair.
hreading progress check summarizing what were the key accomplishments during roosevelt s first hundi days in office.
312 banks and debt relief guiding question why did roosevelt broadcast fireside chats.
roosevelt knew that very few of the new programs would work as long as the nations banks remained closed.
before he did anything else he had to restore peoples confidence in the banking system.
within a week of his taking office the emergency banking relief act was passed.
the new law required federal examiners to survey the nations banks and issue treasury department licenses to those that were financially sound.
on march 12 roosevelt addressed the nation by radio.
sixty million people listened to this first of many fireside chats he said i assure you that it is safer to keep your money in a reopened bank than under the mattress.
when banks opened on march 13 deposits far outweighed withdrawals.
the banking crisis was over.
with confidence in the banking system restored roosevelt then proceeded to use powers granted in the emergency banking relief act to take the dollar off the gold standard.
in june congress went further passing a law that made all contracts payable only in legal tender.
no one could demand gold in payment or use gold to pay for things.
almost immediately inflation began.
this was exactly what the president wanted.
the purpose of going off the gold standard was to cause inflation what roosevelt called reflation because he believed the dollar was overvalued from decades of deflation.
roosevelt wanted to cause inflation to help people in debt.
when money inflates it loses value.
debts become easier to pay because the money owed is not worth as much anymore.
at the same time inflation causes prices to go up earning more money for farmers and others who were suffering from low prices for their goods.
the united states stayed off the gold standard for about nine months until the president thought the dollars value had fallen far enough.
in early 1934 roosevelt set a new price for the gold standard where one ounce of gold equaled 35 u s dollars.
fireside chats radio broadcasts made by roosevelt to the american people to explain his initiatives thefdicand sec many of roosevelt s advisers wanted to go further pushing for new regulations for banks and the stock market.
roosevelt agreed and supported the securities act of 1933 and the glass steagall banking act.
the securities act required companies that sold stocks and bonds to provide complete and truthful information to investors.
the securities and exchange commission sec was created to regulate the stock market and stop fraud.
the glass steagall act separated commercial banking from investment banking.
commercial banks handle everyday transactions and could no longer risk depositors money through stock speculation.
the act also created the federal deposit insurance corporation fdic to provide government insurance for bank deposits.
the creation of the fdic increased public confidence in the banking system.
in creating the fdic and the sec congress changed the historical role of state and federal governments in financial matters.
until the new deal the regulation of banks had been the responsibility of state governments today banks can have a federal charter or a state charter and be subject to ot federal and state regulations.
similarly up until 1933 the operation of stock markets had been generally unregulated.
under the laissez faire ideas oft e fate 1800s the idea that the federal government should impose ru es on a market where people met to buy and sell stocks was never seriously considere.
the great crash of 1929 changed peoples thinking.
roosevelt and the new deal 313 the fdic still exists today.
it guarantees bank deposits up to 250 000 for all member banks and is funded by insurance premiums paid by the banks not by taxpayer money.
the fdic supervises the operations of over 4500 banks nationwide making sure they are sound and comply with all financial regulations and consumer protection laws.
you can tell if a bank is insured by the fdic by looking for the member fdic logo on bank windows paper documents and websites.
the sec also still exists regulating the operations of the nations stock markets.
it inspects stock brokers investment advisors and agencies that rate stocks.
it investigates reports of fraud insider trading and works to prevent companies from misleading investors with false information.
the sec does not insure investments.
investing in companies always carries risk and investors can lose their money.
the secs role is not to protect investments but to prevent fraud and make sure investors are given correct information so they can make good investment decisions.
mortgage and debt relief terrified of losing their homes and farms many americans cut back on spending to make sure they could pay their mortgages.
roosevelt responded by introducing policies to help americans with their debts.
for example the home owners loan corporation bought the mortgages of home owners who were behind in their payments.
it then restructured the loans with longer repayment terms and lower interest rates.
the farm credit administration fca helped farmers refinance their mortgages.
these loans saved millions of farms from foreclosure.
although the fca may have slowed economic recovery by making less money available to lend to more efficient businesses it did help many desperate and impoverished people hold onto their land.
both the holc and the fca represented a dramatic expansion ofthe federal governments role in the economy.
never before had the federal government been involved in helping people with their mortgages.
h reading progress check summarizing how did the government restore confidence in the banking system.
farms and industry guiding question how did new deal legislation try to stabilize agriculture and industry.
many of roosevelts advisers believed that both farmers and businesses were suffering because prices were too low and production too high.
to help the nations farmers congress passed the agricultural adjustment act.
the act was based on a simple idea that prices for farm goods were lo because farmers grew too much food.
under this act the governments agricultural adjustment administration aaa would pay farmers not to rai certain livestock grow certain crops and produce dairy products.
over the ne two years farmers withdrew millions more acres from cultivation and receive.
more than 1 billion in support payments.
the program met its goal althougl raising food prices in a depression drew harsh criticism.
also not all farmers benefited.
thousands of tenant farmers many of them african americans los their jobs and homes when landlords took their fields out of production.
the government turned its attention to manufacturing in june 1933 with the national industrial recovery act nira.
once passed this law authorize the national recovery administration nra to suspend antitrust laws and a owed business labor and government to cooperate with rules or codes of 1 314 competition for each industry.
codes set prices established minimum wages shortened workers hours to create more jobs permitted unionization and helped businesses develop industry wide rules of fair competition.
the nra revived a few industries but the codes were difficult to administer.
employers disliked that the nra allowed workers to form unions.
they also argued that paying minimum wages forced them to raise prices.
after the nra was instituted industrial production fell.
the nra was declared unconstitutional in 1935 h reading progress check specifying how was the agricultural adjustment act intended to stabilize the agricultural industry.
geography connection the world in spatial terms what states other than tennessee benefited from the tva projects.
places and regions why do you think the majority of the projects were located in eastern tennessee.
relief programs guidingquestion how did new deal programs differ from president hoover s attempts to combat the depression.
many of president roosevelts advisers emphasized tinkering with prices and providing debt relief to solve the depression.
others maintained that the depressions fundamental cause was low consumption.
they thought getting money into the hands of needy individuals would be the fastest remedy.
because neither roosevelt nor his advisers wanted to give money to the unemployed they supported work programs for the unemployed.
the decision to create federal work programs marked yet another change in the historical roles of state and federal government.
until the depression relief programs run by government were rare but when they have been set up they had always been funded and managed by state and local governments.
during the hoover administration relief aid had for the first time been sent from the federal government to state governments to help them fund jobs fundamental being of central importance roosevelt and the new deal 315 this poster for the civilian conservation corps ccc expresses the optimism ofthe new deal.
critical thinking drawing conclusions how did the ccc provide opportunities for work play study and health.
but the new deal went even further with the creation of several federally managed job programs that bypassed the state governments entirely the ccc u 1 the most highly praised new deal work relief program was the civilian conservation corps ccc.
the ccc offered unemployed young men 18 25 years old the opportunity to work under the direction of the forestry service planting trees fighting forest fires and building reservoirs.
to prevent a repeat ofthe dust bowl the workers planted a line of more than 200 million trees known as a shelter belt from north texas to north dakota.
the young men lived in camps near their work areas and earned 30 a month 25 of which was sent directly to their families.
the average ccc worker returned home after six to twelve months better nourished and with greater self respect.
ccc programs also taught more than 40 000 of their recruits to read and write.
by the time the ccc closed down in 1942 it had put 3 million young men to work outdoors including 80 000 native americans who helped reclaim land they had once owned.
after a second bonus army march on washington in 1933 roosevelt added some 250 000 veterans to the ccc as well.
fera and the pwa a few weeks after authorizing the ccc congress established the federal emergency relief administration fera.
roosevelt chose harry hopkins a former social worker to run fera.
initially it did not create projects for the unemployed.
instead it gave money to state and local agencies to fund their relief projects.
after meeting with roosevelt to discuss his new job hopkins took the next two hours to spend 5 million on relief projects.
when critics charged that some of the projects did not make sense in the long run hopkins replied people dont eat in the long run they eat every day in june 1933 congress authorized another relief agency the public works administration pwa.
one third of the nations unemployed were in the construction industry.
to put them back to work the pwa began building highways dams schools and other government facilities.
the pwa awarded contracts to construction companies.
by insisting that contractors not discriminate against african americans the agency broke down some of the racial barriers in the construction trades.
the cwa by the fall of 1933 neither fera nor the pwa had reduced unemployment significantly and hopkins realized that unless the federal government acted quickly a huge number of unemployed citizens would be in severe distress once winter began.
after hopkin explained the situation president roosevelt authorized him to set u the civil works administration cwa.
hiring workers directly the cwa employed 4 million people including 300 000 women.
the agency built or improved 1 000 airports 500 000 miles of roads 40 000 school buildings and 3 500 playgrounds a parks.
the program spent nearly 1 billion in just five months.
although the cwa helped many people get through the winter president rooseve was alarmed by how quickly the agency was spending money.
he did no want americans to get used to the federal government providing them v jobs.
warning that the civil works administration would become aha with the country roosevelt insisted that it be shut down the following spring.
hopkins summarized what the cwa had accomplished 16 political cartoons the new deal this political cartoon from 1933 depicts the efforts made by president roosevelt to end the great depression with his new deal.
i president roosevelt tries to prime the economic pump using taxpayer dollars to get the economy going again.
1 analyzing primary sources how does the artist feel about the new deal.
2 analyzing visuals what symbols are used to convey the artist s message.
primary source long after the workers of cwa are dead and gone and these hard times are forgotten their effort will be remembered by permanent useful works in every county of every state.
from spending to save the complete story of relief 1936 connections to today emergency economic stabilization act success of the first new deal during his first year in office roosevelt convinced congress to pass an astonishing array of legislation.
the first new deal did not restore prosperity but it reflected roosevelts zeal for action and his willingness to experiment.
banks were reopened many more people retained their homes and farms and more people were employed.
perhaps the most important result of the first new deal was a change in the spirit of the american people.
roosevelts actions had inspired hope and restored americans faith in their nation.
b reading progress check identifying how did the relief programs help combat the depression.
lesson 1 review government relief programs and legislation to help banks and other financial institutions are still enacted today.
in 2008 the emergency economic stabilization act became law.
it provided up to 700 billion to the secretary of the treasury to buy mortgages and other troubled assets from the countrys banks to promote financial market stability reviewing vocabulary 1 defining how did polio affect president roosevelt s character and physical abilities.
2 explaining what did people fear would happen if the nation went off the gold standard.
15e using your notes 3 summarizing use the notes you completed during the lesson to write a short paragraph summarizing how roosevelt addressed the major problems during his first three months in office.
160 16e answering the guiding questions 4 identifying what qualities make an effective leader.
5 making inferences why are the first hundred days so important fora president.
6 describing why did roosevelt broadcast fireside chats.
7 analyzing how did new deal legislation try to stabilize agriculture and industry.
160 8 contrasting how did new deal programs differ from president hoover s attempts to combat the depression.
16d 19a writing activity argument if you were an adviser to president roosevelt what ideas would you suggest to end the depression.
provide an argument for why your ideas would work.
16d 16e 19a roosevelt and the new deal 317 the first new deal when fdr took office in 1933 the economy had been getting worse for more than three years.
during the first one hundred days of his presidency he oversaw 15 major pieces of legislation that attempted to revive the nation s economy and provide relief to the unemployed.
never before had the federal government intervened so directly in the economy.
key to stopping the economic downslide was fdr s ability to inspire confidence that the nations economic problems could be solved.
vocabulary induction process of placing someone in office vigor strength or force framework a basic supporting part or structure shiftless lacking in ambition lazy laissez faire idea that government should not regulate the economy revival a renewal coming alive again inagural address 1933 i am certain that my fellow americans expect that on my induction into the presidency i will address them with a candor and a decision which the present situation of our nation impels.
this is preeminently the time to speak the truth the whole truth frankly and boldly so first of all let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself nameless unreasoning unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance.
in every dark hour of our national life a leadership of frankness and vigor has met with that understanding and support ofthe people themselves which is essential to victory.
i am convinced that you will again give that support to leadership in these critical days this nation asks for action and action now.
our greatest primary task is to put people to work.
this is no unsolvable problem if we face it wisely and courageously.
it can be accomplished in part by direct recruiting by the government itself treating the task as we would treat the emergency of a war but at the same time through this employment accomplishing greatly needed projects to simulate and reorganize the use of our natural resources president franklin d roosevelt first inaugural address delivered march 4 1933 excerpted from the public papers and addresses of franklin d roosevelt during the whole 33 one hundred days congress people didnt know what was going on the public couldnt understand these thing that were being passed so fast.
they knew something was happening something goodfc them.
they began investing and working and hoping again the bank rescue of 1933 was probably the turning point ofthe depression.
when people were able to survive the shock of having all th banks closed and then see the banks open up there began to be confidence.
the public helped itself after it got confidence.
it marked the revival of hope a depression is much like a run on a bank.
its a crisis of confidence raymond moley original member of fdf brains tru oral history interview what roosevelt and the new deal did wast turn around and face the realities a hundred years from now when historians loc back on it they will say a big corner was turned.
people agreed that old things didnt work.
what ran through the whole new deal was finding a way to make things work.
before that hoover would loan money to farmers to keep their mules alive but wouldnt loan money to keep their children alive.
this was perfectly right within the framework of classical thinking.
if an individual couldnt get enough to eat it was because he wasnt on the ball.
it was his responsibility.
the new deal said anybody who is unemployed isnt necessarily unemployed because hes shiftless great quantities of letters came pouring in letters from everywhere.
they were proposals from people solutions to all sorts of problems.
some of them crackpot some of them quite good.
everybody had suggestions.
the country was aware as it never was before that it was on the edge of something laissez faire as such certainly did not come to an end with the new deal.
we still have a tremendous amount of freedom of decisionmaking in the individual corporate enterprise.
the new element is the governments positive responsibility for making our economy run economist gardiner c means economic adviser in the roosevelt administration lira analyzing historical documents 1 acquiring information what is the present situation that president roosevelt references in the first paragraph.
what does president roosevelt claim is the greatest primary task 2 evaluating language and context what words and phrases does roosevelt use in this speech to build confidence and trust and to convince people help is coming and that they do not have to be afraid anymore.
3 finding the main idea what appears to be the main idea of hoovers book based on this excerpt.
4 analyzing historical questions critics of roosevelt at the time and later suggested he was undermining the free enterprise system.
what do the comments by gardiner means suggest was the administrations viewpoint on free enterprise.
what does he say is different from a laissez faire approach.
contemporary book 1934 even if the government conduct of business could give us the maximum of efficiency instead of least efficiency it would be purchased at the cost of freedom.
it would increase rather than decrease abuse and corruption stifle initiative and invention undermine the development of leadership cripple the mental and spiritual energies of our people and the forces which make progress the nation seeks for solution of its many difficulties.
these solutions can come alone through the constructive forces from the system built upon liberty.
they cannot be achieved by the destructive forces of regimentation.
the purification of liberty from abuses the restoration of confidence in the rights of men the release of the dynamic forces of initiative and enterprise are alone the methods by which these solutions can be found and the purpose of american life assured former president herbert hoover in his book the challenge to liberty 1934 a crowd confronts police at the locked gates of a bank shortly after roosevelts inauguration 5 answering historical questions look at the photo of the bank holiday.
what effect do you think it had when people arrived at the bank to find they could not get their money out.
why does raymond moley think their reaction was a good thing in the long run.
6 corroborating based on roosevelts speech what does he appear to think is the biggest obstacle facing his administration.
how do the two interviews corroborate what roosevelt said in his inaugural speech.
7 evaluating frame of reference what are herbert hoovers basic assumptions about the government and the economy.
how does his frame of reference affect your opinion about the validity of his ideas.
why else might you question the validity of his arguments.
319 networks there s more online.
gf biography charles coughlin biography huey long ef biography francis townsend ef chart graph wagner act ef chart graph first second new deals ef slideshow new deal opponents r ph f 20a month 7or th 6oyrsof age the spehdt mont wfuu tvtf or credit jw tur economic chz lesson 2 the second new deal st video the new deal interactive self check quiz itizens.
it matters because reading helpdesk academic vocabulary benefit thereby finance criticism of the new deal led president roosevelt to introduce new legislation in 1935 these laws created the works progress administration the national labor relations board and the social security administration.
content vocabulary deficit spending binding arbitration sit down strike taking notes key ideas and details organizing as you read about president roosevelt s second new deal complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below by filling in his main legislative successes during this period.
legislation provisions teks texas essential knowledge and skills 16d compare the new deal policies and its opponents approaches to resolving the economic effects of the great depression continued on p 322 launching the second new deal guidingquestion why did president roosevelt decide to introduce new legislation to fight the depression.
president roosevelt was tremendously popular during his first two years in office but opposition to his policies began to grow.
new deal programs had created more than 2 million new jobs.
more than 10 million workers remained unemployed however and the nations total income was about half of what it had been in 1929 criticism from right and left roosevelt faced hostility from both the political right and the left.
the right wing had long believed that the new deal regulated business too tightly.
opponents thought that it gave the federal government too much power over the states.
by late 1934 the right wing increased its opposition as roosevelt started deficit spending abandoning a balanced budget and borrowing money to pay for his programs.
many business leaders became alarmed at the growing deficit.
some on the left however believed that the new deal had not gone far enough.
they wanted even more economic intervention to shift wealth from the rich to middle income and poor americans.
one outspoken critic was huey long.
as governor of louisiana long had championed the poor.
he improved schools colleges and hospitals and built roads and bridges.
these benefits made him popular and he built a powerful but corrupt political machine.
in 1930 long was elected to the u s senate.
in 1934 he established the share our wealth society to pull down these huge piles of gold until there shall be a real job not a little old sow belly black eyed pea job but a real spending 320 money beef steak and gravy ford in the garage red white and blue job for every man long planned to run for president in 1936 roosevelt also faced a challenge from catholic priest and popular radio host father charles coughlin.
once an ardent new deal supporter the detroit resident had grown impatient with its moderate reforms.
he called for inflating the currency and nationalizing the banking system.
in 1934 he organized the national union for social justice which some democrats feared would become a new political party.
a third challenge came from california physician francis townsend.
he proposed that the federal government pay citizens over age 60 a pension of 200 a month.
recipients would have to retire and spend the entire check each month.
townsend believed that the plan would increase spending and free up jobs for the unemployed.
his proposal attracted millions of supporters especially older americans who mobilized as a political force for the first time.
together the three men had supporters around the country.
roosevelt faced the possibility of a coalition that would prevent his reelection.
thewpa in 1935 roosevelt launched a series of programs now known as the second new deal to generate greater economic recovery.
among these new programs was the works progress administration wpa the new deals largest public works program.
between 1935 and 1941 the wpa employed 8 5 million workers and spent 11 billion to construct about 650 000 miles of roadways 125 000 public buildings 853 airports more than 124 000 bridges and more than 8 000 parks.
one wpa program called federal number one financed artists musicians theater people and writers.
artists created murals and sculptures for public buildings musicians set up orchestras and smaller musical groups playwrights actors and directors wrote and staged plays and writers recorded the stories of those who had once been enslaved and others whose voices had not often been heard.
skills practice pick a partner.
read the lesson on the second new deal together.
help one another with difficult sentences.
explain what a sentence means if your partner does not know.
ask them for help if you have trouble.
ask a teacher for help with difficult sentences when you need it.
deficit spending government practice of spending borrowed money rather than raising taxes usually in an attempt to boost the economy benefit something that promotes well being or is a useful aid finance to provide money for a project the supreme court s role in may 1935 in schechter poultry corporation v united states the supreme court struck down the authority of the national recovery administration.
the schechter brothers had been convicted of violating the nras poultry code.
the court ruled that the constitution did not allow congress to delegate its legislative powers to the executive branch and therefore the nras codes were unconstitutional.
roosevelt worried that the ruling suggested the supreme court could strike down the rest of the new deal.
roosevelt knew he needed a new series of programs to keep voters support.
he called congressional leaders to a white house conference and thundered that congress could not go home until it passed his new bills.
that summer congress passed roosevelts programs.
b reading progress check synthesizing what factors encouraged roosevelt to introduce the second new deal.
some including dr francis townsend criticized the new deal for not going far enough to relieve the economic troubles of poor and middle class americans.
critical thinking comparing and contrasting how did the political left s criticisms of the new deal differ from those of the political right.
th f tbwnsenb tt ah 200.
r month forthose qve soyksofage the spend.
lg otth myw ll purthec0ntb orcremt ntdr of 1 analyzing primary sources there were many viewpoints on the new deal.
some opponents believed it was undermining american society.
others thought it did not go far enough.
s it is not easy for me to stand up here tonight and talk to the american people against the democratic administration.
this is not easy during my whole public life i put patriotism above partisanship.
and when i see danger i say danger what are these dangers that i see.
the first is the arraignment of class against class in my time i have met some good and bad industrialists.
i have met some good and bad financiers but i have also met some good and bad laborers and this i know that permanent prosperity is dependent upon both capital and labor alike.
so now ladies and gentlemen we come to that plan of mine for the redistribution of wealth and for guaranteeing comforts and conveniences to all humanity out of this abundance in our country.
i hope none will be horror stricken when they hear me say that we musl limit the size ofthe big man s fortune in order to guarantee a minimum of fortune life and comfort to the little man but if you are think first that such is the declaration on which roosevelt rode into the nomination and election of president.
while my urgings are declared b some to be the average of a madman if you will listen to me you wi find that it is restating the laws handed down by god to man you will find that it was the exact provision of the contract and law ofthe pilgrim fathers who landed at plymouth in 1620 99 and i also know that there can be no permanent prosperity in this country until industry is able to employ labor and there certainly can be no permanent recovery upon any governmental theory of soak the rich and soakthe poor 99 betrayal ofthe democratic party alfred e smith keynote address to the liberty league 1936 ai smith was elected governor of new york four times.
he was the democratic party s nominee for president in 1928.
from share ourwealth huey long radio address 1935 huey long was a united states senator from louisiana.
dbq document based questions q comparing and contrasting in what ways are huey long s and alfred e smith s concerns exactly the opposite c each other.
q analyzing do you agree with long or with smith.
or do you disagree with them both.
explain your opinion.
continued from p 320 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 16e describe how various new deal agencies and programs including the federal deposit insurance corporation the securities and exchange commission and the social security administration continue to affect the lives of u s citizens 19a evaluate the impact of new deal legislation on the historical roles of state and federal government 19b explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events including world war i the great depression world war ii the 1960s and 9 11 21c evaluate constitutional change in terms of strict construction versus judicial interpretation reforms for workers and senior citizens guiding question howdid the wagner act and the social security act affect americans.
when the supreme court struck down the nra it also invalidated the section of the nira that gave workers the right to organize.
democrats knew that the working class vote was key to winning reelection in 1936 they also believed that unions could help end the depression because higl union wages would give workers more money to spend thereby boosting t economy.
opponents disagreed arguing that high wages forced companies to charge higher prices and hire fewer people.
despite these concerns congress pushed ahead with new labor legislation.
the wagner act in july 1935 congress passed the national labor relations act also called the wagner act.
this act guaranteed workers the right to unionize and bargain collectively.
it also established the national labor relations board nlrb which organized factory elections by secret ballot to determine whether workers wanted a union.
the nlrb could also investigate employers actions and.
stop unfair practices.
the wagner act also set up a process called binding arbitration whereby dissatisfied union members took their complaints to a neutral party who would listen to both sides and decide on the issues.
322 the wagner act led to a burst of labor activity.
in 1935 john l lewis leader ofthe united mine workers helped form the committee for industrial organization cio which set out to organize unions that included all workers skilled and unskilled in a particular industry.
first it focused on the automobile and steel industries two of the largest industries in which workers were not yet unionized.
organizers used new tactics to get employers to recognize the unions.
for example during sit down strikes employees stopped work inside the factory and refused to leave.
this technique prevented management from sending in replacement workers.
it was a common cio tactic for several years.
in late december 1936 the united auto workers uaw a cio union began a sit down strike at general motors plant in flint michigan.
family friends and others passed food and other provisions to them through windows.
violence broke out when police launched a tear gas assault on strikers wounding 13 but the strike held.
on february 11 1937 general motors recognized the uaw as its employees sole bargaining agent.
the uaw became one of the most powerful unions in the united states.
u s steel the nations largest steel producer and a long standing opponent of unionizing decided it did not want to repeat gms experience.
in march 1937 the company recognized the cios steelworkers union.
smaller steel producers did not follow suit and suffered bitter strikes.
by 1941 however the steelworkers union had won contracts throughout the industry.
in the late 1930s employees in other industries worked hard to gain union recognition from their employers.
union membership tripled from roughly 3 million in 1933 to about 9 million in 1939 in 1938 the cio changed its name to the congress of industrial organizations and became a federation of industrial unions.
social security after passing the wagner act congress began work on one of the united statess most important pieces of legislation.
this was the social security act which provided some financial security for older americans unemployed workers and others.
roosevelt and his advisers viewed the bill primarily as an insurance measure.
workers earned the right to receive benefits because they paid special taxes to the federal government just as they paid premiums in buying a life insurance policy.
the legislation also provided modest welfare payments to others in need including people with disabilities and poor mothers with dependent children.
some critics did not like the fact that the money came from payroll taxes imposed on workers and employers but to roosevelt these taxes were crucial.
analyzing primary sources the gm strike beds were made up on the floor of each car the seats being removed if necessary i could not see and i looked for it carefully the slightest damage done anywhere to the general motors corporation.
the nearly completed car bodies for example were as clean as they would be in the salesroom their glass and metal shining bruce bliven from sitting down in flint the new republic january 27 1937 dbq drawing conclusions how do the strikers seem to have i acted during the strike.
thereby because of that binding arbitration process in which a neutral party hears arguments from two opposing sides and makes a decision that both must accept sit down strike method of boycotting work by sitting down at work and refusing to leave the establishment sit down strikers at the gm fisher body plant in flint michigan took over the plant in late december 1936 their action led to a national strike that lasted until february 11 1937 critical thinking analyzing primary sources what did the atmosphere within the gm fisher plant seem to be during the strike.
roosevelt andthe new deal 323 the social security act provided small incomes to millions of americans who were unable to work through no fault of their own.
primary source critical thinking predicting consequences how might social security have changed americans sense of personal economic security.
we put those payroll contributions there so as to give the contributors a legal moral and political right to collect their pensions and their unemployment benefits.
with those taxes in there no politician can ever scrap my social security program quoted in memorandum on conference with fdr concerning social security taxation 19 what roosevelt did not anticipate was that congress would later horror from the social security fund to pay for other programs without raising payroll taxes.
the core of social security was the monthly retirement benefit which people collected when they stopped working at age 65 unemployment insurance supplied a temporary income to workers who had lost their jobs.
social security continues to be a part of american life today.
when americans find themselves unemployed they can draw on their unemployment insurance from social security for many weeks while they look for a new job.
in addition of course americans who have contributed t the social security system are eligible for a pension benefit when they retire.
in 2013 the government paid out over 1 3 trillion dollars in social security payments approximately 37 of all federal government spending that year.
social security dramatically changed the role of the federal governmen it was the first example of what came to be called entitlement programs.
an entitlement program is not simply a form of welfare or relief.
it is a payment from the government that americans are entitled to receive in pa because they have paid into the system regularly with deductions from thei paychecks and in part because the law imposes a requirement on the government to make the payments.
social security was controversial at the time it was passed and remains a source of political debate today in part because even though americans are entitled to their social security payments the federal government has borrow against the social security fund in the past and is now forced to borrow more money to pay its social security obligations.
with the federal government deeply in debt and continuing to use deficit spending in almost every budget concerns have arisen as to whether social security can remain solvent and the u s government will be able to meet its obligations.
social security establishe the principle that the federal government should be responsible for those who through no fault of their own were unable to work.
q reading progress check evaluating what were some benefits ofthe wagner act and the social security t for the american public.
vocabulary review 1 defining what happens when the federal government starts a policy of deficit spending.
16d 19a 2 explaining what was one unique feature of sit down strikes.
using your notes 3 summarizing review the notes that you completed during the lesson and then summarize the provisions of roosevelt s major legislation of the second new deal.
16d 16e 19a answering the guiding questions 4 identifying cause and effect why did president roosevelt decide to introduce new legislation to fight the depression.
tf 5 analyzing how did the wagner act and the social security a affect americans.
16d 16e 19a writing activity argument choose a person or group who criticized the new deal.
write an editorial to the local newspaper expressing why readers should be in support of or in opposition to that viewpo 324 networks there s more online.
gf biography mary mcleod bethune chart graph monthly unemployment rate zf graphic organizer new deal coalition graphic organizer relief reform recovery rf image court packing reaction video the lew deal coalition interactive self check quiz lesson 3 the new deal coalition ilih i i ssss assiiil can government fix the economy.
ible for the economic well being of its citizens.
reading helpdesk it matters because cademic vocabulary recovery mediate president roosevelt was reelected in a landslide in 7 936 early in his second term however his court packing plan and a new recession hurt him politically.
the fair labor standards act the last significant piece of new deal legislation provided new protections for workers.
mtent vocabulary court packing broker state safety net king notes y ideas and details itlining as you read create an tline similar to the one below.
lie new deal coalition roosevelts second term a.
3 c k b texas essential knowledge and skills i 2d explain the significance of the j following years as turning points 1898 j spanish american war 1914 1918 world 1 war i 1929 the great depression begins 1939 1945 world war ii 1957 sputnik launch ignites u s soviet space race 1968 1969 martin luther king jr assassination and u s lands on the moon 1991 cold war ends 2001 terrorist attacks on world trade center and the pentagon and 2008 election of first black president barack obama continued on the next page 1 roosevelt s second term guiding question why do you think roosevelt easily won reelection.
in 1936 millions of voters owed their jobs mortgages and bank accounts to the new deal.
many african americans who had reliably voted republican since reconstruction switched their allegiance to the democratic party.
women and african americans had made modest gains thanks to the support of eleanor roosevelt who toured the country and recounted her experiences to her husband.
she persuaded him to address some of their problems in his new deal programs.
a democratic party coalition emerged including not just the white south but also african americans farmers workers immigrants women progressives and intellectuals.
the election of 1936 the republicans nominated kansas governor alfred landon as their presidential challenger.
he wanted to free the spirit of american enterprise but could not convince most voters change was needed.
roosevelt won more than 60 percent of the popular vote.
the court packing plan although the new deal was popular the supreme court saw things differently.
in january 1936 it declared the agricultural adjustment act unconstitutional.
cases pending on social security and the wagner act meant that the court might strike down other new deal programs.
roosevelt was furious.
after his reelection he tried to change the courts political balance.
he sent congress a bill that would increase the number of justices and allow the president to appoint an additional roosevelt and the new deal 325 court packing the act of a leader to change the political balance of power in a nation s judiciary system by appointing judges who will rule in favor of his or her policies recovery an economic upturn as after a depression continued from p 325 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 19a evaluate the impact of new deal legislation on the historical roles of state and federal government 19b explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events including world war i the great depression world war ii the 1960s and 9 11 20b evaluate the impact of relationships among the legislative executive and judicial branches of government including franklin d roosevelts attempt to increase the number of u s supreme court justices and the presidential election of 2000 continued on the next page mary mcleod bethune shown with eleanor roosevelt became the first african american woman to head a federal agency.
critical thinking comparing and contrasting what mood does the photograph convey.
justice if a sitting justice who had served 10 years did not retire within six months of reaching age 70 the bill if passed would have allowed roosevelt to appoint up to six new justices.
the court packing plan as it was called was a major political mistake.
many southern democrats feared new justices would overturn segregation.
african american leaders worried future justices might oppose civil rights.
many americans thought the plan gave the president too much power.
the court appeared to back down narrowly upholding the constitutionality of both the wagner act and the social security act.
soon after a conservative justices resignation allowed roosevelt to appoint a justice who supported the new deal although the bill was quietly killed and roosevelt achieved his goal of changing the courts view of the new deal the court packing plan hurt his reputation.
moreover it caused conservative democrats to work with republicans to block any further new deal proposals.
the recession of 1937 roosevelts problems continued.
in early 1937 the economy seemed to be on the verge of recovery.
industrial output was almost back to pre depression levels and many people believed the worst was over.
concerned about rising debt roosevelt ordered the wpa and the pwa to be cut significantly.
unfortunately he cut spending just as the first social security payroll taxes took 2 billion out of the economy.
by the end of 1937 about 2 million peop were out of work.
a debate over the value of government spending arose within the administration.
the leaders of the wpa and the pwa cited a new economic theory called keynesianism kayn zee uh nih zuhm which held that government should spend heavily in a recession to jump start the economy.
at first roosevelt was reluctant to begin deficit spending again.
some critics believed the recession proved the public was becoming too dependent on government spending.
but in early 1938 with no recovery i sight roosevelt asked congress for 3 75 billion for the pwa the wpa and other programs.
hreaping progress check determining cause and effect what factors helped roosevelt win a landslide victory in 19 the new deal ends guiding question what impact has new deal legislation had on federal and state governments.
in his second inaugural address roosevelt had pointed out that despite progrf in climbing out of the depression many americans were still poor primarysource i see one third of a nation ill housed ill dad ill nourished the test of our progress is not whe we add more to the abundance of those who have much it is whether we provide enough for those1 have too little.
from the public papers and addresses of franklin d roosevelt the constitution prevail the last new deal reforms one ofthe presidents goals for his second term was to provide better housin for the nations poor.
eleanor roosevelt who had toured poverty stricken appalachia and the rural south strongly urged the president to do somethin roosevelt responded with the passage of the national housing act which established the united states housing authority.
this organization received 500 million to subsidize loans to builders willing to construct low cost hous roosevelt also sought to help the nations tenant farmers.
about 150 000 white and 195 000 afncan american tenant farmers were expelled from farms when landlords took their land out of production under the aaa to stop this trend congress created the farm security administration to give loans to tenants so they could purchase farms.
the last major piece of new deal reform was the fair labor standards act which abolished child labor limited the workweek to 44 hours for most workers and set the first federal minimum wage at 25 cents an hour.
the recession of 1937 enabled republicans to win seats in congress in the midterm elections of 1938 together with conservative southern democrats they began blocking further new deal legislation.
by 1939 the new deal era had come to an end.
continued from p 326 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 21c evaluate constitutional change in terms of strict construction versus judicial interpretation 26d identify the political social and economic contributions of women such as frances willard jane addams eleanor roosevelt dolores huerta sonia sotomayor and oprah winfrey to american society the new deal s legacy the onset of the great depression in 1929 was a major turning point in american history.
the economic crisis of the depression led to the new deal which fundamentally changed the relationship between the american people and the federal government.
as a result of the depression the power of the federal government to intervene in the economy significantly increased.
at the same time the historical role of the state governments and their relationship to the federal government began to shift as well.
increasingly the federal government took on a regulatory role that had previously been left to state governments.
in addition state governments began to look to the federal government as a source of additional funds to help them afford state programs and provide aid in difficult economic circumstances.
the new deal did not end the depression but it did give many americans a stronger sense of security and stability.
as a whole the new deal tended to balance competing economic interests.
supreme court decisions in 1937 and 1942 further increased federal power over the economy and allowed it to mediate between competing groups.
in taking on this mediating role the new deal established what some have called the broker state in which the government works out conflicts among different interests.
this broker role has continued under the administrations of both parties ever since.
the new deal also brought about a new public attitude toward government.
roosevelts programs had succeeded in creating a safety net safeguards and relief programs that protected people against economic disaster.
throughout the hard times of the depression most americans maintained a surprising degree of confidence in the american system.
h reading progress check evaluating how did the new deal change how government worked.
mediate to attempt to resolve conflict between hostile people and groups broker state role of government to work out conflicts among competing interest groups safety net something that provides security against misfortune specifically government relief programs intended to protect against economic disaster lesson 3 review reviewing vocabulary 1 stating what was roosevelt s court packing plan.
20b 21c 2 defining what is a broker state.
2d 19a 3 explaining how does a safety net work.
19a using your notes 4 summarizing review the notes that you completed during the lesson.
what were the key events of the final years answering the guiding questions 5 synthesizing why do you think roosevelt easily won reelection.
6 evaluating what impact has new deal legislation had on federal and state governments.
19a 20b writing activity argument do you think that roosevelt s solution to the 1937 recession was the best one.
write a short essay in which you give your opinions about roosevelt s actions and describe your own ideas about ways that could have eased the crisis.
16d roosevelt and the new deal 327 v chapter explain the reasons the united states government decided to support france and get involved in vietnam.
8d 31b extended response questions analyzing the conflict in vietnam has been called the first television war.
write a brief essay describing how television changed the way americans viewed war in the 1960s and how media coverage affected the nation s response to the war in vietnam.
your essay should have an introduction at least two paragraphs and a conclusion.
8f need extra help.
30 31 32 33 34 35 go to page 51 516 504j 501 508 i summarizing either online or at the library research details ofthe events that led to roy benavidez winning medal of honor.
write a brief newspaper article summarizing his story and identifying the most remarkable elements of his heroism and character.
26 standardized test practice what event led to the french decision to withdraw from vietnam.
8e a the american decision to stop sending aid.
b ho chi minh s return from exile.
c the overthrow of ngo dinh diem.
d the battle of dien bien phu.
why was the tet offensive significant.
8e f it was a major victory for the vietcong.
g it convinced many americans the war could not be won.
h it led to the u s withdrawal from south vietnam j it led to the start of the antiwar movement.
516 the politics of protest 1960 1980 networks there s more online about the united states and the politics of protest.
this portrait of a minuteman was created in 1876 to celebrate 100 years of american independence.
bettmann corbis 1 unrest 0 revolution declaration of independence 0 o 159 chapter 6 place and time the british colonies n3 to n 6 the british colonies extended along the coast of the atlantic ocean.
in the middle of this strip was philadelphia.
this city would become a gathering place for colonial leaders as they discussed the growing conflict with great britain.
step into the place map focus by 1775 british policies had caused unrest in the colonies and a growing movement toward independence.
regions which colonial region appears to have the largest area of loyalist support.
location what lay beyond the borders of british territory in north america.
making connections in which colonies do you think the movement for independence might have been the strongest.
what makes you think so.
pacific ocean 140w british territory strong patriot areas in 1775 1 strong loyalist areas in 1775 ur site of major protests against british tax laws 1764 1774 1 spanish missions native american group 0 200 miles i n h 1 0 200 km lambert azimuthal equal area projection i i.
j ncrw step into the time timeline review the time line.
what was taking place in europe at about the same time the first continental congress 1763 treaty of paris signed 1765 colonists protest stamp act world event networks et map explore the interactive version of there s more online.
this map on networks.
ef timeline explore the interactive version of this time line on networks.
of v 1775 battles of lexington 1774 first and concord occur 1770 boston 1773 boston tea continental 1776 colonies issue the massacre occurs party takes place congress meets declaration of independence 1 networks 1 i 5 british policies et map the proclamation of 1763 et self check quiz et video there s more online.
ef game fill in the blank ef graphic organizer lesson 1 no taxation without representation 1 ial question why dots conflict dwtlop.
teks texas essential knowledge and skills 3a explain the reasons for the growth of representative government and institutions during the colonial period.
it matters because conflict between the american colonies and the british government began to deepen in the years after the french and indian war.
3b analyze the importance of the mayflower compact the fundamental orders of connecticut and the virginia house of burgesses to the growth of representative government.
4a analyze causes of the american revolution including the proclamation of 1763 the intolerable acts the stamp act mercantilism lack of representation in parliament and british economic policies following the french and indian war.
4b explain the roles played by significant individuals during the american revolution including abigail adams john adams wentworth cheswell samuel adams mercy otis warren james armistead benjamin franklin bernardo de galvez crispus attucks king george iii haym salomon patrick henry thomas jefferson the marquis de lafayette thomas paine and george washington.
23e identify the political social and economic contributions of women to american society.
reading helpdesk dealing with great britain guidingquestion why did the british go vernment establish new policies.
after their victory in the french and indian war the british controlled much of north america.
to manage this territory king george iii issued the proclamation of 1763 this order prohibited or barred colonists from living west ofthe appalachian mountains on native american land.
the british believed the proclamation would help keep peace between native americans and settlers.
it would also keep colonist.
near the atlantic coast where british authority was stronger.
finally it would allow britain to control westward expansion and the fur trade in the region.
the king sent 10 000 troops to the colonies to enforce the proclamation.
the colonists feared that the large number of british troops would interfere with their liberties and they resented the restriction on settling western land.
britain restricts trade muain needed new revenue or income to pay for the tr the british also had large debts from the french and indian the king and parliament felt the colonists should pay part oft taking notes identifying as you read identify british policies that affected the colonists.
record each policy in a chart like this one.
then record the colonists views of each policy.
162 the spirit of independence content vocabulary revenue effifly writ of assistance boycott resolution repeal costs so the british government issued new taxes on the colonies.
it also enforced old taxes more strictly.
to avoid taxes some colonists resorted to smuggling.
this caused british revenues to fall.
in 1763 britains prime minister george grenville set out to stop the smuggling.
parliament passed a law to have accused smugglers tried by royally appointed judges rather than local juries.
grenville knew that american juries often found smugglers innocent.
parliament also empowered customs officers to obtain writs of assistance.
these documents allowed the officers to search almost anywhere shops warehouses and even private homes for smuggled goods.
the sugar act in 1764 parliament passed the sugar act which lowered the tax on the molasses the colonists imported.
grenville hoped this change would convince the colonists to pay the tax instead of smuggling.
the act also allowed officers to seize goods from accused smugglers without going to court.
revenue incoming money from taxes or other sources writ of assistance a court document allowing customs officers to enter any location to search for smuggled goods academic vocabulary prohibit to prevent or forbid geography connection king george issued the proclamation of 1763 in the aftermath ofthe french and indian war.
regions how did the proclamation of 1763 attempt to protect native american rights and lands.
critical thinking speculating how do you think the colonists reacted to the proclamation.
lesson 1 163 a growing debt using math skills did british or colonial subjects pay more toward the debt.
what was the difference in pounds and shillings.
critical thinking identifying central issues how did residents of britain and the american colonists pay their shares of the debt.
share of the debt per person britain 1 british pound 1 british shilling 1 pound 20 shillings great britain s national debt soared as a result of the french and indian war.
subjects living in great britain paid more on this debt per person than people living in the colonies.
british efforts to get colonists to pay a bigger share of war related debt led to sharp conflict.
source don cook the long fuse how england lost the american colonies 1760 1785 the sugar act angered many colonists.
they believed this and other new laws violated their rights.
as british citizens colonists argued they had a right to a trial by jury and to be viewed as innocent until proved guilty according to british law.
colonists also believed they had the right to be secure in their homes without the threat of officers barging in to search for smuggled goods.
the colonists also accepted the principle of no taxation without representation as a basic right.
since the colonies lacked representation in parliament many colonists considered it unjust for parliament to tax the colonies.
james otis a lawyer in boston argued primary source m no parts of england s colonies can be taxed without their consent every part has a right to be represented.
w ill from the rights of the british colonies w pi reading progress check analyzing according to the colonists what rights did the sugar act violate skills practice keep a list of academic vocabulary and social studies vocabulary.
before you share information with classmates choose some of these words to use.
reading helpdesk new taxes on the colonies g u i d in g q u e sti o n how did the american colonists react to british policies.
in 1765 parliament passed the stamp act.
this law taxed almost all printed materials.
newspapers wills and even playing cards needed a stamp to show that the tax had been paid.
i resolution an official expression of opinion by a group effigy a mocking figure representing an unpopular individual boycott to refuse to buy items in order to show disapproval or force acceptance of one s terms repeal to cancel an act or law academic vocabulary violate to disregard or go against 164 the spirit of independence opposition to the stamp act the stamp act outraged the colonists.
they argued that only their own assemblies could tax them.
patrick henry a member of the virginia house of burgesses got the burgesses to take action.
the assembly passed a resolution declaring that it had the only and sole exclusive right and power to lay taxes on its citizens.
in boston samuel adams helped start the sons of liberty.
its members took to the streets to protest the stamp act.
protesters burned effigies eh fuh jeez stuffed figures made to look like unpopular tax collectors.
colonial leaders decided to work together.
in october delegates from nine colonies met in new york at the stamp act congress.
they sent a statement to the king and parliament declaring that only colonial assemblies could tax the colonists.
people in colonial cities urged merchants to boycott british goods.
as the boycott spread businesses in britain lost money and demanded parliament repeal or cancel the stamp act.
in march 1766 parliament repealed the law.
however it also passed the declaratory act stating that it had the right to tax and make decisions for the colonies in all cases the townshend acts the stamp act taught the british that the colonists would resist internal taxes those paid inside the colonies.
as a result in 1767 parliament passed the townshend acts to tax imports such as glass tea and paper.
the tax was paid when the goods arrived before they were brought inside the colonies.
protests against the townshend acts began immediately.
in towns throughout the colonies women some organized as daughters of liberty began boycotts of british goods.
mercy otis warren a leader of the daughters of liberty later wrote pamphlets and poems urging separation from britain.
she also i wrote plays ridiculing british officials.
h reading progress check explaining how did the daughters of liberty help the colonial cause.
a british government official placed this seat or stamp on certain paper items in the colonies to show that the tax on them had been paid.
foldable study organized include this lesson s information in your foldable q o 0 unrest reu elution declaration of independence lesson 1 review review vocabulary 1 write a paragraph about the 1760s in the american colonies.
use these vocabulary words joa 3od a revenue b resolution c effigy d boycott e repeal answer the guiding questions 2 describing why did the british limit westward settlement in the proclamation of 1763.
4a 3 using math skills on the chart showing colonial debt per person how much is one british pound worth in shillings.
what was the share of debt per colonist in shillings.
calculate the colonist s share of the debt in pounds.
29c 29h 3oc 4 identifying why did colonists oppose the stamp act.
4a narrative writing write a conversation between two colonists who disagree over britain s taxing the colonies to help pay off its debts from the french and indian war.
4a 3od lesson 1 165 it matters because harsh british actions aimed at controlling the colonies united them instead.
teks texas essential knowledge and skills 4a analyze causes of the american revolution including the proclamation of 1763 the intolerable acts the stamp act mercantilism lack of representation in parliament and british economic policies following the french and indian war.
4b explain the roles played by significant individuals during the american revolution including abigail adams john adams wentworth cheswell samuel adams mercy otis warren james armistead benjamin franklin bernardo de galvez crispus attucks king george iii haym salomon patrick henry thomas jefferson the marquis de lafayette thomas paine and george washington.
20c analyze reasons for and the impact of selected examples of civil disobedience in u s history such as the boston tea party and henry david thoreau s refusal to pay a tax.
reading helpdesk trouble in massachusetts gusdsngquestion how did the american colonists react to the boston massacre.
protests continued to flare in the colonies making british nervous.
in 1768 they sent word to britain that the colonies were on the brink of rebellion a rejection of british authority.
parliament sent troops to boston.
as angry colonists jeered the redcoats set up camp in the center of the city.
for many colonists this british act went too far.
the colonists were already convinced that the british had passed laws that violated colonial rights.
now britain had sent an army to occupy or take control of colonial cities.
to make matters worse the soldiers in boston acted rudely.
the re coats who were mostly poor men earned little pay.
some stole rom local shops and got into fights with colonists.
also in their o ours the soldiers competed for jobs that bostonians wanted.
tension in the streets on march 5 1770 violence erupted.
a fight broke out between ome ostonians and soldiers.
as british officers tried to calm me crowd a man shouted we did not send for you.
we will not have you here.
well get rid of you well drive you away taking notes describing as you read use a diagram like this one to record how the intolerable acts changed life for the colonists.
the spirit of independence content vocabulary rebellion propaganda committee of correspondence civil disobedience the angry townspeople surged forward.
they began throwing sticks and stones at the soldiers.
come on you rascals you bloody backs you lobster scoundrels fire if you dare someone in the crowd shouted.
after one soldier was knocked down the nervous redcoats did fire.
they killed five colonists.
according to accounts crispus attucks a dockworker who was part african and part native american became the first casualty of the american revolution.
one bostonian cried are the inhabitants to be knocked down in the streets.
are they to be murdered the colonists called the tragic encounter the boston massacre spreading the news colonial leaders used the killings as propaganda information designed to influence opinion.
samuel adams put up posters that described the boston massacre as a slaughter of innocent americans by bloodthirsty redcoats.
paul revere made an engraving that showed a british officer giving the order to open fire on an orderly crowd.
the boston massacre led colonists to call for stronger boycotts of british goods.
troubled by the growing opposition in the colonies parliament repealed the townshend acts taxes on british imports except the one on tea.
in response the colonists ended their boycotts except on tea.
trade with britain resumed.
still some colonists continued to call for resistance to british rule.
in 1772 samuel adams revived the boston committee of correspondence a group used in earlier protests.
the group circulated calls for action against britain.
soon committees of correspondence sprang up throughout the colonies bringing together protesters opposed to british measures.
h reading progress check explaining how did the boston massacre affect relations between the colonists and britain.
e q u crispus attucks was the first colonist killed by the british in the boston massacre.
crisis in boston guidingquestion how did the british government react to the actions of the colonists.
by 1773 the british east india company was facing financial ruin.
to help save the company and protect the british economy parliament passed the tea act.
it gave the british east india company nearly total control of the market for tea in the colonies.
rebellion open defiance of authority propaganda ideas or information intentionally spread to harm or help a cause committee of correspondence an organization that spread political ideas and information through the colonies academic vocabulary occupy to move into and take control of a place especially by force encounter a sudden often violent clash build vocabulary multiple meaning words as a verb the word encounter means to come across or meet.
as a noun encounter can mean a chance meeting or a sudden often violent meeting between lesson 2 167 colonists angry at the restrictions of the tea act staged a dramatic protest.
they threw three shiploads of british tea into boston harbor.
critical thinking analyzing why were american colonists especially angry with the tea act.
j skills practice after a class lesson work with a partner.
take turns retelling the lesson to one another.
ii reading helpdesk the tea act also removed some but not all of the taxes on tea making it less expensive for colonists.
yet the colonists remained angry.
they did not want to pay any tax and they did not want to be told what tea they could buy.
colonial merchants called for a new boycott.
colonists vowed to stop east india company ships from unloading.
1 he daughters of liberty issued a pamphlet declaring that rather than part with freedom well part with our tea a tea party despite warnings of trouble the east india company continued shipping tea to the colonies.
colonists in new york and philadelphia forced the tea ships to turn back.
in 1773 three ships loaded with tea arrived in boston harbor.
the royal governor ordered that they be unloaded.
the boston sons of liberty acted swiftly.
at midnight on december 16 colonists dressed as native americans boarded the ships and threw 342 chests ot tea overboard.
as word of the boston tea party spread colonists gathered to celebrate the bold act.
the boston tea party was an readjngstrategy identifying cause and effect 9eta to happes an effect.
one hu e and on o the spirit of independence civil disobedient use of nonviolent protestsk challenge a government0 1 act of civil disobedience or the refusal to obey laws that are considered unjust.
the intolerable acts when news of the boston tea party reached london king george iii realized that britain was losing control of the colonies.
he declared we must either master them or totally leave them to themselves in 1774 parliament responded by passing a series of laws called the coercive acts.
coercive co ehr sihv describes the forceful pressure used to make someone do something.
these laws were meant to punish the colonists for resisting british authority.
one coercive act applied to all the colonies.
it forced the colonies to let british soldiers live among the colonists.
massachusetts though received the harshest treatment.
one of the coercive acts banned town meetings in massachusetts.
another closed boston harbor until the colonists paid for the ruined tea.
this stopped most shipments of food and other supplies to the colony.
parliament was trying to cut massachusetts off from the other colonies.
instead the coercive acts drew the colonies together.
other colonies sent food and clothing to support boston.
following the coercive acts parliament also passed the quebec act.
this law created a government for canada and extended canadas territory south all the way to the ohio river.
this action ignored the colonies claims to that region.
the colonists believed all of these new laws violated their rights as english citizens.
they expressed their feelings about the laws by calling them the intolerable acts.
intolerable means painful and unbearable.
j i h reading progress check i analyzing how did the intolerable acts affect the residents of j massachusetts.
king george s determination to take a firm stand against the colonies after the boston tea party failed to resolve the growing crisis.
in fact colonial anger grew.
include this lesson s information in your foldable.
j unrest o o 0.
revolution declaration of independence lesson 2 review review vocabulary 1 explain the significance of the following terms 3oa a rebellion b propaganda c committee of correspondence d civil disobedience answer the guiding questions 2 sequencing list the events leading up to and following the boston massacre in the order that they occurred ibjzbb analyzing how did samuel adams and paul revere use propaganda to rally colonists after the boston massacre.
4b 4 explaining how did the british punish the colonists for the boston tea party.
4a narrative writing write an account of the boston massacre from the point of view of a british soldier involved in the event.
3od lesson 2 169 networks there s more online.
ef biography patrick henry ef chart choosing sides et graphic organizer key actions of the continental congress et map battles of lexington and concord ef self check quiz ef video r y vr 7f l fc r i b lesson 3 a call to arms question whatmotivatespeopktoatt.
teks texas essential knowledgejnd skjlls 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
4b explain the roles played by significant individuals during the american revolution including abigail adams john adams wentworth cheswell samuel adams mercy otis warren james armistead benjamin franklin bernardo de galvez crispus attucks king george iii haym salomon patrick henry thomas jefferson the marquis de lafayette thomas paine and george washington.
4c explain the issues surrounding important events of the american revolution including declaring independence writing the articles of confederation fighting the battles of lexington concord saratoga and yorktown enduring the winter at valley forge and signing the treaty of paris of 1783.
1oa locate places and regions of importance in the united states during the 17th 18th and 19th centuries.
26b identify examples of american art music and literature that reflect society in different eras.
29d identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
it matters because as anger toward the british grew colonists began to consider the possibility of independence.
a meeting in philadelphia guidingquestion what roles did key individuals play in the movement toward independence.
in september 1774 55 delegates gathered in philadelphia.
they had come to set up a political body that would represent colonists and challenge british control.
the delegates called this body the continental congress.
leaders from twelve of the thirteen colonies attended the meeting.
only georgia did not send a representative.
massachusetts sent fiery samuel adams and his lawyer cousin john adams.
new york sent john jay another lawyer.
virginia sent george washington as well as richard henry lee and patrick henry two outspoken defenders of colonial rights.
patrick henry wanted the colonies to unite in firm resistance to britain.
he summed up the meaning of the meeting when he addressed the delegates on its second day primarysource 7 7 reading helpdesk the distinctions between virginians pennsylvanians new yorkers and new englanders are no more.
i am not a virginian but an american.
99 patrick henry at the continental congress 177 taking notes summarizing as you read use a diagram like this one to list three key actions of the continental congress.
continental congress content vocabulary minuteman loyalist patriot the delegates vote the delegates discussed complaints against the british.
then they voted.
in a statement of grievances the delegates called for the repeal of 13 acts of parliament.
they believed these laws violated the laws of nature the principles of the english constitution and the several charters of the colonies.
the delegates also voted to boycott british trade.
the colonies would not import or use any british goods nor would they sell their goods in great britain.
the delegates to the continental congress also decided to endorse the suffolk resolves prepared by the people of boston and other towns in suffolk county massachusetts.
these resolutions declared the coercive acts to be illegal.
they called on the countys residents to arm themselves against the british.
after delegates endorsed the resolves other colonies also organized militias groups of citizen soldiers.
the colonial militias american colonists had a long tradition of serving and protecting their communities with militias.
members of a militia were an important part of each towns defense.
militia members trained and drilled with the other citizen soldiers.
they practiced using muskets and cannons.
each member was required to provide his own weapon usually a musket and ammunition.
later as tension between britain and the colonies grew towns began to build vocabulary multiple meaning words the word resolves as used on this page means something that is decided.
as a noun the word resolve can also mean firmness of purpose as in the patriots showed resolve against the british.
as a verb resolve can mean to decide something or to solve a problem.
lesson 3 171 patrick henry 1736 1799 henry was one of the first members of the virginia house of burgesses to argue for independence from britain.
his speaking ability inspired many colonists.
in a debate over whether the virginia colony should form a militia he said give me liberty or give me death.
his stirring cry gave voice to the independence movement.
fighting begins guidingquestion why were the battles at lexington and concord important.
many colonists believed that if fighting with the british were to break out it would happen in new england.
militias in massachusetts held drills made bullets and stockpiled weapons.
some militias were known as minutemen because they boasted they would be ready to fight at a minutes notice.
in the winter of 1774 1775 a british officer stationed in boston noted in his diary.
primary source m the people are evidently making every preparation for resistance.
they are taking every means to provide themselves with arms.
99 from diary of frederick mackenzie 1775 chtkai.
thinking analyzing is the ability to speak well an important quality for a leader.
great britain sends troops the british also got ready for a fight.
king george told parliament that the new england colonies were in a state of rebellion and that blows must decide who would control america.
by april 1775 several thousand british troops were in and around boston with more on the way.
british general thomas gage had orders to seize the weapons from the massachusetts militia and arrest the leaders.
gage learned that the militia was storing arms and ammunition at concord a town about 20 miles 32 km northwest of boston.
he ordered 700 troops under lieutenant colonel francis smith to concord where you will seize and destroy all the artillery and ammunition you can find the british on the move i ii reading helpdesk minuteman during revolutionary era a civilian sworn to be ready to fight with only one minute s notice be spirit of independence on the night of april 18 1775 colonial protest leader dr joseph warren walked through boston.
watching for any unusual activity by the british he saw troops marching out of the city.
warren alerted paul revere and william dawes members of the sons of liberty.
revere and dawes rode to lexington a town east of concord to spread the word that the british were coming.
revere galloped across the countryside shouting his warning of the approaching troops.
hearing the news samuel adams said what a glorious morning this is he was ready to fight.
a british patrol later captured dawes and revere.
another rider named samuel prescott carried the warning to concord.
view the map to see the locations of lexington and concord.
skills practice as you read look for connecting words such as and but or because before after like or unlike.
classify them according to the type of connection they show for example cause comparison or sequence.
7 i geography connection the first fighting between british troops and the colonial militia took place at lexington and concord massachusetts.
movement which towns did paul revere warn on his ride to lexington.
critical thinking analyzing how might the starting point of the british forces in boston have affected the outcome of these battles.
i i lexington and concord meanwhile the british continued their march.
at dawn the redcoats approached lexington.
there they ran into about 70 waiting minutemen.
led by captain john parker the minutemen stood on the town common with muskets in hand.
badly outnumbered the minutemen were about to give way to the redcoats.
just then a shot was fired from where is still not clear.
both sides let loose an exchange of bullets.
when the shooting ended eight minutemen lay dead.
the british continued on to concord.
while some troops burned the few weapons they found the others met a group of minutemen waiting at the north bridge.
in a short battle the british took heavy losses.
they began to make their way back to boston.
all along the road colonists hid behind trees and fired on the soldiers.
by the time the redcoats reached boston at least 174 were wounded and 73 were dead.
about 60 years later poet ralph waldo emerson wrote in the concord hymn that the americans at lexington and concord had fired the shot heard round the world.
the battle for independence had begun.
h reading progress check explaining why did british troops march to concord.
academic vocabulary approach to draw near to something skills practice work with a group.
before you read look at the pictures maps graphs charts and bold faced words in your text.
ask group members to tell you what they know about a topic and tell them what you know.
i lesson 3 173 reading helpdesk this painting shows the british charge at what historians call the battle of bunker hill which actually took place on breed s hill.
more military action guiding question what were the beliefs of the loyalists and patriots.
after the battles at lexington and concord armed conflict with british forces quickly spread.
benedict arnold a captain in the connecticut militia raised a force of 400 to seize fort ticonderoga near lake champlain in new york.
ticonderoga occupied a key location.
it was also rich in military supplies.
arnold learned that ethan allen of nearby vermont also planned to attack the fort so he joined forces with allens men the so called green mountain boys.
together they took the british by surprise.
fort ticonderoga surrendered on may 10 1775 later arnold became a traitor to the patriot cause.
he sold military information to the british.
when his crime was discovered in september 1780 he fled to british controlled new york city.
there he commanded british troops and led raids against the americans in virginia and connecticut.
the battle of bunker hill following lexington and concord more volunteers joined the colonial militias.
soon militias around boston numbered about 20 000 strong.
the british remained in control of the city with the militia camped nearby.
on june 16 1775 militia commanded by colonel william prescott set up posts on bunker hill and breeds hill across the harbor from boston.
loyalist an american colonist who remained loyal to britain and opposed the war for independence patriot an american colonist who favored american independence academic vocabulary so called known as 174 the spirit of independence the next day the redcoats assembled at breeds hill.
bayonets drawn they charged.
low on ammunition prescott reportedly ordered dont fire until you see the whites of their eyes the americans opened fire forcing the british to retreat.
twice more the redcoats charged receiving furious fire from above.
finally the americans ran out of gunpowder and had to withdraw.
the battle on breeds hill which became known as the battle of bunker hill was a british victory.
yet the british suffered heavy losses of more than 1 000 dead and wounded.
they were learning that defeating the americans on the battlefield would be neither quick nor easy.
choosing sides as news of these battles spread each colonist faced a major decision to join the rebels or remain loyal to great britain.
those who sided with britain the loyalists did not think unfair taxes and laws justified a rebellion.
some were officeholders who felt a responsibility to uphold british rule.
others had not suffered from british policies and saw no reason to break with britain.
still others believed britain would win the war and did not want to be on the losing side.
the patriots on the other hand supported the war.
they believed that the colonists should have the right to govern themselves.
the patriots were determined to fight the british until american independence was won.
the american revolution was not just a war between america and britain.
it was also a civil war patriots against loyalists.
h reading progress check describing what did the british learn from the battle of bunker hill.
making predictions loyalists came from all parts of american society.
political differences divided communities and even split families.
benjamin franklins son william served as royal governor of new jersey.
when the revolution began william remained loyal to britain and quarreled with his father.
do you think benjamin franklin and william franklin resolved their differences.
foldables study organizer include this lesson s information in your foldable.
i unrest o 0 os.
revolution declaration of independence lesson 3 review review vocabulary 1 write a paragraph explaining what the words below have in common.
3oa 3od a minuteman b loyalist c patriot answer the guiding questions 2 drawing conclusions how did the continental congress s support for the suffolk resolves push the colonies closer to war.
ia 29b 3 explaining why did the continental congress vote in 1774 to repeal the coercive acts passed by parliament.
4b 29d 4 interpreting reread patrick henry s quote about the continental congress.
what change was taking place in how the colonists saw themselves.
290 narrative writing write a scene from a play in which colonists in a small town react to the news of the battles at lexington and concord.
remember not all colonists wanted independence from britain.
290 300 lesson 3 175 what do you think.
should the colonies declare their independence from great britain.
some americans did not think that independence was the right path for the colonies.
they wanted to remain under british rule.
these colonists were called loyalists.
colonists who believed the colonies should become an independent nation were called patriots.
in these excerpts patriot thomas paine and loyalist charles inglis express different points of view about the fight for american independence.
yes ssas volumes have been written on the subject of the struggle between england and america and the period of debate is closed i challenge the warmest advocate for reconciliation to show a single advantage that this continent can reap by being connected with great britain.
but the injuries and disadvantages are without number and our duty to mankind at large as well as to ourselves instruct us to renounce the alliance.
every thing that is right or reasonable pleads for separation.
the blood of the slain the weeping voice of nature cries tis time to part.
99 thomas paine tension between 1 british authorities and the colonists grew during the 1770s.
wim h a s w s.
not every colonist agreed with the behavior of the protesters involved with the boston tea party.
vocabulary charles inglis primary source tt i think it no difficult matter to point out many advantages which will certainly attend our reconciliation and connection with great britain the blood of the slain the weeping voice of nature cries ft is time to be reconciled it is time to lay aside those animosities which have pushed on britons to shed the blood of britons a declaration of independency would infallibly disunite and divide the colonists torrents of blood will be spilt and thousands reduced to beggary and wretchedness america is far from being yet in a desperate situation.
i am confident she may obtain honourable and advantageous terms from great britain.
99 charles inglis the true interest of america impartially stated 1776 advocate supporter reconciliation settlement understanding renounce to give up to abandon animosity hostility ill will hatred infallibly without fail torrent fast moving liquid whatdoyou think.
dbq o drawing inferences both of these passages were written in 1776 the same year that the declaration of independence was adopted.
how do you think paine and inglis reacted to the colonies breaking away from britain.
4b 29b 0 identifying bias do either paine or inglis use emotional or biased language.
cite examples.
29f 0 evaluating in your opinion which of the two writers makes the stronger argument.
explain your answer.
2 e i i lesson 3 17 vh networks e there s more online.
k j ef biography k thomas paine h ef graphic organizer dedarationof independence et map the siege of boston ef primary source battles of lexington and concord reaction to declaration of independence sf self check quiz slideshow the committee of five video common sense inhabitants o r america.
oa ik subject.
lesson 4 declaring independence l question teks texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
1c explain the significance of the following dates 1607 founding of jamestown 1620 arrival of the pilgrims and signing of the mayflower compact 1776 adoption of the declaration of independence 1787 writing of the u s constitution 1803 louisiana purchase and 1861 1865 civil war.
4a analyze causes of the american revolution including the proclamation of 1763 the intolerable acts the stamp act mercantilism lack of representation in parliament and british economic policies following the french and indian war.
4c explain the issues surrounding important events of the american revolution including declaring independence writing the articles of confederation fighting the battles of lexington concord saratoga and yorktown enduring the winter at valley forge and signing the treaty of paris of 1783 it matters because the decision to declare independence came only after all other options had been exhausted.
the second continental congress guidlngquestlon howdid individuals and events impact efforts for independence.
in 1774 the continental congress agreed to meet again it the british did not address their complaints.
in fact as the battles at lexington and concord in 1775 showed the dispute between the british and the colonies had worsened.
distinguished leaders the second continental congress met on may 10 1775 the delegates included some of the greatest leaders in the colonies.
among them were john and samuel adams patrick henry richard henry lee and george washington all delegates to the first continental congress.
several new delegates came as well.
benjamin franklin one of the most respected men in the colonies had been a leader in the pennsylvania legislature.
in 1765 he represented the colonies in london and helped win repeal of the stamp act.
john hancock of massachusetts was a wealthy merchant.
he funded many patriot groups including the sons of liberty.
the delegates chose hancock to be president of the second continental congress.
thomas jefferson only 32 was also a delegate.
he served in the virginia legislature.
jefferson was already known as a brilliant thinker and writer.
reading helpdesk taking notes organizing as you read use a diagram like this one to describe the parts of the declaration of independence.
declaration of independence part 1 t part 2 1 1 part 3 1 f part 4 1 content vocabulary petition preamble the spirit of independence the delegates at the second continental congress had much to discuss.
though american and british blood had been spilled they were not ready to vote for a break from britain.
it would be another year before jefferson would write the declaration of independence.
key actions the continental congress did take steps to begin governing the colonies.
it authorized the printing of money and set up a post office with franklin in charge.
the congress also formed committees to handle relations with native americans and foreign countries.
most important it created the continental army.
unlike local militias such a force could form and carry out an overall strategy for fighting the british.
the congress unanimously chose george washington to command this army.
washington was an experienced soldier and a respected southern planter.
he left philadelphia at once to take charge of the forces in boston.
the delegates then offered britain a last chance to avoid war.
they sent a petition or formal request to george iii.
called the olive branch petition it assured the king that the colonists wanted peace.
it asked him to protect the colonists rights.
the king rejected the petition.
instead he prepared for war.
he hired more than 30 000 german troops called hessians heh shuhnz to fight alongside british troops.
15c identify colonial grievances listed in the declaration of independence and explain how those grievances were addressed in the u s constitution and the bill of rights.
19a define and give examples of unalienable rights.
20a explain the role of significant individuals such as thomas hooker charles de montesquieu john locke william blackstone and william penn in the development of self government in colonial america.
29d identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
petition a formal request geography connection when washington placed troops on dorchester heights in march 1776 british forces left boston.
movement in which direction did british forces retreat.
critical thinking analyzing visuals why would british general howe have been concerned about patriot cannons on nook s hill.
lesson 4 179 general george washington commanded the continental army in their battles with the british.
thomas paine s common sense had a great influence on public opinion in the colonies.
common sense inhabitants o f a m e r r c a oo the tetensfog e c t s smt c.
f s v a the war heats up congress learned that british troops in canada were planning to invade new york.
the americans decided to strike first.
a unit of patriots marched north from fort ticonderoga and captured montreal.
however an american attack on quebec led by benedict arnold failed.
washington reached the boston area in july 1775 a few weeks after the battle of bunker hill.
the british held boston but patriot militia ringed the city.
although the size of the colonial force grew every day washington realized that the men were disorganized and lacked discipline the ability to follow strict rules and procedures.
washington began the task of turning armed civilians into soldiers.
washington also needed weapons.
he arranged to have dozens of cannons hauled 300 miles 483 km from fort ticonderoga.
moving the heavy guns was a huge effort.
in march 1776 washington believed his army was ready to fight.
under the cover of darkness he moved soldiers and cannons into position overlooking boston while the redcoats slept.
the move surprised the british who realized they were now within easy reach of washingtons big guns.
british general william howe commanded his soldiers to hoard ships and withdraw from boston.
on march 17 washington led his jubilant troops into the city.
they watched as the british troops sailed away to halifax nova scotia a part of canada.
moving toward independence many colonists held on to hope that the colonies could remain part of great britain.
still support for independence was growing it was inspired in no small part by writer thomas paine.
paine arrived in the colonies from england in 1774 he soon caught the revolutionary spirit.
in january 1776 he published a pamphlet called common sense.
in bold language paine called for a complete break with british rule.
primary source reading helpdesk every thing that is right or reasonable pleads for separation.
the blood of the slain the weeping voice of nature cries tis time to part.
99 from common sense w academic vocabulary discipline the ability to follow strict rules and procedures debate a discussion of opposing points of view 180 the spirit of independence common sense listed powerful reasons why americans would be better off free from great britain.
the pamphlet greatly influenced opinions throughout the colonies.
h reading progress check explaining what was the significance of the olive branch petition.
declaring independence guidingquestion why did the american colonies declare independence.
the second continental congress was filled with spirited debate should the colonies declare themselves an independent nation or stay under british rule.
in june 1776 virginias richard henry lee offered a bold resolution primary source that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states and that all political connection between them and the state of great britain is and ought to be totally dissolved.
99 richard henry lee resolution for independence 1776 the congress debated lees resolution.
some delegates still thought the colonies should not form a separate nation.
others argued that war had already begun and they should be free from great britain.
still others feared britains power to crush the rebellion.
writing the declaration while delegates debated congress chose a committee to write a declaration of independence.
john adams benjamin franklin thomas jefferson robert livingston and roger sherman formed the committee.
adams asked jefferson to write the first draft.
jefferson hesitated but adams persuaded him saying committee members benjamin franklin john adams and thomas jefferson examine jefferson s changes to his draft of the declaration.
4 primary source m reason first you are a virginian and a virginian ought to appear at the head of this business.
reason second i am obnoxious suspected and unpopular.
you are very much otherwise.
reason third you can write ten times better than i can.
99 from the writings of thomas jefferson 1822 jefferson agreed that he would do the writing for the great project.
he drew on ideas from english philosopher john locke to explain why the thirteen colonies were proclaiming their freedom.
r j jefferson and the rest of the committee present the completed declaration of independence to the second continental congress.
preamble the introduction to a formal document that often tells why the document was written in the 1690s locke had expressed the idea that people are born with certain natural rights to life liberty and property.
locke wrote that people form governments to protect those rights and that a government interfering with those rights could rightfully be overthrown.
jefferson and other patriots agreed with locke.
on july 2 1776 the second continental congress voted on lees resolution for independence.
twelve colonies voted for independence.
new york did not vote but later announced its support.
next the delegates discussed jeffersons draft ol the declaration of independence.
after making some changes delegates approved the document on july 4 1776 john hancock signed the declaration first.
he remarked that he wrote his name large enough for king george to read without his glasses.
eventually 56 delegates signed the document announcing the birth of the united states.
copies of the declaration of independence were printed and sent out to people in the newly declared independent states.
george washington had the declaration read to his troops in new york city on july 9 in worcester massachusetts a public reading of the declaration of independence led to repeated cheers firing of musketry and cannon bonfires and other demonstrations of joy the declaration of independence the declaration has four major sections.
the preamble or introduction states that people who wish to form a new country should explain their reasons for doing so.
the next two sections of the declaration list the rights that the colonists believed they should have and their complaints against great britain.
the final section proclaims the existence of the new nation.
john adams expected the day congress voted on lees resolution for independence to be celebrated as a national academic vocabulary status rank or place as compared to others reading helpdesk tie spirit of independence holiday.
he wrote the second day of july 1776 ought to be solemnized with pomp and parade and illuminations from one end of this continent to the other instead july 4 the date the delegates actually adopted the declaration of independence is celebrated as independence day.
the declaration of independence states what jefferson and many americans thought were universal principles that is principles that apply to all people in all situations.
it begins by describing what had long been viewed as basic english rights primary source m we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable not to be denied rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness declaration of independence 1776 the declaration states that government exists to protect these rights.
if government fails it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it and to institute new government the document goes on to list grievances against the king and parliament.
these include cutting off our trade with all parts of the world and imposing taxes on us without our consent americans had petitioned for redress of these grievances.
the british had ignored or rejected these petitions.
finally the declaration announces americas new status stay tuhs.
pledging to each other our lives our fortunes and our sacred honor the americans declared themselves a new nation.
the struggle for independence the american revolution had begun.
h reading progress check summarizing according to john locke what is the purpose of government.
lesson 4 review review vocabulary 1 use the term petition in a sentence about the colonists struggles with britain.
3oa 3ob 2 use preamble in a sentence that helps explain its meaning.
3oa 3ob answer the guiding questions 3 describing what were the political contributions of thomas jefferson and richard henry lee.
22b skills practice before you read a section of text use the visuals bold faced terms and headings to make predictions about content.
when you come to these features as you read check to see if your predictions are correct.
foldables study organizer include this lesson s information in your foldable o 0 0 revolution declaration of independence lesson 4 183 4 explaining what is the significance ofthe year 1776 in the nation s history.
15c 5 identifying who was chosen to write the first draft of the declaration of independence.
if the government does not protect the basic rights ofthe people it governs what did the declaration say that people have the right to do.
300 persuasive writing who did the most to promote the cause of independence george washington thomas jefferson or thomas paine.
give reasons for your choice.
4b 30d activities directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
o use your oe32i03 to explore the essential questions.
expository writing explain the issues and events leading up to the declaration of independence.
use examples from the chapters and lessons from 1945 to the present.
examine the headings and topics.
think about what i you already know about recent events in american history.
create a timeline illustrating the major historical eras you would use to understand 1945 to the present.
identify the dates for each era and i list a few bullet points for each era j describing its characteristics.
89 kapfer i assessment directions on a separate sheet of paper answer the questions below.
make sure you read carefully and answer all parts of the questions.
c v lesson review lesson 1 0 identifying cause and effect what factors caused european nations to explore the western hemisphere and establish colonies.
0 describing colonies took on unique characteristics based on charters and colony formation.
explain how certain colonies offered freedom from religious persecutions for colonists.
0 explaining continuity and change how was the idea of no taxation without representation an important factor leading to the american revolution.
1b 0 analyzing text what are the four major sections of the declaration of independence.
evaluate the purpose of each section.
1a lesson 2 0 contrasting what was a key difference between the federalists and the democratic republicans.
0 analyzing and evaluating what is the intent ofthe bill of rights.
the constitutional convention did not think the constitution needed a bill of rights.
why did the framers agree to add it later.
do you think it was necessary.
explain your answer.
1a 0 identifying cause and effect how did napoleon bonaparte s interest in european conquest lead to u s expansion.
0 explaining what contribution did james madison make to the founding ofthe united states.
1c 0 understanding relationships among events how do the ideas of the connecticut compromise affect the structure of our federal government today.
constitution handbook 0 analyzing and evaluating why are the constitution and the bill of rights important.
what purpose do they serve and have they been effective.
1a explaining name three ways you can participate in the democratic process.
how does participating in the democratic process help build a more perfect union.
2 explaining what is the meaning and historical significance ofthe motto e pluribus unum.
26e describing based on what you have learned about the structure of american government its founding principl and the democratic process what qualities do you think make for an effective leader in the united states.
1a 1 1c 24a lesson 3 identifying central issues how did opposing views o slavery lead to the missouri compromise.
comparing and contrasting compare the economies the north and south.
what type of industry or agricultui existed and who performed the labor.
lesson 4 making connections how was the addition of oregon to the united states an example of the idea of manifest destiny.
explaining what was the fugitive slave act.
identifying cause and effect why was there so much violence in kansas in 1855 and 1856.
explaining why did the south secede from the union.
lesson 5 identifying what were the south s financial disadvantages at the start ofthe civil war.
need extra help.
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 1.
cotopage 5 7 8 14 23 24 i 26 i 23 22 28 38 39 28 62 64 i 70 i 72 i 73 i k 90 explaining why did president lincoln feel that the emancipation proclamation was necessary.
how did this show effective leadership.
ib 24a analyzing what method was used to expand the right of african americans to participate in the democratic process after the civil war.
what changes resulted.
23a exploring the essential questions analyzing write a short essay explaining why participating in the democratic process reflects the national ethos or ideals patriotism and civic responsibility.
use the example of voting to give specific evidence for your answer.
your essay should have an introduction at least three paragraphs and a conclusion.
23c read the preamble to the constitution below and then answer the questions that follow.
primary source we the people ofthe united states in order to form a more perfect union establish justice insure domestic tranquility provide for the common defence promote the general welfare and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity do ordain and establish this constitution for the united states of america 99 analyzing intent and meaning what are the major objectives of the constitution as described in the preamble.
what does the text mean when it refers to domestic tranquility.
what is posterity.
1a evaluating meaning what do you think the phrase promote the general welfare means.
why do you think this phrase has been used so often to justify expanding the role ofthe federal government.
1a critical thinking summarizing analyze the text ofthe bill of rights and write a summary evaluating what each amendment means and what rights are protected.
explain how the tenth amendment is different from the others.
which rights do you think are the most important.
1a need extra help.
explaining what is the meaning and historical significance ofthe motto in god we trust.
26e explaining choose one ofthe following founding fathers ofthe united states benjamin rush john hancock john jay john witherspoon john peter muhlenberg charles carroll and jonathan trumbull sr conduct research at the library or online and write a short essay explaining that person s contributions.
essays should have an introduction at least two paragraphs and a conclusion.
1c 30a q identifying most americans have ancestors who came to this country from different places around the world.
what part ofthe declaration of independence shows that all americans have a common bond despite where they came from.
22c social studies skills categorizing make a chart identifying and explaining the five values that alexis de tocqueville said were crucial to american success as a constitutional republic.
then describe how those values are different and unique from those of other nations.
22a 22b applying absolute and relative chronology identify a major contribution of each person on the following list of names.
write one sentence for each person describing their contribution.
then put the names in chronological order based on the contribution you identified.
give an approximate date or time range when they made the contribution you have identified.
2c frederick douglass james madison abraham lincoln thomas jefferson christopher columbus george washington applying absolute and relative chronology create a time line illustrating the major historical eras ofthe united states from 1877 to the present.
on the time line identify the approximate start and end date for each era and use captions to briefly describe the era s characteristics.
2a 2b 2c 21 22 23 24 25 26 28 29 30 31 32 6otopage 80 84 38 43 43 54 9 1 u j 68 i 5 j 2 creating a nation 91 dbq sequencing historical events in what way was the thirteenth amendment the culmination ofthe abolitionist movement.
why might the abolitionist movement be considered the first civil rights movement ofthe 19th century.
how did abolitionism represent an application of the founding principles of the united states.
1b 9a 23a explaining continuity and change what rights did the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments confer and how did they set the stage for a new civil rights movement for african americans.
1b 9a 23a analyzing primary sources read the following excerpt and then answer the questions that follow.
primary source when in the course of human events it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another and to assume among the powers ofthe earth the separate and equal station to which the laws of nature and of nature s god entitle them a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.
we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
that to secure these rights governments are instituted among men deriving their just powers from the consent ofthe governed.
identifying the three paragraphs come from what document.
what date was this document issued.
1a analyzing and evaluating what organization issued the document and what was the intent ofthe document.
did the document achieve what it was intended to do.
1a analyzing and evaluating meaning what does the document mean when it says that we hold these truths to be self evident.
to what truths is it referring.
according to the document why do people create governments.
1a 22c need extra help.
join or dib.
analyzing and evaluating significance why is the document important.
what has been its significance t both american history and world history.
ia analyzing visuals use the drawing to answer the following questions.
analyzing visuals what message does this cartoon convey about the fate of the colonies as they faced challenges leading up to the american revolution.
29h extended response questions analyzing write an essay that analyzes and evaluate the text ofthe u s constitution and the intent of the document.
what kind of structure does it impose on tl u s government.
what is the intent of the u s constitution.
how does it structure the government tc achieve its purpose.
cite text from the document to support your evaluation and analysis.
1a standardized test practice what contributions did mary walker make during thei war to make her the only woman to earn the medal of honor.
26f a she captured confederate soldiers.
b she served as a spy for union troops.
c she served as an army surgeon near the frontline d she fought alongside men during the war.
which amendment in the bill of rights guarantees the to due process and does not allow the government to t property for public use without compensation.
1a 14 f the first amendment g the tenth amendment h the second amendment j the fifth amendment 92 settling the west 1865 1890 networks there s more online about settling the west.

section 4 europe before transatlantic travel 22 the big idea new ideas and trade changed europeans lives.
awiiba a travelogue people who make long trips often write travelogues that describe their journeys.
a travelogue allows people who did not make the trip to experience some of the same sights sounds and thoughts that the traveler did.
in this chapter you will learn the following academic word i before you read chapter you will read about the events that shaped the united states from 1828 to 1838 you will see how political and economic decisions were intertwined.
for instance you will read about the tensions between southern and northern states over tariff regulations.
you will also read about the forced relocation of many native americans to the west.
understanding how economic issues led to political decisions will help you understand this time.
drawing conclusions about the past focus on reading writers don t always tell you everything you need to know about a subject.
sometimes you need to think critically about what they have said and make your own decisions about what you ve read.
drawing conclusions earlier in this book you learned how to make inferences.
sometimes when you read you will need to make several inferences and put them together.
the result is a conclusion an informed judgment that you make by combining information.
the 1828 campaign focused a great deal on the candidates personalities.
jackson s campaigners described him as a war hero who had been born poor and rose to success through his own hard work.
adams was a harvard graduate whose father had been the second u s president.
jackson s supporters described adams as being out of touch with everyday people.
when the ballots were counted jackson had defeated adams winning a record number of popular votes.
323 324 inference jackson shared many qualities with american voters.
inference adams enjoyed many privileges that most americans did not.
inference jackson easily won the election by a huge majority.
conclusion in 1828 americans chose a president to whom they could relate.
0 chapter 10 section 1 nominating conventions p 323 jacksonian democracy p 323 democratic party fp.
323 john c calhoun p 323 spoils system p 324 martin van buren p 324 kitchen cabinet p 324 section 2 tariff of abominations p 327 states rights doctrine ip.
328 nullification crisis ip.
328 daniel webster p 328 mcculloch v maryland ip.
330 whig party ip.
330 panic of 1837 ip.
331 william henry harrison p 331 section 3 indian removal act p 332 indian territory p 332 bureau of indian affairs ip.
332 sequoya ip.
333 worcester v georgia p 334 trail of tears p 334 black hawk p 335 osceola ip.
335 academic vocabulary success in school is related to knowing academic vocabulary the words that are frequently used in school assignments and discussions.
in this chapter 5 this painting shows the signing of the constitution on september 17 1787 james madison number 4 on the diagram became known as the father of the constitution for his ideas about government and his ability to lead the delegates to agreement.
which person did the artist choose to make the focus of this painting.
why do you think that is.
up of two houses or groups of representatives and chosen on the basis of state populations.
larger states would thus have more representatives than would smaller states.
delegates from the smaller states believed that it would give too much power to the larger states.
new jersey plan the smaller states came up with a plan to stop the larger states from getting too much power.
new jersey delegate william paterson presented the small state or new jersey plan which called for a unicameral or one house legislature.
the plan gave each state an equal number of votes and thus an equal voice in the federal government.
the plan gave the federal government the power to tax citizens in all states and it allowed the government to regulate commerce.
compromise is reached after a month of debate the delegates were unable to agree on how states should be represented.
the convention reached a deadlock.
finally roger sherman of connecticut proposed a compromise plan.
the legislative branch would have two houses.
each state regardless of its size would have two representatives in the senate or upper house.
this would give each state an equal voice pleasing the smaller states.
in the house of representatives or lower house the number of representatives for each state would be determined by the state s population.
this pleased the larger states.
the agreement to create a two house legislature became known as the great compromise.
james wilson a great speaker saw his dream of a strong national government come true.
reading check the impact today all u s states but one modeled their legislative branches on the federal one with a house of representatives and a senate.
nebraska has a unicameral legislature.
contrasting how did the virginia plan and new jersey plan differ.
virginia plan bicameral legislature number of representatives based on state populations in lower house number of representatives equal from each state in upper house new jersey plan gave more power to national government bicameral legislature number in both houses based on population gave more power to state governments unicameral legislature number of representatives equal from each state forming a government 165 primary source j mhmi points of view compromise and the slave trade the issue of slavery highlighted the growing division between the north and the south.
gouverneur morris of new york spoke with much emotion against the three fifths compromise.
also the idea of banning the foreign slave trade prompted southerners such as john rutledge of south carolina to defend the practice.
if the convention thinks that north carolina south carolina and georgia will ever agree to the plan to prohibit the slave trade unless their right to import slaves be untouched the expectation is vain useless john rutledge quoted in the atlantic monthly february 1891 by frank gaylord cook the admission of slaves into the representation comes to this that the inhabitant of a state who goes to the coast of africa and tears away his fellow creatures from their dearest connections and damns them to the most cruel bondage slavery shall have more votes in a government established for protection of the rights of mankind gouverneur morris quoted in founding the republic edited by john j patrick finding main ideas how did these two views of slavery differ.
three fifths compromise the debate over representation also involved regional differences.
southern delegates wanted enslaved africans to be counted as part of their state populations.
this way they would have more representatives and more power in congress.
northerners disagreed.
they wanted the number of slaves to determine taxes but not representation.
to resolve this problem some delegates thought of a compromise.
they wanted to count three fifths of the slaves in each state as part of that state s population to decide how many representatives a state would have.
after much debate the delegates voted to accept the proposal called the three fifths compromise.
under this agreement only three fifths of a state s slave population would count when determining representation.
another major issue was the foreign slave trade.
some of the delegates believed slavery was wrong and wanted the federal government to ban the slave trade.
others said that the southern states economies needed the slave trade.
many southern delegates said they would leave the union if the constitution immediately ended the slave trade.
also at issue was congress s ability to tax imports and exports.
worried delegates reached another compromise.
the commerce compromises allowed congress to levy tariffs on imports but not exports and allowed the importation of slaves until the end of 1807 the delegates omitted or left out the words slavery and slave in the constitution.
they referred instead to free persons and all other persons.
summarizing what compro mise was reached over the issue of the slave trade.
reading check a 66 chapter 14 elizabeth cady stanton what steps would you take to bring about nationwide change.
when did she live.
1815 1902 where did she live.
elizabeth cady stanton was born in johnstown new york.
she married a prominent abolitionist and settled in seneca falls new york where she had seven children.
later in life she traveled widely giving lectures and speeches across the country.
what did she do.
stanton and fellow activist lucretia mott organized the nation s first women s rights convention at seneca falls in 1848 she and susan b anthony founded the national woman suffrage association in 1869 for nearly six decades she spoke and wrote passionately about women s rights.
key events ills why is she important.
stanton helped author the declaration of sentiments which demanded equal rights for women including the right to vote.
a brilliant speaker and debater stanton spoke out against laws that kept married women from owning property earning wages and keeping custody of their children.
finding main ideas what problems did stanton try to correct.
what problems did she face in accomplishing her goals.
1815 born in johnstown new york 1840 meets lucretia mott at the world s anti slavery convention where they are barred from participating 1848 helps organize the first national meeting of women s suffrage reformers at seneca falls new york 1851 meets susan b anthony with whom she will later lead the national woman suffrage association 1895 publishes the woman s bible 1902 dies in new york city elizabeth cady stanton helped author the declaration of sentiments at the seneca falls convention.
abmmkk dowlass amt p s catbar s unanimously adopted as follows declaration of sentiments.
u rro n a dm uite ut winch the mourn t w w lnithi l 8 mid v in.
f il s uro if s ft t.
r in lounhe clhy m of ur cue 1 n lh i bn 4 rdh r i n h to rcfpyy ocial studies skills analysis critical thinking civic participation study r accepting social responsibility define the skill a society is an organized group of people who share a common set of activities traditions and goals.
you are part of many societies your school community and nation are just three.
every society s strength depends on the support and contributions of its members.
social responsibility is the obligation that every person has to the societies in which he or she is a member.
learn the skill as a part of your school community and nation you have obligations to the people around you.
the most obvious is to do nothing to harm your society.
you also have a duty to be part of it.
at the very least this means exercising the rights and responsibilities of membership.
these include being informed about issues in your society.
another level of social responsibility is support of change to benefit society.
this level of involvement goes beyond being informed about issues to trying to do something about them.
if you take this important step here are some points to consider.
1 few efforts to change society have everyone s support.
some people will want things to stay the same.
they may treat you badly if you work for change.
you must be prepared for this possibility if you decide to take action.
2 sometimes efforts to improve things involve opposing laws or rules that need to be changed.
no matter how just your cause is if you break law or rules you must be willing to accept the consequences of your behavior.
3 remember that violence is never an acceptable method for change.
people who use force in seeking change are not behaving in a socially responsible manner even if their cause is good.
this chapter 10 the supreme court and capitalism connect to economics 1810 1819 1824 during the early 1800s the supreme court made several rulings that helped define federal power over contracts and commerce.
these rulings reinforced capitalism as the ruling economic system in the united states.
mfltof effect did the supreme court hove on economic development.
peck state legislatures could not pass laws violating existing contracts.
dartmouth college v woodward state legislatures could not pass laws to change the charters of institutions or businesses.
mcculloch v maryland states do not have the power to tax federal institutions.
gibbons v ogden only the federal government has the power to regulate interstate and foreign commerce.
men to run against van buren.
because of this indecision and with backing from jackson van buren won the election.
shortly after van buren took office the country experienced the panic of 1837 a severe economic depression.
jackson s banking policies and his unsuccessful plan to curb inflation contributed to the panic.
but people blamed van buren.
in 1840 the whigs united against the weakened van buren to stand behind one candidate william henry harrison an army general.
harrison won in an electoral land slide.
the whigs had achieved their goal of winning the presidency.
identifying cause and effect what contributed to the panic of 1837 and how did it affect the 1840 election.
reading check if summary and preview the states i rights debate dominated much of jack son s presidency.
in the next section you will leam about the removal of american indians from the southeastern united states.
section 2 assessment rt j.
i j reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a recall on what were the economies of the northern southern and western states based.
why did they differ.
b summarize what disagreements arose over protective tariffs.
c predict how might the sectional issues involved in the dispute over the tariff of abominations lead to future problems between north and south.
2 a describe what roles did henry clay daniel webster and john c calhoun play in the nullification crisis.
b summarize what idea did supporters of the states rights doctrine promote.
c explain what constitutional issues were raised by the nullification crisis and states rights debate.
3 a describe what problems resulted from weakening the bank.
b draw conclusions why did jackson veto the bill to renew the second bank of the united states.
4 a recall what caused the panic of 1837.
b summarize how did the whig party win the election of 1840.
c elaborate why do you think jackson chose not to run for the presidency in 1836.
do you think he made the right decision.
critical thinking 5 identifying cause and effect review your notes on the political conflicts during jackson s administration.
then use a graphic organizer like the one below to show how some of jackson s policies dealing with conflicts led to the panic of 1837 jackson s policies panic of 1837 ywritesmart 6 identifying important conflicts stories about conflict sell newspapers.
make a list of important conflicts that occurred during jackson s presidency and note the role jackson played in creating or resolving the conflicts.
the age of jackson teks 5g 10a 10b 18b 22b 23 ivtdidfi r omo v2il what you will learn 1 the indian removal act authorized the relocation of native americans to the west.
2 cherokee resistance to removal led to disagreement between jackson and the supreme court.
3 other native americans resisted removal with force.
if you were there you belong to the cherokee nation.
your family has farmed rich lands in georgia for as long as anyone can remember.
you ve learned some new ways from white settlers too.
at school you ve learned to read both english and cherokee.
but now that doesn t seem important.
the u s government is sending you and your people far away to unknown places in the west.
how would you feel about being taken away from your home.
v president jackson supported a policy of indian removal.
key terms and people indian removal act p 332 indian territory p 332 bureau of indian affairs p 332 sequoya p 333 worcester v georgia p 334 trail of tears p 334 black hawk p 335 osceola p 335 w taking notes 1 use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the steps andrew jackson and the u s government took toward indian removal.
i building background president andrew jackson had become i famous as an american indian fighter.
he had no sympathy with native americans claim to the lands where they had always lived.
with public support he reversed the government s pledge to respect indian land claims.
the result was the brutal removal ofthe southeastern peoples to empty lands in the west indian removal act native americans had long lived in settlements stretching from georgia to mississippi.
however president jackson and other political leaders wanted to open this land to settlement by american farmers.
under pressure from jackson congress passed the indian removal act in 1830 authorizing the removal of native americans who lived east of the mississippi river to lands in the west.
congress then established indian territory u s.
land in what is now oklahoma and planned to move native americans there.
some supporters of this plan like john c calhoun argued that removal to indian territory would protect indians from further conflicts with american settlers.
one of the greatest evils to which they are subject is that incessant constant pressure of our population he noted.
to guard against this evil.
there ought to be the strongest assurance that the country given to them should be theirs.
to manage indian removal to western lands congress approved the creation of a new government agency the bureau of indian affairs.
332 chapter.
then write a paragraph that sequences the events using relative chronology.
social studies skills determining different points of view use the social studies skills taught in this chapter you will read about slavery in the united states.
then you will write an autobiography of a fictional character telling how these events affected him or her.
your fictional character can live in any part of the united states.
he or she might be an enslaved african a southern plantation owner a northern abolitionist or a settler in one of the new territories.
your classmates are your audience.
united states world 472 chapter you will learn about different groups of people who came to the americas.
you will pretend to be a member of one of these groups and write a letter home to tell your friends and family about the people you meet and the experiences you have in the americas.
34 chapter 2 world 1416 prince henry the navigator establishes a center for naval exploration at sagres portugal.
j the arrival of the history spanish 71 video att v y i g 1 the ships of explorer christopher qolumbus sail again in the form of these replicas.
1492 christopher columbus lands in the bahamas.
1609 henry hudson makes his first voyage to north america.
mt 1600 sjiii 1533 francisco pizarro and his men kill inca leader atahualpa.
1609 galileo galilei becomes the first person to use a telescope to view the heavens.
1619 the first africans in north america arrive at jamestown virginia.
1644 the qing dynasty begins in china and rules until 1912 new empires in the americas 35 reading social studies economics geography politics society and culture science and technology focus on themes in this chapter 6 obey the law vhhi ww ww.
hs analysis 1 iilstsb skills analyzing visuals which responsibilities can you fulfill now without waiting until you turn 18 years old.
first amendment rights many of the rights enjoyed by u s citizens are specifically protected by the constitution.
as you have read the 27 amendments are especially important tools to protect these rights.
many of the amendments protect voting rights and the rights of people accused of crimes.
the rights protected by the first 10 amendments or the bill of rights were so important to the founders that they were included before the government went into effect.
the rights protected by the first amendment are considered by many people to be the most fundamental to the identity of the nation.
the first amendment reads congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof or abridging the freedom of speech or of the press or the right of the people peaceably to assemble and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.
this amendment prevents the government from making policies that support one religion over another.
it also allows people to practice any religion they want or no religion at all.
the freedom of religion has shaped the american way of life since colonial times.
several colonies were founded to protect religious freedom.
the freedom of religion has led to the existence of a wide variety of kinds of worship in the united states.
having many choices for religious worship is one part of the american national identity.
the right to free speech and a free press allow citizens to express their viewpoints even if they are critical of the government or elected officials.
these rights are necessary for a constitutional republic because citizens need to be informed about the government elected officials policies and issues so that people can hear important facts and opinions when making voting decisions.
they are also valuable for sharing new information and stories that can educate entertain or promote invention.
the final two rights mentioned in the first amendment the right to assemble and the right to petition the government are directly related to british policies toward the colonies.
british authorities tried to stop the revolutionary movement by arresting people who gathered to discuss the issues.
they also ignored petitions for change by claiming the colonists were not following the correct rules in asking for different laws.
recall what kinds of rights are described in the first amendment.
reading check citizenship andthe constitution 225 academic vocabulary influence change or have an effect on citizens and government even after an election people can influence officials.
political participation is part of our nation s identity and tradition.
when colonists protested british rule in the 1700s they formed committees and presented their views to political leaders.
influencing government as the new american nation grew so did political participation.
french diplomat alexis de tocqueville visited the united states in 1831 to study american democracy.
he was amazed at the large number of political groups americans participated in.
he wrote about them what political power could ever carry on the vast multitude large number of lesser undertakings which the american citizens perform every day with the assistance ofthe principle of association joining a group.
nothing in my opinion is more deserving of our attention than the intellectual and moral associations of america alexis de tocqueville democracy in america u s citizens sometimes work with interest groups.
these groups of people share a common interest that motivates them to take political action.
interest groups organize speeches and rallies to support their cause.
however citizens need not join a group to influence government.
they can write letters to leaders of government or attend city council meetings.
active political participation is an important duty for u s citizens and immigrants alike.
in addition to voting many americans choose to campaign for candidates or issues.
anyone can help campaign even if he or she is not eligible to vote.
many people also help campaigns by giving money directly or through political action committees pacs groups that collect money for candidates who support certain issues.
helping the community commitment to others moves many americans to volunteer in community service groups.
some small communities rely on volunteers for services such as fire protection and law enforcement.
the american red cross helps citizens in times of natural disasters or other emergencies.
the boy scouts and girl scouts plan many projects such as planting trees to improve the environment.
even simple acts such as picking up trash in parks or serving food in shelters help a community.
summarizing in what ways do volunteer groups benefit the community.
reading check.
i summary 1 you learne and preview in this section d about citizens duties toward their nation and their communities.
in the next chapter 11 and pleasant climates.
by 1845 some 5 000 settlers occupied the willamette valley.
the santa fe trail the santa fe trail was another important path west.
it led from independence missouri to santa fe new mexico.
it followed an ancient trading route first used by native americans.
american traders loaded their wagon trains with cloth and other manufactured goods to exchange for horses mules and silver from mexican traders in santa fe.
the long trip across blazing deserts and rough mountains was dangerous.
but the lure of high profits encouraged traders to take to the trail.
one trader reported a 2 000 percent profit on his cargo.
the u s government helped protect traders by sending troops to ensure that native americans were not a threat.
three communities eventually failed and an anti mormon mob murdered smith in 1844 following smith s murder brigham young became head of the mormon church.
young chose what is now utah as the group s new home and thousands of mormons took the mormon trail to the area near the great salt lake where they prospered.
by 1860 there were about 40 000 mormons in utah.
reading check finding main ideas why did mormons move west.
i summary and preview some of the i first americans to move west were fur traders and trappers.
settlers soon followed.
in the next section you will learn about the texas revolution.
reading check a contrasting how were the oregon and santa fe trails different.
section 1 assessment mormons travel west one large group of settlers traveled to the west in search of religious freedom.
in 1830 a young man named joseph smith founded the church of jesus christ of latter day saints in western new york.
the members of joseph smith s church became known as mormons.
smith told his followers that he had found and translated a set of golden tablets containing religious teachings.
the writings were called the book of mormon.
church membership grew rapidly but certain beliefs and practices caused mormons to be persecuted.
for example beginning in the 1850s some mormon men practiced polygamy a practice in which one man is married to several women at the same time.
this practice was outlawed by the church in 1890 in the early 1830s smith and his growing number of converts left new york.
they formed new communities first in ohio then in missouri and finally in illinois.
all reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify what was the oregon trail.
who used it.
b elaborate would you have chosen to leave your home ito travel west.
2 a identify who are the mormons.
b summarize what difficulties led mormons to move to utah.
s critical thinking i 3 drawing conclusions review your notes on early ameri i can settlement in the west.
then copy the chart below and use it to identify challenges of the trip that western travelers faced.
travelers challenges faced j writesmart 4 describing trails west make a list noting important topics that you might want to cover in your documentary film.
in addition write down ideas about how you might present information about each topic.
for example will you use a narrator to tell the life story of joseph smith or will you have actors present it dramatically.
expanding west 3 section 2 teks 1 a 6e 10a 10b ioc 11 a 11b 12d 23d what you will learn 1 many american settlers moved to texas after mexico achieved independence from spain.
2 texans revolted against mexican rule and established an independent nation.
in 1836 texas gained its independence from mexico.
the texes revolution if you were there you are the father of a large farm family in missouri.
there is not enough land for everyone so you re looking for another opportunity.
one day a mexican government official comes to town.
he is looking for people to settle in texas.
the mexican government is offering generous tracts of land to colonists.
however you have to become a citizen of mexico and follow mexican laws.
would you decide to move your family to texas.
key terms and people father miguel hidalgo y costilla p 350 empresarios p 350 stephen f austin p 351 antonio lopez de santa anna p 351 alamo p 352 battle of san jacinto p 352 building background what do you already know about the history of texas.
many towns in texas have streets or neighborhoods named after early settlers and heros of the texas revolution.
travis austin bowie and houston are all early texas heros.
use the knowledge you already have about texas and texas history to help you understand this section.
i taking notes use the annotation tools in your ebook to take notes on the events that led to the independence of texas.
american settlers move to texas mexico had a long unprotected border that stretched from texas to california.
mexico s spanish rulers worried constantly about attacks from neighbors.
they also were concerned about threats from within mexico.
their fears were justified.
mexicans moved to overthrow spanish rule in the early 1800s.
in september 1810 father miguel hidalgo y costilla a mexican priest led a rebellion of about 80 000 poor indians and mestizos or people of indian and spanish ancestry.
they hoped that if mexico became independent from the spanish monarchy their lives would improve.
hidalgo s revolt failed but the rebellion he started grew.
in 1821 mexico became independent.
in 1824 it adopted a republican constitution that declared rights for all mexicans.
the new mexican government contracted with empresarios or agents to bring settlers to texas.
they paid the agents in land.
350 chapter 6 chapter and make a list of the primary sources used.
then research each topic to find another primary source and a secondary source on each topic.
make a list of all nine items and what type of source each is.
next to the title of each source copy a sentence with language that you believe indicates the source is valid.
describe the author and why he or she is a valid source.
then choose one of the topics and use the sources you have found to write a summary of the events and ideas surrounding the topic.
write out each fact that you use and the sources in which you have corroborated the fact.
mywritesmart 17 writing your autobiography review your notes.
then write your autobiography being sure to mention each of the events from your notes.
tell how your character heard about each event what he or she was doing at the time how he or she felt about the event and how it affected him or her.
what are your character s hopes and fears for the future.
w 500 chapter ask your teacher or classmates to help you understand them.
1789 george washington becomes the first president.
1789 the french revolution begins.
world chapter 2 results of exploration portugal s explorations would have major results including the start of the atlantic slave trade.
as portuguese sailors explored the west coast of africa they negotiated for gold ivory and slaves.
the slave trade devastated african communities.
it led to increased warfare among kingdoms and broke up many families.
the portuguese sent many enslaved africans to europe and to islands in the atlantic where they lived and worked under brutal conditions.
the other nations of europe watched as new trade routes brought increased wealth and power to portugal.
they soon launched voyages of exploration to find their own water routes to asia.
reading check predicting how would continued exploration affect africans.
i summary and preview in the 1400s i the portuguese started a new era of exploration.
in the next section you will learn how europeans reached the american continents.
section 1 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify who was leif eriksson.
b summarize how did the vikings eventually establish vinland.
c draw inferences why do you think the vikings did not try to colonize the americas.
2 a identify who was prince henry the navigator.
b compare why were caravels able to sail against the wind while other ships could not.
3 a recall who was the first explorer to find a sea route from europe to asia.
b explain how did muslims living in india learn portuguese.
c draw conclusions how did the slave trade affect west africa.
geography skills interpreting maps 1 movement which explorer was the first to reach the cape of good hope.
2 human environment interaction about how many miles was da gama s 1497 1499 voyage.
ww 1wl t 1flmi critical thinking 4 summarizing review your notes on european exploration.
then copy the chart below and use it to explain the reason for the explorations the technology that made explorations possible and the results of the explorations.
5 taking notes on early explorers review the section and make notes on groups of explorers.
make sure to list the differences and similarities between the groups where they traveled and why.
new empires in the americas 41 what you will learn europeans reach the americas 1 christopher columbus sailed across the atlantic ocean and reached a continent that was previously unknown to him.
2 after columbus s voyages other explorers sailed to the americas.
christopher columbus s voyages led to new exchanges between europe africa and the americas.
key terms and people christopher columbus p 42 line of demarcation p 44 treaty of tordesillas p 44 ferdinand magellan p 44 circumnavigate p 44 columbian exchange p 45 f taking notes.
use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the explorers their journeys and the effects of european voyages to the americas.
if you were there you are a european explorer who just returned to your homeland from the americas.
while you were gone you tried new and different foods including corn potatoes and cocoa.
you have brought some of these foods back with you.
you want your friends and family to sample these items but they resist.
what will you say about these new foods.
ibuildingbackground europeans africans and asians i had traded with each other for centuries using land and sea routes.
i native american groups also knew of each other through trade routes i although sailors often explored new areas before 1492 the two worlds had no communication with each other.
columbus sails across the atlantic stories of fabulous kingdoms and wealth in asia captured the imagination of christopher columbus a sailor from genoa italy.
columbus was convinced that he could reach asia by sailing west across the atlantic ocean.
the journey begins columbus asked king ferdinand and queen isabella of spain to pay for an expedition across the atlantic.
he promised them great riches new territory and catholic converts.
it took columbus several years to convince the king and queen but they finally agreed to help finance the journey.
ferdinand and isabella ordered columbus to bring back any items of value and to claim for spain any lands he explored.
on august 3 1492 columbus s three ships set sail.
the nina and the pinta were caravels.
columbus sailed in the larger santa maria.
the ships carried about 90 sailors and a year s worth of supplies.
they made a stop in the canary islands and then on september 6 they resumed their journey.
soon they passed the limits of columbus s chapter you will read about four great americans washington hamilton jefferson and adams.
then you ll choose one of these great leaders and write a nobel prize nomination for him.
if there are any terms sentences or ideas you aren t sure you understand as you read the chapter review visual summary use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas of the chapter about the civil war you will see that this was a time in our history dominated by two major concerns politics and society and culture.
you will not only read about the political decisions made during this war but also you will see how the war affected all of american society.
you will read about the causes and the key events during the war and the many consequences of this war.
this chapter that you think would make a good 10 minute documentary.
your outline should be organized by scene no more than 3 scenes in chronological order.
for each scene give the following information main idea of scene costumes and images to be used audio to be used and length of scene.
as you plan remember that the audience will be students your own age.
374 chapter you are getting ready to read.
as you read the passage look for information that is important enough to go in a summary.
as the months rolled on and the number of dead continued to increase a group of northern democrats began speaking out against the war.
led by u s representative clement l vallandigham of ohio they called themselves peace democrats.
their enemies called them copperheads comparing them to a poisonous snake.
the name stuck.
many copperheads were midwestemers who sympathized with the south and opposed abolition.
they believed the war was not necessary and called for its end.
vallandigham asked what the war had gained and then said let the dead at fredericksburg and vicksburg answer.
j after you read the passage answer the following questions.
1 do you think the quote in the passage above is essential information for a summary of the issue being discussed.
2 do you think the name copperheads should be included in your summary.
3 write a three or four sentence summary of the passage above.
be sure to use standard spelling grammar sentence structure and punctuation.
4 with a partner choose a paragraph from the chapter you will learn the following academic words innovation p 520 execute ip.
540 as you read chapter 2 17 writing your letter first review your notes and decide which group you want to write about.
which details from your notes will your friends and family be most interested in.
which do you find most important.
what do you want to tell your family and friends about the americas.
directions read each question and write the letter of the best response.
1 which of the following best illustrates the process known as the columbian exchange.
a christopher columbus sailed west to reach asia and encountered the americas.
b corn and tomatoes were introduced to europe from america.
c asian goods moved long distances along the silk road to reach europe.
d advances in technology allowed sailors to better navigate on the open seas.
2 the decimation of the native population of the americas and the need for plantation labor resulted in the f encomienda system.
g establishment of religious tolerance.
h transatlantic slave trade.
j columbian exchange.
3 the desire to convert people to christianity and the demand for asian trade goods led to a increased interest in exploration.
b the renaissance.
c the conquest of the americas.
d efforts to end the slave trade.
4 spains empire in the americas included which of the following.
f new york g virginia h mexico j canada 5 which of the following established colonies in north america.
a the portuguese b the dutch c the greeks d the romans 6 the voyage of enslaved africans across the atlantic to the americas was known as the f northwest passage.
g african diaspora.
h triangular trade.
j middle passage.
7 examine the following passage from bernal diaz del castillos account of an aztec marketplace.
then answer the question below.
z the bustle and noise caused by this large crowd of people was so great that it could be heard more than four miles away.
some of our men who had traveled through italy said that they never had seen a marketplace that covered so large an area which was so well regulated and so crowded with people as this one at mexico.
bernal diaz del castillo adapted from the memoirs of the conquistador bernal diaz del castillo document based question what is the authors impression of the aztec marketplace.
how can you tell.
new empires in the americas 67 history multimedia connections click through 1 i i irvuuvi i inter activities 1 caribbean island encounters watch the video to learn about the first encounters between spanish explorers and the people of the caribbean.
claiming florida for spain watch the video to learn about ponce de leon s first landing on the coast of what is now florida.
llili a r isn cape c v ssbsws sb the spanish conquistador juan ponce de leon was the first european to set foot on land that later became part of the united states.
ponce de leon first sailed to the americas with christopher columbus on his second voyage in 1493 once in the caribbean region he helped conquer what is now puerto rico and was named ruler of the island.
in puerto rico ponce de leon heard about a nearby island that supposedly held the legendary fountain of youth.
its waters were said to make old people young again.
in 1513 ponce de leon set out to find the island but instead landed in what is now florida.
he named florida and claimed it for spain.
explore important events in the life of ponce de leon online you can find a wealth of information video clips primary sources activities and more at i 71 jin.
ponce de leon s 1513 route study the map to learn about the region of the americas that ponce de leon explored in 1513.
1620 the pilgrims sign the mayflower compact.
section 5 conflict in the colonies 98 the big idea tensions developed as the british government placed tax after tax on the colonies.
on writing llohs writing an infomercial what if television had been invented during the time that the english colonies were being founded in north america.
instead of relying on printed flyers and word of mouth to attract settlers the founders of colonies might have made infomercials.
in this chapter you will read about life in the american colonies during different times.
you will choose one time period and colony and write an infomercial encouraging english citizens to settle in the colony of your choice.
1648 work is finished on india s taj 1 mahal.
save our history history secrets of jamestown 71 video jex 1 m 11 a.
f plymouth colony thrives again in this highly accurate re creation.
1681 william penn establishes the colony of pennsylvania.
1682 peter the great becomes czar of russia.
1 1763 i pontiac an y american indian leads a rebellion on the western frontier.
1773 patriots stage the boston tea party.
1768 british explorer james cook sets sail on his first trip to the south pacific meeting people like this sandwich islander.
the english colonies 69 reading social studies 1 economics geography politics society and culture science and technology focus on themes in this chapter 7 chapter 16 geography skills 5 interpreting maps location what major port cities in the south were affected by the blockade.
the union navy had already built its own ironclad the monitor designed by swedish born engineer john ericsson.
ericsson s ship had unusual new features such as a revolving gun tower.
one confederate soldier called the monitor a tin can on a shingle.
although small the monitor carried powerful guns and had thick plating.
when the virginia returned to hampton roads later that month the monitor was waiting.
after several hours of fighting neither ship was seriously damaged but the monitor forced the virginia to withdraw.
this success saved the union fleet and continued the blockade.
the clash of the ironclads also signaled a revolution in naval warfare.
the days of wooden warships powered by wind and sails were drawing to a close.
evaluating how effective was the union blockade.
reading check.
i summary i ties of the and preview the early bat civil war were centered in the east.
in the next section you will read about battles in the west.
the impact today the monitor sank in north carolina in the winter of 1862 the shipwreck was located by scientists in 1973 and remains of the ship are part of the exhibit at the uss monitor center which opened in 2007 section 2 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify list the early battles in the east and the outcome of each battle b elaborate why do you think the union lost the t first battle of bull run.
i 2 a describe what costly mistake did the confederacy make before the battle of antietam.
b analyze what was the outcome of the battle of antietam and what effect did it have on both the i north and the south.
c elaborate why do you think general george b mcclellan did not finish off general robert e lee s troops when he had the chance.
3 a describe what was the union s strategy in the war at sea.
b draw conclusions why were ironclads more successful than older wooden ships.
critical thinking 4 supporting a point of view review your notes on the battles in the east and at sea then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to show which three conflicts you think were the most significant and why.
most significant why j writesmart 5 taking notes on the war in the east write notes on the first battle of bull run the seven days battles the second battle of bull run and the battle of antietam.
be sure to answer the following questions who.
the civil war 52 what you will learn the vifaf m the west 1 union strategy in the west centered on control of the mississippi river.
2 confederate and union troops struggled for dominance in the far west.
t the big idea fighting in the civil war spread to the western united states.
key terms and people ulysses s grant p 522 battle of shiloh p 523 david farragut p 524 siege of vicksburg p 524 i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on civil war battles in the west.
if you were there you live in the city of vicksburg set on high bluffs above the mississippi river.
vicksburg is vital to the control of the river and confederate defenses are strong.
but the union general is determined to take the town.
for weeks you have been surrounded and besieged.
cannon shells burst overhead day and night.
some have fallen on nearby homes.
supplies of food are running low.
how would you survive this siege.
i building background the civil war was fought on many fronts 3 i all across the continent and even at sea.
in the east fighting was atfirst i concentrated in virginia.
in the west cities and forts along the mississippi f river were the main target of union forces.
northern control of the river would cut off the western states of the confederacy.
union strategy in the west while lincoln fumed over the cautious hesitant general mcclellan he had no such problems with ulysses s grant.
bold and restless grant grew impatient when he was asked to lead defensive maneuvers.
he wanted to be on the attack.
as a commander of forces in the union s western campaign he would get his wish.
the western campaign focused on taking control of the mississippi river.
this strategy would cut off the eastern part of the confederacy from sources of food production in arkansas louisiana and texas.
from bases on the mississippi the union army could attack southern communication and transportation networks.
in february 1862 grant led an assault force into tennessee.
with help from navy gunboats grant s army of the tennessee took two outposts on key rivers in the west.
on february 6 he captured fort henry on the tennessee river.
several days later he took fort donelson on the cumberland river.
fort donelson s commander asked for the terms of surrender.
grant replied no terms except an unconditional and immediate 522 chapter.
why do you think these sources were included.
chapter 3 reading check perhaps the worst community conflicts in new england involved the witchcraft trials of the early 1690s.
the largest number of trials were held in salem massachusetts.
in salem a group of girls had accused people of casting spells on them.
the community formed a special court to judge the witchcraft cases.
the court often pressured the suspected witches to confess.
before the trials had ended the salem witch trials led to 19 people being put to death.
identifying cause and effect what led to religious disagreements among the puritans and what was the result.
new england economy connecticut massachusetts new hampshire and rhode island were very different from the southern colonies.
the often harsh climate and rocky soil meant that few new england farms could grow cash crops.
most farming families grew crops and raised animals for their own use.
there was thus little demand for farm laborers.
although some people held slaves slavery did not become as important to this region.
merchants trade was vital to new england s economy.
new england merchants traded goods locally with other colonies and overseas.
many of them traded local products such as furs pickled beef and pork.
many merchants grew in power and wealth becoming leading members of the new england colonies.
fishing fishing became one of the region s leading industries.
the rich waters off new england s coast served as home to many fish including cod mackerel and halibut.
merchants exported dried fish.
colonists also began hunting for whales that swam close to shore.
whales were captured with harpoons or spears and dragged to shore.
whaling provided valuable oil for lighting.
shipbuilding shipbuilding became an important industry in new england for several reasons.
the area had plenty of forests that provided materials for shipbuilding.
as trade particularly in slaves in the new england seaports grew more merchant ships were built.
the fishing industry also needed ships.
new england shipyards made high quality valuable vessels.
ship owners sometimes even told their captains to sell the ship along with the cargo when they reached their destination.
skilled craftspeople the northern economy needed skilled craftspeople.
families often sent younger sons to learn skilled trades such as blacksmithing weaving shipbuilding and printing.
the young boys who learned skilled trades were known as apprentices.
apprentices lived with a master craftsman and learned from him.
in exchange the boys performed simple tasks.
apprentices promised to work for a master craftsman for a set number of years.
they learned trades that were essential to the survival of the colonies.
apprentices received food and often clothing from the craftsmen.
gabriel ginings for example was an apprentice in portsmouth rhode island.
he received sufficient food and raiment clothing suitable for such an apprentice as his 1663 contract stated.
after a certain amount of time had passed apprentices became journeymen.
they usually traveled and learned new skills in their trade.
eventually they would become a master of the trade themselves.
reading check categorizing what types of jobs were common in the new england colonies.
the impact today education in the colonies education was important in colonial new england.
mothers and fathers wanted their children to be able to read the bible.
the fishing remains an important industry in new england earning hundreds of millions of dollars each year.
the english colonies 83 massachusetts bay colony passed some of the first laws requiring parents to provide instruction for their children.
public education the impact today public schools are the main source of education for most children in the united states.
about 50 million students are enrolled in the nation s public elementary and secondary schools.
to be sure that future generations would have educated ministers communities established town schools.
in 1647 the general court of massachusetts issued an order that a school be founded in every township of 50 families.
schoolchildren often used the new england primer which had characters and stories from the bible.
they learned to read at the same time that they learned about the community s religious values.
the availability of schooling varied in the colonies.
there were more schools in new england than in the other colonies where most children lived far from towns.
these children had to be taught by their parents or by private tutors.
most colonial children stopped their education after the elementary grades.
many went to work either on their family farm or away from home.
higher education higher education was also important to the colonists.
in 1636 john harvard and the general court founded harvard college.
harvard taught ministers and met the colony s need for higher education.
the second college founded in the colonies william and mary was established in virginia in 1693 by 1700 about 70 percent of men and 45 percent of women in new england could read and write.
these figures were much lower in virginia where jamestown was the only major settlement.
reading check analyzing why was education important to the new england colonies.
summary and preview in this section k you learned about the role that religion played in the new england colonies.
in the next section you ll learn about new york new jersey and pennsylvania.
section 2 assessment jp reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a recall why did the pilgrims and puritans leave f europe for the americas.
b explain what was significant about the year 1620.
c elaborate do you think the pilgrims could have survived without the assistance of squanto and massasoit.
explain your answer.
i 2 a describe what role did the church play in mas.
sachusetts.
why did some colonists disagree with the leaders of massachusetts.
b explain why were the colonies of connecticut and rhode island founded.
c analyze how did the mayflower compact and the fundamental orders of connecticut encourage self government.
3 a identify describe the economy in the new eng i land colonies.
b analyze why do you think new england merchants became leading members of society.
4 a describe what steps did the massachusetts bay colony take to promote education.
i i b predict what are some possible benefits that new england s emphasis on education might bring.
critical thinking 5 identifying cause and effect review your notes on the reasons english colonists came to new england.
then copy the diagram below and use it to show how the colonists experiences caused them to build certain types of colonies.
6 comparing colonies take notes on the early new england colonies.
be sure to note what advantages they offered to settlers and what difficulties settlers faced.
put a star beside the colony or colonies you might use in your infomercial.
i chapter 12 economy.
steam powered ships soon connected the united states with european mar kets spurring the economy even more.
reading check finding main ideas what benefits did the transportation revolution bring to trade and daily life.
steamboats american and european inventors had developed steam powered boats in the late 1700s.
however they were not in wide use until the early 1800s.
steamboat era in 1803 american robert fulton tested his first steamboat design in france.
several years later he tested the first full sized commercial steamboat called the clermont in the united states.
on august 9 1807 the clermont traveled against the current up the hudson river without trouble.
demand for steamboat ferry service soon arose.
the steamboat was well suited for river travel.
it could move upriver and did not rely on wind power.
steamboats increased trade and profits because goods could be moved quickly and thus more cheaply.
more than 500 steamboats were in use in the united states by 1840 by the 1850s steamboats were also being used to carry people and goods across the atlantic ocean.
gibbons v ogden increased steamboat shipping led to conflict over waterway rights.
in 1819 aaron ogden sued thomas gibbons for operating steamboats in new york waters that ogden said he owned.
gibbons did not have a license to operate in new york but argued that his federal license gave him the right to use new york waterways.
in the case of gibbons v ogden which reached the supreme court in 1824 the court reinforced the federal government s authority to regulate trade between the states by ending monopolistic control over waterways in several states.
the ruling freed up waters to even greater trade and shipping.
almost the north 3.
overnight there were many more shipping companies traveling the waterways.
competition between the businesses brought prices down and more people could afford to buy the products brought to their local markets.
reading check summarizing explain the effects of the gibbons v ogden ruling.
american railroads o history video wild west tech train tech.
what the steamboat did for water travel the train did for overland travel.
steam powered trains had first been developed in great britain in the early 1800s.
however they did not become popular in the united states until the 1830s.
in 1830 peter cooper built a small but powerful locomotive called the tom thumb.
he raced the locomotive against a horse drawn railcar.
eyewitness john latrobe later described the race in which tom thumb had a slow start and fell behind.
latrobe wrote the pace increased the passengers shouted the engine gained on the horse then the engine passes the horse and a great hurrah hailed the victory.
unfortunately for coo per victory was spoiled when tom thumb broke down and lost the race near the end.
despite the defeat the contest showed the power and speed of even a small locomotive.
railroad fever soon spread.
by 1840 railroad companies had laid about 2 800 miles of track more than existed in all of europe.
french economist michel chevalier described americans as having a perfect passion for railroads.
as more railroads were built engineers and mechanics overcame many tough challenges.
most british railroads for example ran on straight tracks across flat ground.
in the united states however many railroads had to run up and down steep mountains around tight curves and over swift rivers.
railroad companies also built the tracks quickly and often with the least expensive materials available.
as time went on engineers and mechanics built heavier faster and more powerful steam locomotives.
by 1860 about 30 000 miles of railroad linked almost every major city in the eastern united states.
as a result the economy surged forward.
for example american loco the steam train connect to science and technology boiling water produces steam which pushes pistons back and forth in a steam engine.
these pistons are connected to rods that rotate the wheels of the locomotive.
why does the train have a firebox.
as steam follows the path of the white arrows into the cylinder the pressure pushes the piston in the direction of the large blue arrow.
connecting rods turn the wheel half a turn.
q when the small valve rod moves the other valve is blocked pushing steam into the other side of the cylinder.
the pressure moves the piston in the direction of the large blue arrow and the wheel completes a turn.
398 chapter 3 demanding more political equality.
revivals became popular places to talk about political and social issues.
people from those colonies with less political freedom were thus introduced to more democratic systems used in other colonies.
enlightenment during the 1600s european scientists began to better understand the basic laws that govern nature.
their new ideas about the universe began the scientific revolution.
the revolution changed how people thought of the world.
in 1675 for example anton van leeuwenhoek became the first to observe microorganisms through a microscope.
many colonists were also influenced by the enlightenment.
this movement which took place during the 1700s spread the idea that reason and logic could improve society.
enlightenment thinkers also formed ideas about how government should work.
they based many of their ideas on the concept of using reason to best achieve virtue and social order.
some enlightenment thinkers believed that there was a social contract between government and citizens.
philosophers such as john locke thought that people had natural rights such as equality and liberty.
one judge william blackstone published a book describing the system of english law.
his ideas about natural laws and rights became influential in colonial legal education.
ideas of the scientific revolution and the enlightenment eventually influenced colonial leaders desire for self government.
summarizing how did new ideas influence colonial society.
french and indian war by the 1670s tensions had arisen between new england colonists and the wampa noag.
metacomet a wampanoag leader also known as king philip opposed the colo reading check nists efforts to take his people s lands.
in 1675 these tensions finally erupted in a conflict known as king philip s war.
the colonial militia civilians serving as soldiers fought american indian warriors.
both sides attacked each other s settlements killing men women and children.
the fighting finally ended in 1676 but only after about 600 colonists and some 3 000 indians had been killed including metacomet.
native american allies some native americans allied with the colonists to fight against metacomet and his forces.
these indians had developed trade relations with colonists.
they wanted tools weapons and other goods that europeans could provide.
in exchange the colonists wanted furs which they sold for large profits in europe.
as a result each side came to depend upon the other.
french colonists traded and allied with the algonquian and huron.
english colonists traded and allied with the iroquois league.
this powerful group united american indians from six different groups.
many american indians trusted the french more than they did the english.
the smaller french settlements were less threatening than the rapidly growing english colonies.
no matter who their allies were many indian leaders took care to protect their people s independence.
as one leader said we are born free.
we neither depend upon the governor of new france nor the governor of new york.
we may go where we please and buy and sell what we please garangula quoted in the world turned upside down edited by colin g calloway war erupts until the mid 1700s france and great britain struggled for control of territory in north america.
british colonists wanted to settle in the ohio river valley where they could the english colonies 95 north american empires before and after the treaty of paris take advantage of the fur trade.
the french believed this settlement would hurt their profits.
a standoff developed in the ohio valley where the french had built three forts.
fighting erupted in 1753 as the british military moved to take over the valley.
when a young virginian named george washington arrived with more soldiers he found the area under french control.
washington and his troops built a small simple fort that he named fort necessity.
after his troops suffered many casualties captured injured or killed soldiers washington finally surrendered.
his defeat in 1754 was the start of the french and indian war.
leaders from the colonies met to discuss defense.
the convention produced a plan for uniting the colonies called the albany plan.
meanwhile in 1756 fighting began in europe starting what became known as the seven years war.
treaty of paris the turning point of the war came in 1759 that year british general james wolfe captured quebec gaining the advantage in the war.
however the war dragged on for four more years.
finally in 1763 britain and france signed the treaty of paris officially ending the war.
the terms of the treaty gave canada to britain.
britain also gained all french lands east of the mississippi river except the city of new orleans and two small islands in the gulf of st lawrence.
from spain which had allied with france in 1762 britain received florida.
in an earlier treaty spain had received louisiana the land that france had claimed west of the mississippi river.
the treaty of paris changed the balance of power in north america.
soon british settlers began moving west to settle new lands.
western frontier most colonial settlements were located along the atlantic coast.
colonial settlers or pioneers slowly moved into the virgin ia and carolina backcountry and the ohio river valley.
indian leaders like chief pontiac opposed british settlement of this new land.
pontiac s rebellion began in may 1763 when his forces attacked british forts on the frontier.
within one month they had destroyed or captured seven forts.
pontiac then led an attack on fort detroit.
the british held out for months.
british leaders feared that more fighting would take place on the frontier if colonists kept moving onto american indian lands.
to avoid more conflict king george iii issued the proclamation of 1763 this law banned british settlement west of the appalachian mountains.
the law also ordered settlers to leave the upper ohio river valley.
these limitations angered many colonists and some began to question british policies.
summarizing why did george iii issue the proclamation of 1763.
reading check section 4 assessment pontiac 1720 1769 pontiac an ottawa chief who had fought for france tried to resist british settlement west of the appalachians.
calling them dogs dressed in red who have come to rob us he attacked the british in the ohio country in 1763 pontiac s rebellion was put down and he surrendered in 1766 analyzing information how did pontiac try to stop the british.
summary and preview in this section i you read about colonial governments the slave trade and the conflicts with foreign countries and with native americans that the colonies faced as they grew.
in the next section you ll learn about the increasing tension between the colonies and great britain that led to independence.
reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a describe how were colonial governments organized.
b analyze how did political change in england affect colonial governments.
c explain why did self government increase in the colonies.
2 a explain what is mercantilism.
b analyze how did the navigation acts support the system of mercantilism.
c evaluate did the colonies benefit from mercantilism.
why or why not.
3 a identify what was the great awakening and how did it reflect religious freedom.
how did the ideas of virtue and the social contract affect colonial government.
b compare how was the enlightenment similar to the great awakening.
c identify how did john locke and william black i stone contribute to the idea of self government in the i colonies.
4 a explain what caused the french and indian war.
j b evaluate where was the colonial western frontier.
defend the british decision to ban colonists from set tling on the western frontier.
critical thinking 5 summarizing review your notes on the developments in the colonies during the late 1600s to mid 1700s.
then add a box to the bottom of your chart in which you briefly summarize how the colonies grew and changed during the period as well as the challenges they faced.
development effects establishment of local government political change in england trade laws great awakening enlightenment french and indian war t j how the colonies grew and changed and challenges faced 6 reviewing the information this section focused on what life was like in all the english colonies discussed so far.
does this information give you any new ideas about the colony you ll use in your infomercial.
the english colonies 97 history and geography as you have read life differed from colony to colony.
the colonies were created with very different goals in mind.
many of the northern colonies were established with the goal of providing religious freedom to the people who lived there.
many of the middle and southern colonies were founded by companies and individual colonists who hoped to make a profit on the resources found there.
eventually however the northern colonies also became centers of business activity.
new england colonies middle colonies southern colonies 100 200 miles 100 200 kilometers 7a chapter.
industrial revolution mass production interchangeable parts the lowell and rhode island systems transportation revolution factories telegraph i ii ii ii railroad and steamboat reviewing vocabulary terms and people complete each sentence below by filling in the blank with the correct term or person from the chapter.
1 the system of was developed to represent letters of the alphabet when sending telegraph messages.
2 the first american woman to hold a high ranking position in the labor movement was 3 the was a period of rapid growth in the use of machines and manufacturing.
4 the first locomotive in the united states was built by.
5 workers would sometimes go on to force factory owners to meet their demands for better pay and working conditions.
6 the industry which produced cloth items was the first to use machines for manufacturing.
comprehension and critical thinking section 1 pages 384 389 7 a identify what ideas did eli whitney want to apply to the manufacture of guns.
b analyze how did the war of 1812 lead to a boom in manufacturing in the united states.
c elaborate why do you think the industrial revolution began in great britain rather than in the united states.
section 2 pages 390 395 8 a describe what was mill life like.
b draw conclusions how did the rhode island system and the lowell system change the lives of american workers.
c evaluate were reformers such as sarah g bagley effective in improving labor conditions.
the north 41 section 3 pages 396 401 9 a describe how were americans affected by the introduction of steamboats.
b make inferences how did railroad companies become some of the most powerful businesses in the country.
c elaborate what was the most important result of the transportation revolution.
section 4 pages 402 405 10 a recall what important change took place in how factories were powered.
b draw conclusions how did the telegraph affect communication in the united states.
c evaluate do you think moving factories close to cities helped or hurt working life.
reviewing themes 11 science and technology how did the introduction of new inventions change the way goods were made and sold in the united states.
12 science and technology what effects did the technological innovations of the industrial revolution have on daily life in the united states.
give specific examples.
13 economics what was the overall effect of the industrial revolution on the u s economy.
using the internet 14 activity marketing plan the industrial revolution changed the way goods were produced.
new inventions created easier faster or completely new ways of doing things.
using the online textbook research inventions made between 1790 and 1860 then create a plan for how to sell one of the inventions.
in your plan identify the problems the invention will fix your target audience and how the invention should be advertised and sold.
reading skills causes and effects in history use the reading skills taught in this chapter review visual summary use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas of the chapter 8 linking to today the louisiana purchase when the corps of discovery headed west in 1804 an estimated 30 million buffalo roamed the plains alongside 97 000 people mostly native americans.
since that time the numbers have reversed.
today nearly 40 million people call the lands of the louisiana purchase home in contrast the buffalo which had been driven nearly to extinction by the late 1800s has recovered to a population of approximately 15 000 in the wild.
analysis skill analyzing information other than agricultural goods what types of valuable resources are found in the former louisiana purchase.
natural resources oil natural gas coal gemstones copper iron ore lead zinc silver limestone sulphur diamonds helium major agricultural and livestock production rice cattle chicken hogs corn wheat sugarcane cotton dairy products hay louisiana purchase i y report offered many americans their first description of the southwest.
summary and preview the louisiana i purchase nearly doubled the size of the supporting a point of view united states.
in the next section you will what would you do if you were pike and found learn about increasing tensions between yourself in spanish territory.
the united states and great britain.
reading check.
section 2 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify what new states were added to the union by the early 1800s.
what happened in 1803 that changed the nation dramatically.
b explain why were new orleans and the mississippi river important to settlers in the west.
2 a recall what two reasons did napoleon have for selling louisiana to the united states.
b summarize why was the louisiana purchase important to the national security and stable economy of the united states.
c predict what are some possible results of expansion into the louisiana purchase.
3 a describe what areas did the lewis and clark expedition and the pike expedition explore.
b draw conclusions why were meriwether lewis and william clark chosen to lead the exploration of the louisiana purchase.
critical thinking 4 sequencing review your notes on the louisiana purchase then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to rank the three most important effects of the louisiana purchase from most important to least important and explain why you chose that order.
importance why 1.
writesmart 5 gathering information about a person s actions make a list of jefferson s actions the ones that would put him on that top ten list.
add any new character traits you have discovered.
the jefferson era 277 what you will learn 1 violations of u s neutrality led congress to enact a ban on trade.
2 native americans great britain and the united states came into conflict in the west.
3 the war hawks led a growing call for war with great britain.
i j challenges at home and abroad led the united states to declare war on great britain.
j key terms and people uss constitution p 278 impressment p 279 embargo p 279 embargo act p 279 non intercourse act p 280 tecumseh p 280 battle of tippecanoe p 282 war hawks p 282 james madison p 283 taking notes i use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the challenges that led the united states to declare war on great britain.
the coming of war if you were there you are a tea merchant in boston in 1807 but right now a new law forbids trading with european nations.
boston harbor is full of empty ships.
it seems to you that the law is hurting american merchants more than european ones.
you know that some are breaking the law and smuggling goods just to stay in business.
would you obey the law or smuggle.
building background the united states tried to stay neutral in the conflicts between france and great britain but it was impossible to avoid getting involved.
french and british ships interfered with american trade across the atlantic.
the british also caused trouble along the western frontier.
many americans began to urge war with great britain.
violations of neutrality during the late 1700s and early 1800s american merchant ships fanned out across the oceans.
the overseas trade while profitable was also risky.
ships had to travel vast distances often through violent storms.
merchant ships sailing in the mediterranean risked capture by pirates from the barbary states of north africa who would steal cargo and hold ships crews for ransom.
the young united states had no formal navy to protect these ships.
congress provided money for just six ships but the ships were designed to compete against the largest navies in the world.
attacks continued until the united states sent the uss constitution a large warship to end them.
the barbary pirates were a serious problem but an even larger threat soon loomed.
when great britain and france went to war in 1803 each country wanted to stop the united states from supplying goods to the other.
each government passed laws designed to prevent american merchants from trading with the other.
in addition the british and french navies captured many american merchant ships searching for war supplies.
the real trouble however started when britain began stopping and searching american ships for sailors who had run away from the british navy forcing the sailors to return to british ships.
sometimes u s citizens were captured by accident and pressed into the uss constitution connect to science and technology 1 why do you think gunpowder was stored on the bottom deck.
2 what was the purpose of the copper sheathing.
boys called powder monkeys carried gunpowder from the orlop or lowest deck up to the gunners.
in the early years of the republic foreign trade was critical to the nation s survival.
in 1797 congress decided to create a navy to protect american merchant ships.
the powerful warship uss constitution was a key part of the new navy and was undefeated in battle.
it is the oldest commissioned warship in the world.
this impressment or the practice of forcing people to serve in the army or navy continued despite american protests.
soon britain was even targeting american navy ships.
in june 1807 for example the british ship leopard stopped the u s navy ship chesapeake and tried to remove sailors.
when the captain of the chesapeake refused the british took the sailors by force.
the brazen attack on the chesapeake stunned americans.
the embargo act great britain s violations of u s neutrality sparked intense debate in america about how to respond.
some people wanted to go to war.
others favored an embargo or the banning of trade against britain.
without a strong navy many feared that the young nation would be unable to defend its independence in a fight against the largest navy in the world.
jefferson who had easily won re election in 1804 supported an embargo.
at his urging in late 1807 congress passed the embargo act.
the law essentially banned trade with all foreign countries.
american ships could not sail to foreign ports.
american ports were also closed to british ships.
congress hoped that the embargo would punish britain and france and protect american merchant ships from capture.
the effect of the law was devastating to american merchants.
without foreign trade the jefferson era 279 they lost enormous amounts of money.
northern states that relied heavily on trade were especially hard hit by the embargo.
congressman josiah quincy of massachusetts in a speech before congress described the situation.
all the business of the nation is in disorder.
all the nation s industry is at a standstill he said.
the free enterprise system of economics was becoming more important to the financial well being of merchants and other americans and many did not want government policies to interfere with trade.
the embargo damaged jefferson s popularity and strengthened the federalist party.
angry merchants sent jefferson hundreds of petitions demanding the embargo act s repeal.
one new englander said the embargo was like cutting one s throat to stop the nosebleed.
even worse the embargo had little effect on britain and france.
non intercourse act in 1809 congress tried to revive the nation s trade by replacing the unpopular act with the non intercourse act.
this new law banned trade only with britain france and their colonies.
it also stated that the united states would resume trading with the first side that stopped violating u s neutrality.
in time however the law was no more successful than the embargo act.
comparing and contrasting in what ways were the embargo act and the non intercourse act similar and different.
reading check.
conflict in the west disagreements between great britain and the united states went beyond the neutrality issue.
in the west the british and native americans again clashed with american settlers over land.
the conflict over land in the early 1800s native americans in the old northwest territory continued to lose land as thousands of settlers poured into the region.
the united states had gained this land in the treaty of greenville but indian leaders who had not agreed to the treaty protested the settlers arrival.
frustrated indian groups considered what to do.
in the meantime britain saw an opportunity to slow america s westward growth.
british agents from canada began to arm native americans who were living along the western frontier.
rumors of british activity in the old northwest territory quickly spread filling american settlers with fear and anger.
tecumseh resists u s settlers soon an indian leader emerged who seemed more than capable of halting the american settlers.
tecumseh tuh kuhm suh a shawnee chief had watched angrily as native americans were pushed off their land.
a brilliant speaker he warned other indians about the dangers they faced from settlers.
he believed that the native americans had to do what white americans had done unite.
primary source analysis skill.
political cartoon the embargo act the unpopularity of the embargo act prompted political cartoonists to show visually how the act was hurting american trade.
what do you think the turtle represents.
what is the turtle j preventing this j man from doing.
analyzing primary sources how does the cartoonist emphasize the unpopularity of the embargo act.
tecumseh hoped to unite the native americans of the northwestern frontier the south and the eastern mississippi valley.
he was helped by his brother a religious leader called the prophet.
they founded a village called prophetstown near the wabash and tippecanoe rivers for their followers.
the battle of tippecanoe the governor of the indiana territory william henry harrison watched tecumseh s activities with alarm.
harrison called him one of those uncommon geniuses which spring up occasionally to.
overturn the established order.
the governor was convinced that tecumseh had british backing.
if true tecumseh could be a serious threat to american power in the west.
in 1810 tecumseh met face to face with harrison.
the governor urged him to follow the treaty of greenville that had been signed in 1795 tecumseh replied the white people have no right to take the land from the indians because the indians had it first.
no single chief he insisted could sell land belonging to all american indians who used it.
in response harrison warned tecumseh not to resist the power of the united states.
w analysis j skill.
reading time lines primary source points of view views of war tecumseh urged native americans to unite to oppose what he called the evil of white settlement.
the only way to stop this evil is for all the red men to unite in claiming a common and equal right to the land as it was at first and should be yet.
before the land never was divided but belonged to all for the use of each person.
no group had a right to sell not even to each other much less to strangers who want all and will not do with less j tecumseh william henry harrison was proud of his efforts to obtain land for settlers.
by my own exertions in securing the friendship of the chiefs by admitting them at all times to my house and table my propositions for the purchase of their lands were successful beyond my hopes in the course of seven years s the indian title was extinguished to the amount of fifty millions of acres william henry harrison how did harrison s and tecumseh s views on western settlement differ.
focus on reading what generalization can you make about the views on going to war.
tecumseh traveled south to ask the creek nation to join his forces.
in his absence harrison attacked.
harrison raised an army and marched his troops close to prophetstown.
fighting broke out when the prophet ordered an attack on harrison s camp on november 7 1811 the indians broke through army lines but harrison kept a calm cool and collected manner according to one observer.
during the all day battle harrison s soldiers forced the indian warriors to retreat and then destroyed tecumseh s village.
said chief shabbona with the smoke of that town and loss of that battle i lost all hope.
although tecumseh was safe u s forces defeated tecumseh and his followers in the battle of tippecanoe.
the defeat destroyed tecumseh s dream of a great indian confederation.
he fled to canada.
the prophet was removed from power for ordering the failed attack.
reading check finding main ideas why were u s officials worried about tecumseh s actions.
call for war the evidence of british support for tecumseh further inflamed americans.
a democratic republican newspaper declared the war on the wabash river is purely british.
many americans felt that britain had encouraged tecumseh to attack settlers in the west.
the war hawks several young members of congress called war hawks by their opponents took the lead in calling for war against britain.
these legislators most of whom were from the south and west were led by henry clay of kentucky john c calhoun of south carolina and felix grundy of tennessee.
they saw war as the only answer to british insults.
if we submit calhoun warned the independence of this nation is lost.
calls for war grew.
the war hawks wanted to put a stop to british influence among native americans and enforce national security.
they also wanted to invade canada and i chapter 17 p 568 after you read the passage answer the following questions.
1 what do you know about african americans right to vote prior to and during reconstruction.
2 what do you know about the importance of the right to vote.
3 how do you think restrictions on their right to vote would affect african americans after reconstruction.
chapter 4 from chapter 13 think about what topics would be interesting to research on the web.
if you do some research on the web remember to use the evaluation list to analyze the web site.
the south 41 section teks 7c 10a 10b 11a 12a 12b 27a 27d 28a what you will learn.
1 the invention of the cotton gin revived the economy of the south.
2 the cotton gin created a cotton boom in which farmers grew little else.
3 some people encouraged southerners to focus on other crops and industries.
t the big idea the invention of the cotton gin made the south a one crop economy and increased the need for slave labor.
key terms and people cotton gin p 475 planters p 416 cotton belt p 416 factors p 417 tredegar iron works p 419 i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the causes of the cotton boom in the south.
growth of the cotton industry if you were there you are a field worker on a cotton farm in the south in about 1800 your job is to separate the seeds from the cotton fibers.
it is dull tiring work because the tiny seeds are tangled in the fibers.
sometimes it takes you a whole day just to clean one pound of cotton.
now you hear that someone has invented a machine that can clean cotton 50 times faster than by hand.
how might this machine change your life.
building background sectional differences had always existed between different regions of the united states.
the revolutionary changes in industry and transportation deepened the differences between north and south.
the south remained mainly agricultural.
new technology helped the region become the cotton kingdom.
reviving the south s economy before the american revolution three crops dominated southern agriculture tobacco rice and indigo.
these crops produced mostly by enslaved african americans played a central role in the southern economy and culture.
after the american revolution however prices for tobacco rice and indigo dropped.
when crop prices fell the demand for and the price of slaves also went down.
in an effort to protect their incomes many farmers tried with little success to grow other crops that needed less labor.
soon however cotton would transform the southern economy and greatly increase the demand for slave labor.
cotton becomes profitable cotton had been grown in the new world for centuries but it had not been a very profitable crop.
before cotton could be spun into thread for weaving into cloth the seeds had to be removed from the cotton fibers.
414 chapter you will learn the following academic words reaction p 114 strategy p 129 l as you read chapter texas test practice directions read each question and write the letter of the best response.
1 the supreme courts decision in the 1803 case marbury v madison is an example of a checks and balances.
b reserved powers.
c delegated powers.
d dual sovereignty.
2 most of the fighting in the war of 1812 took place f in europe.
g in canada.
h in the united states.
3 why did president jefferson agree to buy louisiana from france.
a he wanted to learn more about the lands and peoples east of the mississippi river.
b he believed that the united states would benefit from the purchase.
c he wanted to end the french threat in north america.
d he hoped to increase the presidents constitutional powers.
4 the united states went to war with britain in 1812 for which of the following reasons.
f to strengthen the alliance between britain and france g to endanger the rights of u s ships on the high seas h to allow british influence among indian groups on the frontier j to stop trade restrictions against american merchants 5 the lewis and clark expedition was significant because it a introduced the united states to valuable raw materials such as coal.
b improved americas knowledge of the west.
c led to u s settlement of the southwest.
d opened trade between the united states and native americans in the west.
6 during the war of 1812 trade interruptions resulted in f the repeal of the embargo act.
g a rise in unemployment.
h an increase in the production of cotton in the south.
j a boost to u s manufacturing.
7 read the following passage from thomas jeffersons inaugural address and use it to answer the question below.
though the will of the majority is in all cases to prevail that will to be rightful must be reasonable t he minority possess their equal rights which equal laws must protect let us then fellow citizens unite with one heart and one mind we have been called by different names brethren of the same principle.
we are all republicans we are all federalists president thomas jefferson inaugural address 1801 document based question what did jefferson mean in making this statement.
the jefferson era 293 lark in 1804 meriwether lewis william clark and the 33 man corps of discovery began an 8 000 mile journey across uncharted territory.
under orders from president thomas jefferson the expedition mapped a route across the louisiana purchase to the pacific ocean.
from st louis missouri they traveled west up the missouri river then across the rocky mountains and to the pacific.
they met native american peoples and cataloged geography plants and animals.
not only was their mission one of history s greatest explorations it also secured an american claim to the pacific coast and helped inspire millions to migrate west.
explore entries from lewis s journal and other primary sources online.
you can find a wealth of information video clips activities and more at 7 es mfcas s.
uiv muidii wuuiaii recognized the point of a high plain to our right which she informed us was not very distant from the summer retreat of her nation on a river beyond the mountains which runs to the west.
meriwether lewis lewis s journal entry 1 read an excerpt from meriwether lewis s journal that details sacagawea s assistance during the journey.
underway on the missouri watch the video to see how the corps of discovery sailed up the missouri river to begin their expedition.
making friends upriver watch the video to see which native american peoples the corps met and traded with as they made their journey west.
the shores of the pacific watch the video to see how the4 corps tried to adapt to a different climate and the new peoples that they met along the pacific coast.
lfwis andclark 293 mc2 mil j writesmart cus on writing a character sketch nations like people have characters.
for example a nation might be described as peaceful or aggressive prosperous or struggling.
in this chapter 13 textile mills in great britain were the largest foreign buyers of southern cotton.
joseph r anderson followed helper s advice.
in 1848 anderson became the owner of the tredegar iron works in richmond virginia one of the most productive iron works in the nation.
it was the only factory to produce bridge materials cannons steam engines and other products.
industry however remained a small part of the southern economy.
southern industry faced stiff competition from the north and from england both of which could produce many goods more cheaply.
and as long as agricultural profits remained high southern investors preferred to invest in land.
reading check focus on reaping what kind of web site would you look for to learn more about the tredegar iron works.
making inferences why were there fewer industries in the south.
analysis skill.
drawing conclusions why do you think cotton was so important to the south s economy.
i summary and preview you have read i about how southern farmers worked to improve farming methods.
in the next section you will read about the structure of southern society.
section 1 assessment.
onune quiz reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a describe how did the cotton gin make processing cotton easier.
b draw conclusions why had slavery been on the decline before the invention of the cotton gin.
how did slavery change as a result of the cotton gin.
c predict how might the invention of the cotton gin and the rise of cotton production and slavery affect southern society.
2 a identify what areas of the united states made up the cotton belt.
what physical characteristics helped define the area.
b evaluate do you think the south should have i paid more attention to its industrial growth.
i 3 a describe what other crops and industries were encouraged in the south.
b make inferences why were some southern leaders worried about the south s reliance on cotton.
critical thinking 4 identifying cause and effect review your notes on the causes of the cotton boom.
then add to your graphic organizer by identifying the effects of the cotton boom on the south.
writesmart 5 noting life on the cotton farm in your notebook note how whitney s gin changed life on the farm.
also note other details about cotton farming you could include in your sketch.
the south 4 teks 7b 7c 10b sleuth m society what you will learn.
1 southern society and culture consisted of four main groups.
2 free african americans in the south faced a great deal of discrimination.
t if you were there your family owns a small farm in georgia in the 1840s.
sometimes you work in the fields but more often you tend the vegetable garden and peach orchard.
since you have no close neighbors you look forward to sundays.
going to church gives you a chance to socialize with other young people.
sometimes you wonder what it would be like to live in a city like savannah.
how would life be different if you left the farm for the city.
the big idea southern society centered around agriculture.
key term yeomen p 422 w taking notes building background although the south had some industry agriculture was the heart of the southern economy.
cotton was king.
as a result wealthy plantation families were the most prominent social class in southern society.
small farmers however made up the largest part of the population.
use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the different segments of southern society.
southern society and culture popular fiction often made it seem that all white southerners had many slaves and lived on large plantations.
many fiction writers wrote about wealthy southern families who had frequent grand parties.
the ideal image of the antebellum before the war south included hospitality and well treated slaves on beautiful plantations that almost ran themselves.
this romantic view was far from the reality.
during the first half of the 1800s only about one third of white southern families had slaves.
fewer families had plantations.
despite their small numbers these planters had a powerful influence over the south.
the economy of the south was dependent on agriculture and most of the agricultural production relied on slave plantations.
many plantation owners served as political leaders.
they led a society made up of many different kinds of people including yeomen farmers poor whites slaves and free african americans.
each of these segments of society contributed to the economic success of the south.
420 chapter you are getting ready to read.
as you read the passage think about living during the early to mid 1800s when there were few roads.
tariffs and sectionalism not everyone agreed with the plan however.
most of the resistance was centered in the west and the south.
these regions were more dependent on trade to acquire manufactured goods than the north was.
the plan for a high tariff on imported manufactured goods resulted in higher prices for these goods.
this increase in prices would be felt more in the west and the south while benefiting the manufacturers in the north.
from chapter 17 tion congress passed the pacific railway acts in 1862 and 1864 these acts gave railroad companies loans and large land grants that could be sold to pay for construction costs.
railroad companies sold this land to settlers which encouraged people to move west.
railroad companies also encouraged people to put their money into the railroad business which they did sometimes unwisely.
occasionally companies would lie about the value of the land they sold to hopeful settlers.
by the 1880s many small western railroads were deeply in debt.
despite such setbacks americans remained interested in railroad investments.
by 1890 there were about 164 000 more miles of track in operation than in 1865 railroads had become one of the biggest industries in the united states.
railroad companies offered better shipping rates to large companies causing small farmers and businesses to complain about unfair business practices.
in february 1887 congress passed the interstate commerce act providing national regulation over trade between states and creating the interstate commerce commission to ensure fair railroad rates.
however the commission lacked power to enforce its regulations.
farm incomes fall by the 1880s mechanical farming became more common.
using machines farmers could work much more quickly on large fields with fewer workers.
farmers shipped their harvest east by train and from there overseas.
the great plains became known as the breadbasket of the world.
the combination of more farms and greater productivity led to the overproduction of some crops.
overproduction resulted in lower prices.
as profits decreased many farmers found it difficult to pay bills.
farmers who could not make their mortgage payments lost their farms and homes.
many of these homeless farmers became tenant farmers who worked land owned by others.
by 1880 one fourth of all farms were rented by tenants and the number continued to grow.
reading check finding main ideas what kinds of businesses supported the western economy.
clashes for the west as miners and settlers began crossing the great plains in the mid 1800s they pressured the federal government for more access to western lands.
to protect these travelers u s officials sent agents to negotiate treaties with the plains indians.
the struggle for land the plains indians lived throughout the great plains from canada south into texas.
time line ha native american land loss in the west 1850 1890 battles and treaties of the indian wars geography skills.
interpreting maps region in what regions did native americans lose land in the late 1800s.
q treaties at fort laramie 1851 and 1868 q treaty at fort atkinson 1853 sand creek massacre 1864 fetterman massacre 1866 q treaty of medicine lodge 1867 battle of the little bighorn 1876 ft battle of the rosebud 1876 wounded knee massacre 1890 atlanti ocean land lost by native americans 1850 1870 1870 1890 reservations in 1890 te native american group 0 200 400 miles indian groups such as the apache and the comanche lived in and around texas and what is now oklahoma.
to the north were the sioux.
these groups spoke many different languages.
however they used a common sign language to communicate and they shared a similar lifestyle.
miners and settlers were increasing in numbers and they wanted indians land.
the u s government tried to avoid disputes by negotiating the treaties of fort laramie and fort atkinson the first major treaties between the u s government and plains indians.
these treaties recognized indian claims to most of the great plains.
they also allowed united states troops to build forts and roads and to travel across indian homelands.
the u s government promised to pay for any damages to indian lands.
the treaties did not keep the peace for long.
in 1858 the discovery of gold in what is now colorado brought thousands of miners to the west.
they soon clashed with the cheyenne and the arapaho.
in 1861 the u s government negotiated new treaties with plains indians.
these treaties created reservations areas of federal land set aside for native americans.
the government expected indians to stay on the reservations.
this made hunting the buffalo that plains indians relied on almost impossible.
in the northern plains southwest and far west native americans resisted being moved to and confined on reservations.
the u s government sent troops including african american cavalry called buffalo soldiers by the indians to force the indians to leave.
battles between u s troops and native americans occurred throughout the great plains.
brutal attacks against each side occurred sometimes including attacks on civilians women and children.
571e chapter 4 1 mdep ncj n e i if you were there you have grown up on a farm in south carolina.
you know every inch of the woods and marshes around your home.
you are too young to join the continental army but you have heard stories about a brave group of soldiers who carry out quick raids on the british then disappear into the woods.
these fighters get no pay and live in constant danger.
would you consider joining the fighters.
1 patriot forces faced many problems in the war in the south.
2 the american patriots finally defeated the british at the battle of yorktown.
3 the british and the americans officially ended the war by signing the treaty of paris of 1783 building background as the war moved to the south american forces encountered new problems.
they suffered several major defeats.
but american resistance in the southern colonies was strong.
backwoods fighters confused and frustrated the british army.
the war spread to the southern colonies where the british were finally defeated.
war in the south the war across the ocean was not going the way the british government in london had planned.
the northern colonies with their ragged scrappy fighters proved to be tough to tame.
so the british switched strategies and set their sights on the south.
the british hoped to find support from the large loyalist populations living in georgia the carolinas and virginia.
as they moved across the south the british also planned to free enslaved africans and enlist them as british soldiers.
under the leadership of a new commander general henry clinton the strategy paid off for a while.
brutal fighting the southern war was particularly brutal.
much more than in the north this phase of the war pitted americans patriots versus loyalists against one another in direct combat.
the british also destroyed crops farm animals and other property as they marched through the south.
one british officer banastre tarleton sowed fear throughout the south by refusing to take prisoners and killing soldiers who tried to surrender.
key terms and people francis marion p 136 comte de rochambeau p 137 battle of yorktown p 137 treaty of paris of 1783 p 139 use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the major events that led to the british defeat.
ie american revolution 135 georgia the last colony to join the revolution was the first to fall to the british.
a force of 3 500 redcoats took savannah in 1778 and put in place a new government.
britain s next major target was charleston south carolina.
in early 1780 general clinton landed a force of 14 000 troops around the port city.
with a minimal cost of about 250 casualties the british scored one of their biggest victories of the war.
the patriots surrendered charleston in may handing over four ships and some 5 400 prisoners.
camden and king s mountain in august 1780 patriot forces led by horatio gates tried to drive the british out of camden south carolina.
the attack was poorly executed however.
gates had only half as many soldiers as he had planned for and most were tired and hungry.
in the heat of battle many panicked and ran.
the patriot attack quickly fell apart.
of some 4 000 american troops only about 700 escaped.
general nathanael greene arrived to reorganize the army.
as he rode through the southern countryside he was discouraged by the devastation.
he later wrote i have never witnessed such scenes.
american forces attacked loyalists at king s mountain in october 1780 scoring a major victory.
swamp fox francis marion leads his soldiers down a river in south carolina.
from a hideout on a river island marion led raids against british communication and supply lines.
which figure do you think is francis marion.
guerrilla warfare the southern patriots switched to swift hit and run attacks known as guerrilla warfare.
no patriot was better at this style of fighting than francis marion.
he organized marion s brigade a group of guerrilla soldiers.
marion s brigade used surprise attacks to disrupt british communication and supply lines.
despite their great efforts the british could not catch marion and his men.
one frustrated general claimed as for this old fox the devil himself could not catch him.
from that point on marion was known as the swamp fox.
reading check sequencing list the events of the war in the south in chronological order.
battle of yorktown in early 1781 the war was going badly for the patriots.
they were low on money to pay soldiers and buy supplies.
the help of their foreign allies had not brought the war to a quick end as they had hoped.
the british held most of the south plus philadelphia and new york city.
the patriots morale took another blow when benedict arnold one of america s most gifted officers turned traitor.
regrouped under nathanael greene the continental army began harassing british general charles cornwallis in the carolinas.
the patriot s system of spies kept washington and lafayette informed of british plans.
one african american spy a slave named james armistead posed as a runaway slave who wanted to help the british.
he moved easily in the camps of both cornwallis and arnold but sent reports of their plans back to lafayette.
hoping to stay in communication with the british naval fleet cornwallis moved his force of 7 200 men to yorktown virginia.
it was a fatal mistake.
1 r f r a history close up battle of yorktown a w c j w s j the british scuttled or purposely sank dozens of their ships.
this formed a barrier that kept the french ships from coming too close.
lx 2 x f f.
i v y v w v t j x ta.
j s x v x x w v american troop positions w french troop positions y v 5 j l f l1 q a a i hl i ii ii r ff wh x y s.
w o v x x general washington in new york saw a chance to trap cornwallis at yorktown.
he ordered lafayette to block cornwallis s escape by land.
then he combined his 2 500 troops with 4 000 french troops commanded by the comte de rochambeau raw shahn boh.
washington led the french american force on a swift march to virginia to cut off the other escape routes.
the patriots surrounded cornwallis with some 16 000 soldiers.
meanwhile a french naval fleet seized control of the chesapeake bay preventing british ships from rescuing cornwallis s stranded army.
the siege began.
for weeks the fight ing steadily wore down the british defenses.
in early october washington prepared for a major attack on the weakened british troops.
facing near certain defeat on october 19 1781 cornwallis sent a drummer and a soldier with a white flag of surrender to washington s camp.
the patriots took some 8 000 british prisoners the largest british army in america.
the battle of yorktown was the last major battle of the american revolution.
prime minister lord north received word of the yorktown surrender in november.
in shock he declared it is all over.
ak history video george washington yorktown 1.
reading check.
drawing conclusions why did the victory at yorktown end the fighting.
the american revolution 137 primary source pamphlet sentiments of an american woman the continental army received aid from female patriots led by esther deberdt reed and sarah franklin bache the daughter of benjamin franklin.
in 1780 these women organized a campaign that raised 300 000 for soldiers clothing.
the following pamphlet written by the campaign s leaders announced the campaign.
in it the authors used images of women helping with war efforts of the past to gain support for their cause.
on the commencement of actual war the women of america manifested a firm resolution to contribute to the deliverance of their country.
animated by the purest patriotism they are sensible of sorrow at this day in not offering more than barren wishes for the success of so glorious a revolution.
they aspire to render themselves more really useful and this sentiment is universal from the north to the south of the thirteen united states.
our ambition is kindled by the fame of those heroines of antiquity who have proved to the universe that if opinion and manners did not forbid us to march to glory by the same paths as the men we should at least equal and sometimes surpass them in our love for the public good.
i glory in all that which my sex has done great and commendable.
i call to mind with enthusiasm and with admiration all those acts of courage of constancy and patriotism which history has transmitted to us jj so many famous sieges where the women have been seen building new walls digging trenches with their feeble hands furnishing arms to their defenders they themselves darting the missile weapons of the enemy resigning the ornaments of their apparel and their fortune to fill the public treasury and to hasten the deliverance of their country burying themselves under its ruins throwing themselves into the flames rather than submit to the disgrace of humiliation before a proud enemy born for liberty disdaining to bear the irons of a tyrannic government we associate ourselves with those rulers who have extended the empire of liberty and contented to reign by sweetness and justice have broken the chains of slavery forged by tyrants i a female spy passes news to a colonial officer.
1 commencement start 2 manifested presented 3 render make 4 antiquity ancient times 5 commendable praiseworthy 6 disdaining refusing 7 tyrannic unjust 8 contented determined the women declare that they would fight if they were allowed.
the authors list ways in which women have helped fight wars in the past.
in this phrase the women link themselves to great women rulers of the past.
analysis skilli analyzing primary sources 1 what do the writers call to mind in asking women to join the patriots cause.
2 with whom do the writers associate themselves.
138 chapter 17 chapter to answer the question below.
9 which of the following would be the best web site to find information about life in the south before the civil war.
a a civil war historian s homepage b a collection of autobiographies written by slaves c a site with information about how to grow cotton d a collection of biographies of inventors using the internet 10 activity writing diary entries enslaved african americans faced harsh working and living conditions.
many tried to escape the slave system.
using the online book research the attempts by enslaved african americans to reach the north and the people who assisted them.
imagine you were trying to help slaves travel to freedom.
write four entries into a diary.
in each entry describe your experiences.
include thumbnail maps to trace their trip.
i 71 reviewing themes 11 society and culture how were the different social classes in the south affected by the cotton boom.
12 economics how did the cotton boom affect the economy of the south and the institution of slavery.
13 economics how did slavery affect the south.
social studies skills interpreting and creating graphs and charts use the social studies skills taught in this chapter 4 chapter 9 congress passed the missouri compromise in 1820 despite the success of the compromise there were still strong disagreements between the north and south over the expansion of slavery.
although people hoped that the compromise would end the debate the issue would continue to arise with each new application for statehood.
drawing conclusions why did henry clay propose the missouri compromise to resolve the issue of missouri statehood.
reading check the election of 1824 soon a presidential election also brought controversy.
andrew jackson won the most popular votes in 1824 although he did not win a majority.
however he did not have enough electoral votes to win office.
under the constitution the house of representatives had to choose the winner.
when the house chose john quincy adams as president jackson s supporters claimed that adams had made a corrupt bargain with speaker of the house henry clay in order to be named president.
these accusations grew after adams chose clay to be secretary of state.
the controversy weakened adams s support and encouraged more political action by jackson s supporters in the democratic party.
reading check focus on reading compare and contrast opinions about john quincy adams.
drawing inferences why did adams have weak support during his presidency.
i summary and preview strong nation i alistic feeling contributed to the develop ment of america s politics and economy.
in the next section you will read about the development of a new national culture.
section 2 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a define what was the era of good feelings.
b describe what positions did henry clay and daniel webster take in the congressional debates on the american system.
c explain how did the war of 1812 affect the u s economy.
d analyze explain the issues behind the decisions and the importance of the supreme court cases mcculloch v maryland and gibbons v ogden.
how did they affect life in the united states.
e predict how would transportation improvements eventually aid the growth and stability of the u s economy.
2 a recall what role did henry clay play in the debate over missouri s statehood.
b explain what problem did missouri s request for statehood cause.
c elaborate was the missouri compromise a good solution to the debate between free states and slave states.
explain your answer.
3 a identify who were the candidates in the presidential election of 1824.
how was the winner determined.
b draw conclusions why did john quincy adams lose popular support following the election of 1824.
critical thinking 4 evaluating review your notes on nationalism during the era of good feelings.
then copy the following graphic organizer and use it to identify how threats to nationalism were resolved by the missouri compromise.
sectional z differences missouri compromise outcome 1.
3 sq n writing j writesmart 5 judging self esteem another way you can tell about people s characters is by how they view themselves.
are they self confident.
do they make healthy choices.
think of the united states as a person and jot down notes about the view the united states had of itself.
is the new nation pleased with itself.
does it feel confident or confused.
a new national identity 305b history and geography in 1825 new york opened the erie canal which connected buffalo on lake erie to albany on the hudson river.
with the new canal boats and barges could travel from new york harbor in the east to the great lakes region in the west.
trade boomed new cities formed and settlers moved farther west as the erie canal helped open up the midwest region to farming and settlement.
363 miles erie canal hudsj river jsuubany r w wu it buffalo 370 feet from this elevation profile you can tell that the canal rises almost 600 feet as it winds its way westward from albany to buffalo.
barges move along a steep route through a series of locks along the canal.
the diagram below shows you how locks work.
albany tow path x i lock main gate o the barge enters the lock through the main gate.
water flows into the lock through the sluice gate to raise the boat to the next level.
the barge leaves the lock as mules help pull it across the water.
06 chapter 9 lake superior albany later canals extended west into ohio and indiana.
chicago sb agricultural pr0 trade through new york harbor boomed as goods flowed along the erie canal to overseas markets and back to settlers and cities in the west.
jsiii 3 effects of the canal thanks to the canal the cost of shipping dropped.
lower costs led to increases in shipping and in city populations.
cost of shipping 1 population 1825 10 per ton by canal year atlantic ocean w geography skills interpreting maps 1 region how did the erie canal affect western lands.
2 location what effect do you think the erie canal had on new york city.
a new national identity 307 wuvwvyw 1 american writers created a new style of literature.
2 a new style of art showcased the beauty of america and its people.
3 american ideals influenced other aspects of culture including religion and music.
4 architecture and education were affected by cultural ideals.
if you were there you live in philadelphia in 1830 though you ve lived in the city all your life you dream about the west and the frontier.
now you ve discovered a wonderful writer whose stories tell about frontier life and events.
you can t wait to read his next exciting adventure.
you think that perhaps someday you could be a frontier hero too.
why would the frontier seem so exciting.
as the united states grew developments in many cultural areas contributed to the creation of a new american identity.
i building background until the early 1800s americans took most of their cultural ideas from great britain and europe.
but as w american politics and the economy developed so too did a new national culture.
writers and artists were inspired by american history and the american landscape.
american writers key terms and people washington irving p 309 james fenimore cooper p 309 hudson river school p 310 thomas cole p 310 george caleb bingham p 310 i taking notes i use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the new developments in american culture in the 1820s and 1830s.
like many people the world over americans expressed their thoughts and feelings in literature and art and sought spiritual comfort in religion and music.
developments in education and architecture also reflected the growing national identity.
the arts became a way to show the similarities among americans as well as the differences between american and european life.
to do this writers and artists used themes and images that were familiar to most americans.
were laws that allowed racial segregation in public places.
2 the radical republicans were led by a member of congress from pennsylvania.
3 the period from 1865 to 1877 that focused on reuniting the nation is known as.
4 after opposing congress andrew johnson became the first president to face proceedings.
5 the amendment made slavery in the united states illegal.
6 many western states established colleges after gave them land to self for the purpose 7 in 1887 the changed the way land was allotted on reservations.
comprehension and critical thinking section 1 pages 552 557 8 a describe how did the lives of african ameri cans change after the civil war.
b explain why was lincoln s assassination significant for reconstruction.
c compare and contrast how was johnson s reconstruction plan similar to and different from lincoln s ten percent plan.
d evaluate which of the three reconstruction plans that were originally proposed do you think would have been the most successful.
section 2 pages 558 563 9 a identify who were the radical republicans and how did they change reconstruction.
b analyze how did the debate over the fourteenth amendment affect the election of 1866.
reconstruction 57.
c elaborate do you think the house of representatives was right to impeach president andrew johnson.
section 3 pages 564 571a 10 a describe what economic problems did the south face during and after reconstruction.
what reforms did reconstruction governments in the south support.
b draw conclusions in what ways did southern governments attempt to reverse the accomplishments of reconstruction.
c evaluate do you think the south was successful or unsuccessful in its rebuilding efforts.
explain your answer.
section 4 pages s71b 571f 11 a identify what acts did congress pass to encourage settlement in the west.
what were their effects.
b explain how did the dawes act change life on reservations.
c generalize how did the transcontinental railroad affect the growth and development of the united states.
reviewing themes 12 politics explain the political struggles that took place during reconstruction.
13 society and culture what were the social problems during reconstruction.
describe how the economic political and social problems of reconstruction affected different groups including southern african americans and whites northerners and women.
using the internet 14 activity drawing conclusions a challenge for anyone trying to understand reconstruction is drawing conclusions from primary and secondary sources from the time period.
through your online textbook rate the credibility of the sources provided.
make sure you explain whether the source is a primary or secondary source whether you think the source is credible or not and your reasons.
reading skills tut predicting use the reading skills taught in this.

