CHAPTER 16: America in the New Millennium 365
I.
Under President Obama’s leadership, Congress passed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, pumping more federal money into the economy. Obama also gave financial relief to the leading automobile manufacturers to prevent them from going bankrupt. J.
President Obama pushed health care reform and the reform of banks and credit card lenders through Congress. He also appointed Sonia Sotomayor as the first Hispanic to the U.S. Supreme Court. K.
President Obama began to withdraw forces from Iraq and added troops to the war in Afghanistan. In 2011, U.S. forces apprehended and killed Osama bin Laden, who had been found hiding in Pakistan. In Spring 2011, local populations in Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya overthrew their dictators. President Obama encouraged local Arab leaders not to use force against the demonstrators. L.
Scientific discoveries and technological innovations drive the American economy today. The free enterprise system, with its profit motive and system of copyrights and patents, helps drive innovation forward. Often, scientists and engineers make innovations to address specific needs. M.
The United States is now part of a global economy. The use of energy and protection of the environment are important aspects of this economy. N.
American popular culture, spread by music, film, television, and the Internet — now has global reach. These media depict the American culture and way of life to other nations around the world. O.
Demography is the study of population. Since World War II, the size of the U.S. population has more than doubled. During this period, the center of the nation’s population has shifted away from the Northeast towards the Sun Belt. Much of the recent population growth in the United States has been due to both legal and illegal immigration. ESSOmiAL
[al Questions
C ') In what way were both 2000 and 2008 unique Presidential election years?
O'
How did Americans react to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001? How did Presidents Bush and Obama respond to the 2008-2009 financial crisis? What impact has American popular culture had on rest of the world?
CHAPTER 16: America in the New Millennium 367
A
Florida official closely examines a ballot for accuracy. Gore appealed to the Florida Supreme Court, which demanded a statewide recount. Bush appealed this decision to the U.S. Supreme Court. The Court ruled, by a narrow 5 to 4 vote, to order an end to the recount. The Florida Supreme Court had instructed those making the recount to evaluate the voter’s intent in cases where the ballot was not correctly punched in. The U.S. Supreme Court majority objected to this, saying there were no consistent standards for reviewing the ballots. Critics felt that the U.S. Supreme Court had voted along partylines — 5 conservative Justices vs. 4 liberal ones. Some thought the Court, with a majority of Justices appointed
by Presidents Nixon, Ford, Reagan and Bush, was acting against the will of the people, as expressed in the popular vote, to put a minority candidate whom they favored into office.
ACTING AS AN AMATEUR. HISTORIAN
With the election results and balloting practices being debated in the courts, the nation faced a constitutional crisis. The U.S. Supreme Court said the following in delivering its majority decision:
“None are more conscious of the vital limits on judicial authority
than are the members of this Court, and none stand more in admiration of the Constitution’s design to leave the selection of the President to the people, through their legislatures, and to the political sphere. When contending parties invoke the process of the courts, however, it becomes our unsought responsibility to resolve the federal and constitutional issues the judicial system has been forced to confront. The judgment of the Supreme Court of Florida is reversed.”
Do you think the U.S. Supreme Court was correct to halt the recount and to declare Bush as the winner, even though Gore had won the popular vote? Explain your answer.
The Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Board of Education was unanimous. In Bush v. Gore, the vote was 5 to 4. What did this show?
DOMESTIC POLICY UNDER BUSH
As President, George W. Bush pushed through a tax cut in an attempt to revitalize the economy. The Federal Reserve Board also dropped interest rates to their lowest levels in decades. The tax cuts revived the economy, but also brought a return to high federal budget deficits. The cuts also mainly favored the wealthy. Bush claimed that the cuts were needed to get the economy growing again.
As Governor of Texas, Bush had been active in promoting educational reform. As President, he introduced the No Child Left Behind Act, requiring states to test all students in English and mathematics each year from the third to the eighth grade.
CHAPTER 16: America in the New Millennium 369
President Bush also took steps to curb terrorism at home. A new federal agency, the Transportation Security Agency (TSA), took over security at U.S. airports, and all passengers and luggage were subjected to a thorough screening.
In 2003, President Bush created a new Cabinet post, the Department of Homeland Security. Its mission was to keep the United States secure from all threats. Its activities range from nuclear detection and intelligence coordination to the protection of high-level government officials.
Bush also sponsored the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001, which greatly expanded the government’s law enforcement powers. The September 11th terrorists had been organized into four teams. Some had trained as pilots in America. They had cell phones and computers to communicate, and bank accounts funded by international terrorist groups. The new act allowed law enforcement officials and intelligence agencies the power to conduct sweeping searches and surveillance, detain immigrants and monitor bank accounts. President Bush authorized the National Security Agency (NSA) to wiretap suspected callers without first obtaining a warrant. Some felt that the USA PATRIOT Act gave the executive branch too much power, threatening individual liberties. Its “warrantless” wiretaps were later held to be unconstitutional.
President Bush signs the USA PATRIOT Act into law.
President Bush also imprisoned suspected terrorists, captured in Afghanistan at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba, where the rights required by the U.S. Constitution did not have to be given to the accused. Prisoners who went on a hunger strike were force-fed. The Department of Justice believed that limited torture techniques, such as “water-boarding” — pouring water on the face of a prisoner to create the sensation of drowning — were justified to obtain information from the suspects about future attacks, which might save thousands of
lives. Critics felt torture is rarely successful or necessary for obtaining accurate information. They claimed prisoners were treated inhumanely, even though some of them might be innocent. They wished to see Guantamamo Bay closed.
Suspects at Guantanamo Bay.
Which of these post-9/11 steps, in your opinion, were necessary and which were unnecessary? Support your answer with examples and logical reasoning.
Name ____________________________________
CHAPTER 16: America in the New Millennium 371
President Bush next turned his attention to Iraq. Bush and his top advisors feared that Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein might provide biological, chemical, or even nuclear weapons to Islamic terrorists like Osama bin Laden.
A FAILED ULTIMATUM LEADS TO AN INVASION
Hussein had used chemical weapons against the Kurds in the 1980s. Although Hussein denied that he possessed “weapons of mass destruction” (WMDs), he at first refused to allow U.N. inspectors to search in Iraq. Later,
U.N. inspectors found no WMDs, but some questioned whether their inspection was thorough enough. The United States, Britain, and Spain warned Iraq to surrender its WMDs or face invasion. France, Germany, and Russia favored a more cautious approach, calling for
additional inspections. American leaders feared Hussein would use any delay to hide his weapons. In March 2003, President Bush gave Hussein 48 hours to leave Iraq or face invasion. When Hussein rejected the ultimatum, coalition forces took military action.
Some of the 5,000 Kurdish victims killed by chemical gas attacks in Iraq in 1988.
ACTING- AS AN AMATEUR HISTORIAN
In March 2003, President Bush informed Americans that the United States and several of its allies were attacking Iraq:
“Our nation enters this conflict reluctantly. The United States and our allies will not live at the mercy of an outlaw regime that
threatens the peace with weapons of mass murder. We will meet that threat now, with our [military], so that we do not have to meet it later with armies of fire fighters and police on the streets of our cities. Now that conflict has come, the only way to limit its duration is to apply decisive force. I assure you, this will not be a campaign of half measures. We will accept no outcome but victory.”
In this speech, President Bush gave Americans his reasoning for the war in Iraq. Explain his justification in your own words.
President Bush said the United States was going to go to war sooner rather than later so that Americans would not face “armies of firefighters and police on the streets of our cities.” Compare this viewpoint with the earlier Domino Theory.
The United States began its campaign with a series of air strikes. In early April, U.S. forces entered Baghdad. Hussein’s dictatorship quickly collapsed. Later, Hussein himself was captured, tried for crimes against Iraqi citizens during his long reign, and executed by Iraqis in 2006.
Name______________________________________________________
CHAPTER 16: America in the New Millennium 373
Hurricane Katrina was also the costliest hurricane on record. Much of the damage occurred when the levees in New Orleans failed to hold back the storm water. More than 1,800 people lost their lives in the flooding, making Katrina one the deadliest natural disasters in American history. It caused devastation as far as 100 miles from the storm’s center. Rescue efforts were so delayed that many citizens found themselves stranded for days on rooftops and in attics. Almost 20,000 people were trapped in New Orleans’ Superdome, crammed together In sweltering heat and unsanitary conditions.
Immediately following Hurricane Katrina, ABC television interviewed people in New Orleans affected by the storm. They asked: “Do you harbor any anger toward President Bush because of the slow federal response?” Some Americans blamed the Bush Administration for its slow reaction. Many respondents also claimed the City of New Orleans and Louisiana state government should have been more active, even before the federal government was called in. Who do you think was to blame for the loss of lives? Explain your answer. You may wish to conduct research on the Internet for more information.
The end of Bush’s second term coincided with the worst financial crisis in the United States since the Great Depression. For decades, the federal government and Federal Reserve had followed policies to reduce swings in the economy. These efforts, combined with the growth of globalization, now contributed to an unexpected collapse.
ROOTS OF THE FINANCIAL CRISIS
When the stock market dropped sharply back in 2000, the Federal Reserve lowered interest rates to stimulate the economy. Many took advantage of these lower interest rates to buy new homes. Some banks lent money to borrowers who could not really afford their homes. Increasing homeowner-ship caused house prices to rise, leading to speculation in housing. Later, these mortgages were bundled with other Investments and sold to other banks or investors.
The housing crisis threatened the economy.
By 2007, overbuilding led to falling house prices. Some people had special mortgages that adjusted to higher interest rates. When interest rates began to rise, some homeowners found they could not afford their mortgages. This led to a rising number of home foreclosures (when a homeowner cannot pay the mortgage, and the bank takes back the house to sell it}. Meanwhile, the federal government gave rebates to taxpayers and businesses in February 2008 to stimulate the economy.
CHAPTER 16: America in the New Millennium 375
His election was also significant for a number of other reasons. Obama campaigned on a promise of change that powered him through the longest, most costly Presidential campaign in U.S. history. His election was remarkable for his rapid rise in American politics from a position of obscurity just a few years before. Obama used the Internet to gather supporters and to raise campaign contributions. With a stunning grassroots movement, he won the Presidency.
Obama is sworn in as the first African-American President.
ACTING AS AN AMATEUR. HISTORIAN
In January 2009 President Obama delivered this Inaugural Address to the nation:
“For everywhere we look, there is work to be done. The state of our economy calls for action, bold and swift. And we will act, not only to create new jobs, but to lay a new foundation for growth. We will build the roads and bridges, the electric grids and digital lines that feed our commerce and bind us together. We’ll restore science to its rightful place, and wield technology’s wonders to raise health care’s quality and lower its cost. We will harness the sun and the winds and the soil to fuel our cars and run our factories. And we will transform our schools and colleges and universities to meet the demands of a new age. All this we can do. All this we will do.”
Based on his Inaugural Address, how did President Obama intend to deal with some of the nation’s economic difficulties? Explain your answer.
OBAMA RESPONDS TO THE CRISIS
President Obama sought to prevent a depression like the 1930s. His objective was to simulate the economy by creating jobs, rebuilding roads, schools, bridges and tunnels. Obama also proposed important changes to the nation’s health care system and system of education.
In April 2009, Obama and Congressional leaders agreed to the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, to jumpstart the American economy. More than $700 billion was to be spent by the federal government in a bailout package designed to create new jobs, save existing ones, spur economic activity, and invest in long-term infrastructure development. Part of the money would be spent directly by the federal government. Other funds were to be supplied to state governments.
The Obama Administration further responded to the financial crisis by passing legislation to regulate credit cards, lending and other banking practices. He also took steps to save the U.S. auto industry. After much controversy, a health care reform act was passed, which sought to make health care available to more Americans.
Name________________________________________
CHAPTER 16: America in the New Millennium 377
LEARNING WITH GRAPHIC ORGANIZERS
Complete the graphic organizer below describing some of the developments of the George W. Bush and Obama Presidencies.
Name
CHAPTER 16: America in the New Millennium 379
FREE ENTERPRISE AND TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION
The free enterprise system allows people to use their own economic resources to produce goods and services for sale to others. Copyright and patent laws give writers and inventors exclusive rights to their own creations and inventions. In a free enterprise system, scientists, inventors, and entrepreneurs have a powerful incentive to pay attention to the needs of consumers. Since they can profit by meeting consumer needs, they continually strive to improve established products and to create new ones. Both the producers and the consumers benefit.
By allowing people to pursue their own interests, free enterprise can drive technological innovation
and achieve extraordinary results. Running shoes, personal computers, gel toothpaste, cellular phones, BlackBerrys, iPhones, and global positioning system products are just some of the products created as a result of innovation by our free enterprise system.
The free enterprise system drives the creation of new businesses.
INNOVATIONS ADDRESSING SPECIFIC NEEDS
Attempts to address specific needs often lead to scientific discoveries and technological innovation. For example, in the 1950s, Dr. Jonas Salk specifically developed a vaccine to cure polio. In the 1980s, a new disease appeared known as AIDS. Those who contracted the disease had no immunity to other illnesses. Scientists set about discovering what caused AIDS and finding a cure. They discovered it was caused by the HIV virus, which attacks the human immune system. The virus can be transmitted during sexual contact or blood transfusions. Scientists were able to develop a number of specific drugs that slow down the reproduction of the HIV virus and help restore the immune system. Scientists are now attempting to find a vaccine to prevent AIDS.
Scientists have also developed new drugs to reduce the levels of cholesterol, lowering the risk of heart attacks, and they are working on a cure for Alzheimer’s, a disease that attacks an older person’s memory and mental abilities. Scientists have also developed more insect-resistant foods with greater nutritional value, making it possible to support the world’s growing population.
Both the U.S. military and space program have used teams of scientists and engineers to design solutions to specific problems. These solutions often have more general applications: the jet engine, for example, is now used by commercial airlines to power their airplanes, and the Internet, developed for scientists, is now used to communicate by everyone.
THE COMPUTER REVOLUTION
Much of the increased productivity of the American economy in the last few decades has been due to advances in information technology (IT). Computers are machines that use a binary system to store and manipulate information.
APPLYING WH
CHAPTER 16: America in the New Millennium 381
MED
lilOIBi

ivu nnvsc
Choose one of the fields discussed and research information about it from the Internet or library. Then make an oral presentation summarizing your findings.
THE GLOBAL ECONOMY
Multinationals like McDonald’s operate in every corner of the world.
In the 1950s, American manufacturers mainly sold to consumers in the U.S. market. Today, our economy is integrated into the global economy. A multinational corporation is a corporation that has set up local companies, or subsidiaries, in several countries. Today, multinationals make and sell their products in every comer of the world. At the start of the twenty-first century, multinationals controlled more than half of the industrial assets of the United States and employed millions of workers
For example, McDonalds is a franchise with over 30,000 restaurants in 113 countries.
Starbucks sells coffee in 40 overseas markets, operating 12,000 stores. Nike has stores on six continents. Wal-Mart has 2,700 global retail units employing 500,000. Exxon-Mobil and Chevron have subsidiaries in several countries.
Globalization. The emergence of multinational corporations has contributed to globalization. This has had a serious impact on government policies. For example, when a government bans its factories from dumping toxic waste into rivers and harming the environment,
a national company must comply by changing its procedures. However, a multinational company can decide to simply move its production abroad to a more friendly country rather than comply. Multinationals can move their production to countries where labor is less expensive, environmental regulations are more lax, and taxes are lower or non-existent. This freedom of movement penalizes those governments that seek to maintain higher standards of social welfare, environmental regulation or tax policies. Competition among multinational corporations is now intensifying. For example, American automobile manufacturers now face stiff competition from multinational corporations originating in Japan, Germany, Britain, and Korea.
ENERGY
Population growth and rising living standards have led to a greater demand for energy, at home and abroad. It was once thought that nuclear power plants might meet most of our energy needs without pollution. The Three Mile Island accident in 1979 and the earthquake and tsunami in Japan in 2011 have raised fears that nuclear power might impose more dangers than first thought.
PROJECT WITHOUT PERMISSION
CHAPTER 16: America in the New Millennium 383
Water Pollution. As cities have become more crowded, their ability to handle increased sewage and waste is strained. This can lead to the dumping of raw sewage into surrounding waters, contaminating drinking water, killing wildlife, and threatening the health of everyone in society.
THE ROLE OF THE GOVERNMENT
There is a growing belief among Americans that protection of the environment is a governmental responsibility. This is based on the realization that we all need
to breathe clean air and drink safe water. Only the government is capable of managing these resources and
preventing pollution since it has the ability to punish violators. Government decisions, however, are often linked to the costs involved: how much are Americans willing to sacrifice to protect their environment? This question makes protection of the environment especially challenging.
Creation of the Environmental Protection Agency and the passage of the Endangered Species Act gave the federal government special powers for protecting the environment. States also have their own laws and agencies for environmental protection. Both the federal and state governments also directly own some forest, desert, and mountain areas. Governments are responsible for meeting the costs of floods, droughts, and other environmental disasters. Governments undertake the construction of dams, roads, bridges. Both the federal and state governments have their own programs related to environmental protection, environmental awareness, and pollution control. Lastly, private groups and voluntary organizations play an increasing role in promoting public awareness and protecting the environment, such as the Sierra Club, founded in California by conservationist John Muir in 1892.
ACTING- AS AN AMATEUR HISTORIAN_________________________
Contact a federal, state, or local agency that is engaged in environmental protection and arrange for a speaker to visit your class.
Have a debate in your class over this issue: Does the environment need greater protection or is it already overprotected with too many regulations?
■■■■■■
_____
AMI
Since World War II, American popular culture has exercised a great Influence both on the lives of Americans and on people In the rest of the world.
■111!
CHAPTER 16: America in the New Millennium 385
First, the size of the total U.S. population has more than doubled since the end of World War II:
Year	Population	Year	Population
1950	151,325,798	1990	248,709,873
1960	179,323,175	2000	281,421,906
1970	203,211,926	2010	308,745,538
1980	226,545,805	2020	—
In fact, the United States is the third largest nation in terms of population, after China and India.
Secondly, the center of population of the United States has shifted away from the Northeast and Midwest and towards the Sun Belt. The map below shows an ever westward shift of the population. California had 10.5 million in 1950 and 37 million in 2010. Texas’ population grew from 7.7 million in 1950 to 25 million in 2010, while Florida had only 2.8 million people in 1950, it has grown to 18.8 million today.
MEAN CENTER OF POPULATION FOR
Thirdly, much of the recent population growth of the United States has been due to immigration. About 13% of the population living in the United States today are immigrants. The United States has both legal immigrants — those who apply for and receive visas for permanent residence, known as green cards — and millions of illegal immigrants. Illegal immigrants are people who cross America’s borders with Mexico or Canada, or who land on American shores, without officially entering the country. Some estimate there are as many as 15 million illegal aliens now living in the United States. These numbers are not part of the official population count of the United States.
Part of the border fence built to prevent illegal aliens from entering the United States.
Illegal immigrants often work for low wages that others might be unwilling to accept. Their jobs frequently involves agriculture, construction, landscape maintenance or domestic services.
