CHAPTER 5: European Exploration and Colonization 43
European merchants and rulers were anxious to find a sea route to reach China and the Spice Islands of the East Indies. This would allow them to ship these luxury goods more easily back to Europe.
Advances in Technology. Europeans had benefited from contacts through trade with China, which had invented gunpowder and the magnetic compass. From Arabia, Europeans learned how to make better sails. Europeans also developed the moveable rudder, so they could steer larger ships more easily. These technological improvements in navigation made it possible for Europeans to sail farther than ever before. European sailors began to use the sun’s angle to determine their location, allowing them to judge distances.
These innovations allowed them to sail into the open ocean instead of hugging the coastline.
Exploration was fanned by the Renaissance spirit of inquiry and a desire to find an all-water
route to the East. In Portugal, Prince Henry the Navigator (1394-1460) sponsored the exploration of the Atlantic coast of Africa by Portuguese sailors. He developed a new, lighter ship better suited for distant oceanic exploration. Many historians believe Prince Henry played a key role in encouraging European exploration and maritime trade with other continents.
Emergence of Powerful European Rulers. In the early fifteenth century, the sea-faring countries of Europe hoped to extend their influence through exploration. Strong rulers had established power over unruly nobles. These rulers built large armies and amassed great wealth by collecting taxes.
Desire for Profits. Italian city-states had once profited by shipping goods across the Mediterranean, but routes to Asia were cut-off by the Turkish capture of Constantinople in 1453. The capitalist economy was just emerging. People were seeing new wealth from investment and trade. Some hoped to increase their profits through exploration.
Religious Enthusiasm. European missionaries, especially from Spain and Portugal, sought to spread the Christian religion. Christian missionaries believed they not only had a superior religion, but also a superior culture.
What impact did Marco Polo’s travels have on European exploration?
-4t What economic, social, and political factors motivated Europeans to explore oceans?
Name
CHAPTER 5: European Exploration and Colonization
45
APPLYING WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNED
Make your own drawing of one of the inventions that aided navigation.
Use the Internet to find and read excerpts from the journal of Columbus.
Make a chart of the positive and negative effects of the Columbian Exchange for both Native American Indians and Europeans.
EUROPEAN COLONIAL EMPIRES
Spanish conquistadors used horses and superior weaponry to defeat the Aztecs and Incas.
By 1494, news of the “New World” was in print throughout Europe. This greatly stimulated the appetite of European monarchs for overseas exploration. The establishment of New Spain in the Caribbean, Mexico, Florida and South America further heightened the interest of Spain’s chief rivals: France, Holland, and England. The rulers of these nations sent their own explorers to claim lands in the Americas. Where each nation explored and settled was affected by many factors, including ocean currents, weather patterns, and where rival powers had claims.
NEW SPAIN
Spanish conquistadors {conquerors) like Hernando Cortes and Francisco Pizarro used horses and superior weapons, such as cannons and crossbows, to conquer the powerful Aztecs of Mexico and the Incas of Peru.
Cortes allied with other Native American peoples, who had been conquered by the Aztecs, to achieve his victory. In Peru, the Incas had been weakened by civil war shortly before the arrival of Pizarro.
The Spanish conquerors murdered the ruling classes of Mexico and Peru, and destroyed their temples and palaces. New Spain was ruled by the viceroys of the king. The Spanish monarchy became enriched by shipments of gold and silver. One fifth of all the gold and silver from the New World went to the king. When the Spanish first arrived in the New World, they brought with them a set of customs and traditions from Spain.
Spaniards took large tracts of land for mining, ranching, and farming, known as encomiendas. Although the encomienda system was introduced with the idea of caring and providing for Native Americans, it quickly became a highly abusive and destructive system.
Name
CHAPTER 5: European Exploration and Colonization
47
At first, New Netherland was a company owned and operated business, run by the Dutch West India Company. The intent of the company directors was to make a profit for the investors in the company. Dutch families settled in present-day Albany and New York City (then known as New Amsterdam). New Netherland became active in trading for furs. Beaver skins and other furs were highly valued by Europeans. The settlement of New Amsterdam, with its fine natural harbor, became a leading center for trade.
The Dutch welcomed people from other countries. They also practiced religious toleration. Walking around New Amsterdam in the 1660s, a visitor might have seen Irish, British, German or French people talking in the streets. Others there might be Native Americans or Africans. The Dutch West India Company introduced enslaved persons to the colony in 1625. Most Africans in New Netherland had been brought from Africa or the West Indies as enslaved persons.
The earliest known view of New Amsterdam (1651).
Which European countries established colonies, and where did they settle?
What role did the Dutch West India Company play in creating colonial settlements?


The colonization of America shifted wealth and power away from the Mediterranean region to the countries of Western Europe. Spain was greatly enriched by American gold and silver. Protestant England became engaged in a series of wars against Catholic Spain. England’s rulers desired to stake a claim for lands and riches in the New World, so that they could match Spain’s wealth. England’s colonies were established for political, economic, religious, and social reasons.
CHAPTER 5: European Exploration and Colonization
49
ACTING AS AN AMATEUR HISTORIAN
Captain John Smith recorded what he later learned in his history of the colony — The Generali Historie of Virginia, published in 1624.
“These miserable and poor creatures were [kept alive] for the most part by roots, herbs, acorns, walnuts, berries, and fish, even the skins of horses. So great was our famine, that when an Indian was killed, and buried, the poor dug him up and [ate] him, and others boiled and stewed with roots and herbs: One amongst us killed his wife, powdered her, and ate part of her before it was known, for which he was executed.”
What hardships did the first settlers at Jamestown face?
How did some of the Jamestown colonists survive the “Starving Time”?
Despite these initial setbacks, the colony at Jamestown became profitable by growing tobacco for sale in Europe. By 1619, Jamestown was exporting tons of tobacco to England for the new fashion of smoking. Jamestown’s new tobacco economy created a labor shortage. The need for laborers was so great that early settlers attempted to enslave the area’s Native American Indians. However, these Indians were unwilling to be used as forced laborers and often escaped into the surrounding forests. The first enslaved people from Africa arrived in the colony in 1619, as well as the first women. As the success of tobacco planting spread, using African slaves would grow to become the foundation of the Southern agrarian economy.
Later, the area of colonial settlement spread from Jamestown to other parts of Virginia. The capital of the colony was moved to Williamsburg. Virginia eventually had both rich plantation owners and smaller farmers, and grew to become one of the wealthiest colonies.
In a country without roads, rivers played an important role. The first colonists depended on rivers to ship crops from the farm to the marketplace. The marshy coastal plain along the Chesapeake Bay contained many navigable streams. Land-owners constructed their buildings along these streams, while ocean-going ships sailed up these streams for many miles, stopping to load goods at each plantation. These geographic conditions encouraged the development of independent farms and plantations in Virginia and Maryland. At the same time, land away from the rivers remained largely unsettled. These colonies developed few Large towns, since buying
and selling often took place at a farmer's dock.
..................................,,,, '
Name
CHAPTER 5: European Exploration and Colonization
Unlike the adventurers at Jamestown, the Pilgrims and Puritans sailed to the “New World” as entire families, along with their wives and children. Eventually, their two settlements merged into the single colony of Massachusetts. Early Puritans and Pilgrims lived simple, religious lives. Their clothing was usually black or gray. They believed that hard work was the key to getting into Heaven. Sundays and holidays were strictly observed. Religious leaders played an important role in governing the colony.
51
Building a settlement in Massachusetts.
Other English colonies were founded for a variety of reasons:
Rhode Island. The Puritans did not ordinarily permit others to practice their religion freely in Massachusetts. In 1636, Roger Williams therefore left Massachusetts to start his own new colony at Rhode Island, based on principles of religious toleration.
Among those who also fled to Rhode Island was Anne Hutchinson.
While living in Massachusetts, she had often met with friends after church and held religious discussions. She expressed her belief that God revealed himself to individuals without the aid of clergy. Puritan leaders saw these meetings as acts against God, since they believed that God could only be revealed to ministers. Anne Hutchinson was put on trial, where she claimed God had spoken to her directly. She was found guilty of lying. In 1637, she was banished from Massachusetts. Soon after, she joined Williams and other dissenters in Rhode Island.
Connecticut and New Hampshire. Other Massachusetts settlers formed new colonies in Connecticut and New Hampshire. Set-
tlers in Connecticut, led by Thomas Hooker (1586-1647), established self-government in the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut (1639). In addition, the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut provided a basis for future governing in the colony.
New York. At one time, New Netherland separated English colonies to the north and south of it. England, at war with Holland in Europe, sent four ships into the harbor of New Amsterdam in 1664. Dutch settlers, fearing British cannons, refused to fight. Governor Peter Stuyvesant surrendered the colony. Under British control, New Netherland was renamed New York. Fort Orange became Albany, and New Amsterdam became New York City.
Name
53
CHAPTER 5: European Exploration and Colonization
Can you classify the thirteen colonies based on why they were established or seized by the British? The first row has been filled in for you. Complete the others.
Reasons		Examples
Political	Concerns government, citizens7 rights and responsibilities.	Virginia, New York, Delaware, New Jersey
Economic	Concerns money and wealth.	
Religious	Deals with beliefs and practices in the worship of God.	
Social	Involves how people organize themselves or live together.	
ACTING AS AN AMATEUR
HISTORIAN____________________________t Maps are important tools for both geographers and historians.
Sketching your own map of an area can help you better grasp where certain places are located. A “sketch map” is not visually identical to the map being sketched. Rather a “sketch map” focuses on the relationships between and among places. It helps you to better understand the various spatial relationships.
Make your own “sketch map” of early colonial America showing the location of these places: Jamestown, Williamsburg, Plymouth, Boston, Baltimore, Philadelphia, New York City, Albany, and Charleston. Use the Internet to find pictures of these cities during colonial times to decorate the outside borders of your map. What do all of these locations have in common?
CHAPTER 5: European Exploration and Colonization
55
The colonists who established the first English colonies braved the dangers of crossing the Atlantic Ocean. The ships they came on were small and crowded. Their destination was a strange and unfamiliar land with primitive living conditions. Why did they come?
POLITICAL REASONS: ENCOURAGEMENT FROM RULERS
British monarchs encouraged the development of colonies as new sources of wealth and power. They granted charters to groups of businessmen, like the Virginia Company, who offered to help colonists settle in the “New World.”
ECONOMIC REASONS: HUNGER FOR GOLD AND SILVER
Based on the success of Spain, the first colonists believed that gold and silver existed in great abundance in the Americas. These early adventurers came to the Americas in search of precious metals.
The availability of land was a major attraction drawing settlers to Colonial America.
ECONOMIC REASONS: LAND HUNGER
Colonial settlements presented new business opportunities for merchants. The “Proprietors” who owned the Carolinas encouraged people to come. Many colonists came to obtain their own land. Most people in Britain, Ireland, and the rest of Europe were peasants or tenant farmers occupying small, over-worked lands and paying high rents. In America, free land still
seemed plentiful. The settlers did not recognize the rights of Native American Indians or understand their use of the land. Many of the first settlers were given free land by the colony or were able to purchase land cheaply.
Later many colonists came as “indentured servants.” A colonial landowner paid for an indentured servant’s passage across the Atlantic, and the indentured servant then promised to work on the landowner’s plantation or farm, usually for a period of seven years. Once the debt was paid off, indentured servants obtained freedom and began saving to buy their own land.
Name
CHAPTER 5: European Exploration and Colonization
57
CHAPTER 5 CONCEPT MAP
NEW FOODS TO BOTH CULRJRES
SMALLPOX ....V~
MEASLES
NEW DISEASES INTRODUCED TO NATIVE POPULATIONS
POLITICAL, SOCIAL, ECONOMIC REASONS
WHY COLONISTS CAME
MAYFLOWER
COMPACT
GROWTH OF (
REPRESENTATIVE -GOVERNMENT
k FUNDAMENTAL ORDERS OF CT
Virg
X
	"COLUMBIAN	THIRTEEN		,	1	V
	EXCHANGE"	;	ENGLISH	WHY COLONIES	_J ECONOMIC
GUNPOWDER C J \ COLONIES WERE ESIABL1SHED ~~C
kEASUNS J 				
COMPASS RUDDER
	\			
TECHNICAL ADVANCES
RELIGIOUS
ZEAL
EUROPEAN EXPLORATION AND COLONIZATION
RELIGIOUS 'I RELIGIOUS
k TOLERATION , I REASONS J
1		1 .
Pilgrims,		Pennsylvania:
Puritans.		Quakers
Rhode Island: Anne Huchinson
Maryland:
Catholics
CORTES IN MEXICO
NEW SPAIN
DESIRE FOR GOLD/S1LVER
PIZARRO IN PERU
GROWTH OF TRADE
T.
SPICES
SILKS
REASONS X FOR EUROPEAN EXPLORATION .
EUROPEAN
COLONIAL
EMPIRES
NEW FRANCE
CANADA
MISSISSIPPI )
POWERFUL
RULERS
ALLOWED RELIGIOUS TOLERANCE
NEW
NETHERLAND
DIVERSITY OF ETHNIC GROUPS

K
J
CHAPTER STUDY CARDS
Why Colonists Came to New World
Colonization of North America
A
Encouragement from Rulers/Countries. European rulers sought colonies as new sources of wealth and power.
A
Mercantilism. Gold and silver were prized as a source of wealth. Nations measured a nation's wealth by the gold and silver they had. A
Religious Reasons. Groups came to establish their own religious communities. A
Better Life. Most colonists faced hardships in Europe. Saw colonies as a place to escape famine; offered economic opportunities. A
New Spain. i •	Mexico, Cuba, Central America.	[
•	Missionaries	sent to convert	Indians.	1
•	Encomiendas: forced labor.
A
New France. I, •	Canada, Great Lakes,	Mississippi	River.	[
•	Wanted to establish trading posts for furs, i
A
New Netherland. Became NY in 1664. i •	Introduced the Patroon System.	J
A
Thirteen British Colonies. [ •	Established colonies along Atlantic coast, i
Name
CHAPTER 5: European Exploration and Colonization
Examine the question. This question tests your ability to draw a conclusion from a reading passage. Recall what you know. You should recall that most of the colonists were quite religious 200 years ago. Religion was a central feature of life in Europe. Apply what you know. You should realize that since most the Smith passage deals with his
church, sermons, and praying that Choices A, C, and D do not really apply to this passage. The best answer is Choice B. The passage dem onstrates the importance of religion to settlers in early Virginia.
Now try answering some additional questions on your own.
Now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2	Why is the Mayflower Compact considered an important step in the development of American democracy?
F
It established the principle of separation of church and state. (Govt is(a)) G
It provided a basis for self-government in the Plymouth Colony. H
It defined colonial relations with local Native American Indians. J
It outlawed slavery in the Massachusetts Bay Colony. 3	One way in which the settlements at Jamestown (1607) and New Amsterdam (1625) were similar is that both were located —
A in the mountains	C	near the coastline	(Geog io(A))
B on islands far from fresh water	D	in a dry climate
The Mayflower Compact and the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut are most closely associated with —		
F abuses by absolute monarchs		( Hist 3(B) )
G establishment of religious toleration H	steps toward colonial self-government J	adoption of universal suffrage		
In which region of the United States was located?	the	first permanent English settlement
A
Pacific Northwest C Atlantic Coast (Geog io(A)j B
Great Plains D Great Lakes Mountains The need for agricultural workers in the tobacco fields of colonial Virginia led to the —		
F formation of labor unions G decision to industrialize H improvement in farming J use of enslaved people from Africa		( Hist 2(B) J
PROJECT WITHOUT PERMISSION
CHAPTER 5: European Exploration and Colonization
61
Based on these two documents and your knowledge of social studies answer the following
question.
“We the Loyal Subjects of King James ... having undertaken ... a voyage to plant the first colony in Virginia; do ... mutually ... combine ourselves together into a civil body politick ...; and shall meet and [convene] for the general good of the Colony; we promise all due submission and obedience. In witness we have subscribed our names at Cape Cod.”
— The Mayflower Compact, 1620
“We do therefore associate and connive ourselves to be as one Public State or Commonwealth; and do, for ourselves and our successors ... enter into combination and Confederation ... As also in our Civil Affairs to be guided and governed according to such Laws, Rules, Orders and Decrees as shall be made ...”
— Fundamental Orders of Connecticut, 1639
12	Based on these excerpts, in what way were these two documents similar?
F
The signers of both documents had only just landed in America. G
In both documents, colonists agreed to establish a community and obey to its laws. H In both documents, colonists agreed to obey the British King’s decisions. J
Both documents established a government in which its members chose their own governor. 13	Which colonial settlement is correctly paired with the reason it was founded?
A
North Carolina — haven for Pilgrims and Puritans i Hist 2(B)") B
Georgia — place for imprisoned debtors and convicts C Maryland — refuge for Quakers D
Pennsylvania — refuge for English Catholics 14	What was the major reason European rulers sought to colonize North America?
F
They needed people from North America to settle in Europe. Cmst2(AQ G
They sought to learn more about Native American cultures. H
They sought to expand their power with riches from the “New World.” J
They wanted a place to send their criminal population. 15	One reason for the importance of the Mayflower Compact and the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut was that they laid the foundation for —
A a two-house legislature in state governments	(just 3(B) )
B the growth of representative government in Colonial America C the development of English common law in the colonies D social freedom in colonial legislatures
16	The journeys of Henry Hudson, Christopher Columbus, and Robert de LaSalle to the “New World” were made possible because of the —
F effects of the Atlantic slave trade	( Hist 2(A) )
G support of exploration by the English Parliament H trade connections established by the travels of Marco Polo J development of new navigational instruments and technology
Name
