CHAPTER 10: The Early Republic, 1789-1828	169
IMPORTANT IDEAS —
A.
Americans and their leaders faced many challenges in the years after the ratification of the U.S. Constitution, when the new republic was established. B.
George Washington became the nation’s first President in 1789. He established the first Cabinet. The first Congress passed the Bill of Rights and the Judiciary Act of 1789, completing the nation’s federal court system. C.
To create a stable economic system, Alexander Hamilton, the Secretary of the Treasury, set out an economic plan in which the federal government would both assume the debts of the national and state governments and create a national bank, a whiskey tax, and a protective tariff to help American manufacturers. All of Hamilton’s Financial Plan was accepted except for the tariff. D.
Western farmers rebelled against the new whiskey tax. The “Whiskey Rebellion” collapsed when Washington and Hamilton made a show of force. E.
Jefferson and Madison disagreed with Hamilton’s Plan, giving rise to the first American political parties—the Federalists and the Democratic-Republicans. F.
Americans were also divided in their support of the French Revolution. Jefferson and Madison supported it, while Adams and Hamilton feared mob rule in America. Washington kept the nation neutral when war broke out between France and Britain. In his Farewell Address, Washington warned against entangling alliances, believing the nation should avoid ties to Europe. G.
Jefferson was elected in the “Revolution of 1800.” This was a peaceful transition of power from the Federalists. In 1803, Jefferson approved the Louisiana Purchase, doubling the nation’s size and giving America control of the Mississippi River. Jefferson continued Washington’s policy of neutrality with Europe. H.
Chief Justice John Marshall issued a series of landmark Supreme Court decisions which helped strengthen the national government, established the role of the Supreme Court, and unified the nation. In Marbury v. Madison, Marshall established the principle of judicial review — that the Supreme Court can rule whether a law is constitutional. In McCulloch v. Maryland, he established the supremacy of federal law and the ability of Congress to exercise powers needed to carry out its duties. In Gibbons v. Ogden, he expanded the scope of Congress’ power to regulate commerce between the states. I.
Americans finally became involved in a conflict with Britain in the War of 1812. Britain’s impressment of U.S. sailors and U.S. ambitions in Canada were the main causes. The war proved the nation could defend itself. J.
The Federalist Party collapsed after the war, giving rise to the “Era of Good Feelings.” During these years, Americans felt renewed national pride. The Missouri Compromise (1820) preserved unity, and the Monroe Doctrine (1823) asserted American influence in the Western Hemisphere. K.
During these years, Americans also saw the spread of steamboat travel, increasing numbers of factories, and construction of canals, such as the Erie Canal. CHAPTER 10: The Early Republic, 1789-1828	171
DEFINING OUR NEW CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
The Constitution allowed the President to appoint officials in charge of executive departments. The chief officials that Washington appointed began meeting together with him in what came to be known as the Cabinet. Over the years, additional Cabinet departments were created. The Cabinet was one of the important precedents established by Washington. A precedent is an action taken for the first time, which is followed by others afterwards.
CREATING A STABLE ECONOMY
The most pressing problems facing Washington’s government were economic. As a result of the American Revolution, the national government owed $54 million. The
states owed another $24 million, and the paper money issued by the Continental Congress and the Articles of Confederation was worthless. The job of solving these economic problems fell to Alexander Hamilton, our nation’s first Secretary of the Treasury. Hamilton drew up a four-part plan for getting the nation on a sound financial basis:
President Washington (far right) meets with his Cabinet.
HAMILTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN
Repay the Debt Hamilton believed the national govern-				—		—		 National Bank. Hamilton proposed creation of a national	1	— Whiskey Tax. Hamilton proposed a tax on whiskey to raise		— Protective Tariff. Hamilton asked Congress to pass a
ment should pay off		bank as a place to	is ■	money from western		high tariff — a tax
the debts of both the		deposit taxes, to	■	farmers.		on imported foreign
states and the previous		provide a sound cur-			■	goods which would
national government in		rency, and to make			■ 9	protect American
order to establish the		loans to the national	1		ij	industries from foreign
nation's credit. SI	■	government.	s II		B	competition.
THE RISE OF POLITICAL PARTIES
Hamilton’s program was strongly opposed by Thomas Jefferson, Washington’s Secretary of State. Jefferson, Madison and their followers believed Hamilton’s plan would just benefit wealthy Americans since speculators had bought up much of the debt. They also felt that the Constitution did not give the federal government the right to create a national bank. This disagreement gave rise to America’s first political parties — associations that try to elect their members to government offices so that they will pass laws favorable to their ideas.
Alexander Hamilton
PROJECT WITHOUT PERMISSION
CHAPTER 10: The Early Republic, 1789-1828	173
Washington called up the militia to put down the rebellion. Washington, with Alexander Hamilton by his side, was ready to use force, but the rebels fled before any fighting took place.
Imagine you are a representative in Congress in 1794. Write a speech either for or against Hamilton’s financial plan.
How were Shays’ Rebellion and the Whiskey Rebellion handled differently? Explain your answer.
During Washington’s Presidency, the revolution in France became increasingly violent. The revolutionaries overthrew and executed Louis XVI, the French King. War between France and Britain then broke out in 1793. Jefferson’s supporters continued to favor the French revolutionaries, while Alexander Hamilton, John Adams, and other Federalists favored the British.
PROCLAMATION OF NEUTRALITY
(1793) The United States had won its independence largely through the military and financial support of France. Some French leaders thought it was time for the Americans to return the favor and that the Franco-American alliance of 1778 was still in effect.
Hamilton and his supporters were able to persuade Washington that France’s war was totally European in nature. Washington finally became convinced that there was nothing to be gained if the United States involved itself in this European conflict. Compared to European powers, the United States was weak militarily. To avoid being drawn into the Anglo-French conflict, Washington adopted a policy of neutrality — the United States would avoid taking sides in any European conflict or becoming involved in any foreign war.
ACTING AS AN AMATEUR. HISTORIAN
Washington believed America should not become entangled in the conflicts of foreign nations. His Proclamation of Neutrality stated this nation’s position:
“It appears that a state of war exists between Austria, Prussia,
Sardinia, Great Britain, and the Netherlands on the one part, and
France on the other. The duty and interest of the United States require that they should adopt a conduct friendly and impartial toward the [warring] powers. I have thought fit to declare the position of the United States to observe a conduct towards those powers respectfully; and warn our citizens to avoid all acts which may in any manner tend to [go against] this position.”
In your own words, describe Washington’s Proclamation of Neutrality.
Do you think Washington chose a wise policy? Explain your answer.
Name___________________________________________
CHAPTER 10: The Early Republic, 1789-1828	175
LEARNING WITH GRAPHIC ORGANIZERS
Complete the following chart on the highlights of the Presidency of George Washington.
CHAPTER 10: The Early Republic, 1789-1828	177
Construction of the National Road begins.
Whitney’s plan was for machines to produce standardized parts which could be used with other parts to assemble a whole product without a laborer filing and fitting each part together. This interchangeability allowed easy assembly of new devices and easier repair of existing devices, while minimizing the time and skill needed for a person to assembly or repair a product. Use of interchangeable parts in the manufacture of muskets (guns) was a major contribution to the development of America industry.
The shift of manufacturing to factories, known as the Industrial Revolution, would soon lead to the rise of new industries and rapidly growing cities.
Transportation. America’s vast and untamed landscape made travel difficult. Cities were connected by roads that were little more than dirt trails. A few had log or plank roads. Most short travel was done by walking. For longer trips, people rode on horse-drawn wagons. Travel on roads was slow: a trip from Boston to New York took three days by stage coach. Western settlers sought roads to aid settlement and for the transfer of goods. They wished for a way to make it easier to market their goods and to buy essential supplies in return. In 1806, Congress set aside funds to build the first federally funded road,
the National Road. Travel by water was easier and cheaper than travel overland. Goods were often carried along streams and rivers to ports along the coast. People took ferries to cross rivers and took boats to travel down rivers, across lakes, or along coastlines.
Communication. Communications were slow. There were no telephones, telegraphs, televisions, or computers. People communicated primarily by letter. Letters had to be carried over dusty, unpaved roads or by packet boat. Mail was often mangled or even lost. News about events traveled slowly. Most people received their information from local newspapers. Most were published weekly or monthly, and were shared by many readers.
Regional Differences. The three main regions from colonial times — New England, the Middle Atlantic Colonies, and the South — were replaced by the North, the South and the emerging West. The nation’s population was growing at an enormous rate. The land available for settlement increased by almost the size of Europe — from 4.4 million to 7.8 million square kilometers.
REGIONAL POPULATION GROWTH:
1800-1830 Select one state and use your school or public library and Internet websites of local organizations to gather documents, artworks, statistics, and other materials about life in that state in the early 1800s.
CHAPTER 10: The Early Republic, 1789-1828	179
The second President of the United States, John Adams, was a Federalist who continued many of Washington’s policies. In 1800, John Adams lost the Presidential election to Thomas Jefferson.
Jefferson sought to show that he was one of the people. The capital had just been moved from Philadelphia to Washington, D.C. Jefferson walked alone from his boardinghouse to the Capitol to take the oath of office. His inauguration marked the first transition of the executive branch from one party to another. Sometimes known as the “Revolution of 1800,” this change occurred without violence.
JEFFERSON'S VIEWS ON GOVERNMENT
Jefferson saw his election as a turning point. He believed the best government was one that governed least. Jefferson opposed special privileges for the wealthy and had strong sympathies for the common farmer. As President, he set about reducing the size of the army,
ending naval expansion, and lowering government costs.	Thomas Jefferson
ACTING- AS AN AMATEUR HISTORIAN
In his First Inaugural Address (1801), Jefferson spoke of what he thought was necessary to make America a prosperous nation. Here is what he said:
“With all these blessings, what more is necessary to make us
a happy and prosperous people? Still one thing more, fellow citizens — a wise and frugal government, which shall restrain men from injuring one another, which shall leave them otherwise free to regulate their own pursuits of industry and improvement, and shall not take from the mouth of labor the bread it had earned. This is the sum of good government.”
What did Jefferson see as “good government”?
-fc Is what Jefferson said 200 years ago still relevant to our nation today?
THE LOUISIANA PURCHASE
(1803) Jefferson had always dreamed of extending the United States westward. He sent envoys to France to negotiate the right to send goods down the Mississippi River to New Orleans. In 1803, Napoleon Bonaparte, the new ruler of France, offered to sell the Louisiana Territory.
CHAPTER 10: The Early Republic, 1789-1828	181
ACTING AS AN AMATEUR HISTORIAN
Marbury v. Madison was the first significant decision handed down by the U.S. Supreme Court after John Marshall was sworn in as its Chief Justice in 1801:
“It is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial depart-
ment to say what the law is. Those who apply the rule to particular cases, must of necessity [explain] and interpret that rule. If two laws conflict with each other, the courts must decide on the operation of each....”
What was Marshall’s decision? Do you agree with his decision?
-fc Why was the court ruling in Marbury v. Madison of such importance?
THE EMBARGO ACT OF
1807 War continued to rage between Britain and France. British ships started stopping U.S. ships to search for deserters from the British navy. Sometimes they took Americans to serve on British ships. This practice of impressment {forced military service) greatly humiliated Americans and put pressure on President Jefferson to take action.
To avoid war, Jefferson pushed the Embargo Act through Congress. Under the act, American ships were prohibited from trading with European nations. In the last days of Jefferson’s Presidency, Congress replaced the Embargo Act with the Non-Intercourse Act (1809). This act lifted the embargo on U.S. shipping except for ships bound for British or French ports.
An American sailor is seized (impressed) by British seamen.
Research important people and events from this period and devise skits to show how various precedents were set in the new nation: consider the Cabinet, the Pinckney Treaty, the Louisiana Purchase, and Marbury v. Madison.
Did Thomas Jefferson live up to his ideals as President? Explain your answer.
Using the Internet or your local library for information, create your own map showing the route Lewis and Clark took to the Pacific.
CHAPTER 10: The Early Republic, 1789-1828	183
After Jefferson served two terms as President, he followed the precedent set by Washington and stepped down from the Presidency. His good friend and fellow Democratic-Republican, James Madison, became the nation’s fourth President in 1809. Three years later, Americans were drawn into another war with Great Britain in 1812. This war is known as the War of 1812, or the “Second War for Independence.”
CAUSES OF THE CONFLICT
Ever since 1793, France and Britain had been continuously at war against each other with only one short break. Americans continued to trade with Europe, but tried to keep out of the war between these two nations. However, British ships continued to stop American ships and to seize (or impress) U.S. sailors. Some British troops in Canada also encouraged Native American Indians to attack American settlements. At the same time, several young Congressmen thought the time was ripe to seize Canada from the British, who were fighting Napoleon in Europe. In 1812, President Madison asked Congress to declare war on Britain.
MAIN EVENTS OF THE WAR
American forces tried to invade Canada, but they were unsuccessful. In retaliation, British troops temporarily occupied Washington, D.C. and burned down the White House. Madison’s wife, Dolley Madison, acted quickly to remove paintings and other valuables from the White House before the British arrived.
Much of the fighting during the War of 1812 took place on the Great Lakes and in upstate New York. In 1813,
British troops further retaliated for the attack on Canada by burning the American settlement at Buffalo. Meanwhile,
American and British ships clashed in the Battle of Lake Erie.
In December 1814, a peace treaty was finally signed between Britain and the United States. This agreement actually left things much as they had been before the war. The British prom-
ised they would no longer search American ships for British deserters. Americans promised to respect British rule in Canada. Americans felt they had proved they could protect their independence. Communications from Europe were so slow that the bloodiest battle of the war was actually fought after the treaty was signed. General Andrew Jackson defeated the British at the Battle of New Orleans in January 1815.
CHAPTER 10: The Early Republic, 1789-1828	185
CLAY'S "AMERICAN SYSTEM"
In these years, Americans cooperated to improve their transportation routes by building roads and canals. Henry Clay, a spokesman for moderate policies, sought to resolve differences between the North and South while representing the nationalist outlook of the West. Clay proposed his “American System” to Congress.
His system consisted of a high tariff {tax on imports) to protect American manufactured goods from competition with cheaper British products. Clay then proposed that the revenues collected from the tariff should be used to pay for internal improvements, such as new roads and canals, in the West. In this
way, Clay hoped his American System would bind the industrial Henry Clay 777~1852'> East and the agrarian West together. Despite Clay’s good intentions, the American System never went into effect. The national system of internal improvements was never adequately funded by Congress; the failure to provide funds was due in part to sectional jealousies and a belief that such spending was never provided for in the Constitution.
THE ERIE CANAL
In the early 1800s, it was easier and cheaper to ship goods by water than by land. In 1816, the Governor of New York proposed a 360-mile canal connecting Lake Erie to the Hudson River. Farmers could then ship goods from the Great Lakes to New York City entirely by water. After a long and heated debate, state lawmakers voted to build the canal.
The Erie Canal was the most ambitious project ever constructed up to that time. A path 50 feet wide had to be cut through forests, swamps, and hills. Then a ditch 40 feet wide and 4 feet deep had to be dug. The canal was an important modification of the physical environment. Without the heavy equipment we have today, thousands of workers were needed to cut trees, rip out tree stumps, blast through rock, and dig the canal. One out of every four workers was Irish. At the peak of construction, more than four thousand workers were laboring on the canal. Canal workers earned about $10 a month in 1832.
ERIE, OSWEGO
and CHAMPLAIN CANALS CHAPTER 10: The Early Republic, 1789-1828	187
GIBBONS v. OGDEN (1824)
During this period, the Supreme Court encouraged the growth of a national market by its decision in the case of Gibbons v. Ogden.
Background. Ogden had been granted a monopoly by New York State to operate a steamboat between New York and New Jersey. Gibbons was granted a similar license by the federal government. Ogden sued to stop Gibbons from competing with him. Gibbons appealed to the Supreme Court.
Decision / Significance. Marshall ruled that Congress could regulate ferry boats crossing the Hudson River between New York and New Jersey as part of its power under the Constitution to control “interstate commerce” {trade between states). Only the federal government, according to the U.S. Constitution, could regulate interstate commerce, including activities affecting interstate commerce. This established the federal government’s right to regulate anything that involves commerce between the states. It set the stage for future expansion of Congressional power over other activities once thought to be under the control of the states.
THE PURCHASE OF FLORIDA
(1819) The border between Spanish colonial territory and the United States was a source of heated debate with Spain. Plagued by many problems, Spain feared losing Florida without compensation. Spanish leaders therefore chose to negotiate a settlement. The United States agreed to purchase Florida in 1819 for $5 million. It also agreed to recognize Spanish sovereignty over Texas.
McCULLOCH v. MARYLAND (1819)
Another key decision by Chief Justice John Marshall was McCulloch v. Maryland. This case also tested the relationship between state and federal law.
Background. In 1818, the Maryland legislature imposed a tax on the Maryland branch of the Second National Bank. The National Bank was unpopular since it competed with state banks. Maryland legislators hoped that state taxes on the federal bank would shut down the Maryland branch. James McCulloch, the federal bank’s cashier, did not pay the taxes the Maryland law required, and Maryland sued for payment. After the state of Maryland won the dispute in its own courts, the case was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Decision/Significance. The case presented two key issues: (1) Does Congress have the power to create a bank, even though that power is not specifically mentioned in the Constitution? (2) Does Maryland have the power to tax an institution of the federal government? Marshall ruled that Congress could indeed charter a national bank, since this would help Congress carry out its other powers. Marshall said that the “necessary and proper” clause {elastic clause) in the Constitution gives Congress all those powers needed to carry out its powers listed in the Constitution. He also said that since the federal government had the right to establish the bank, Maryland had no right to interfere by taxing it.
Name
CHAPTER 10: The Early Republic, 1789-1828	189
THE MISSOURI COMPROMISE OF
1820 The American Revolution and the Constitutional Convention had failed to resolve the issue of slavery in America. George Washington had freed his own slaves on his death, but Thomas Jefferson, the author of the Declaration of Independence, had not. Many early American leaders had imagined that slavery would just gradually die out. However, the invention of the cotton gin by Eli Whitney in 1793 made it easier for unskilled slaves
to remove seeds from the type of cotton that grew in the South. This invention led to the spread of slavery in the South. The factories of England and the Northern United States kept up the demand for raw cotton. With the purchase of the Louisiana Territory, the issue of slavery again came into sharp focus. Should the territories of the Louisiana Purchase enter the Union as free or slave states?
THE MISSOURI COMPROMISE
1820 Henry Clay engineered a compromise in which slavery was forbidden in the Louisiana Territory north of the “Missouri Compromise Line” (3 6° 30"), except Missouri. One free state (Maine) and one slave state (Missouri) were admitted to the Union at the same time to keep the balance between free and slave states in the Senate.
THE MONROE DOCTRINE
James Monroe fought in the American Revolution, helped negotiate the Lousiana Purchase, and served as Secretary of State under President Madison. In 1817, Monroe became President. In 1823 in his annual message to Congress, Monroe issued a bold statement on foreign policy. He repeated the nation’s longstanding commitment to neutrality and offered a warning to Europe. The American and French Revolutions had inspired people in Latin America to be free. During the Napoleonic Wars, Spain had been cut off from its colonies. The Spanish colonists grew accustomed to self-government. When Spain’s king was restored, he tried to reassert control. Colonists in Latin America then declared their independence. Later, it was feared that France would help Spain reconquer her colonies.
Monroe announced that the United States would oppose any attempts by European powers to establish new colonies or to restore Spanish rule in countries in the Western Hemisphere that had achieved their independence.
Name
CHAPTER 10: The Early Republic, 1789-1828	191
LEARNING WITH GRAPHIC ORGANIZERS
Complete the graphic organizer below. For each event listed, describe it and evaluate its impact on the United States.
War of 1812
Description:








Impact:













Monroe Doctrine
Description:








Impact:













"Era of Good Feelings" Description:








Impact:











CHAPTER 10: The Early Republic, 1789-1828	193
Use the passages and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
“In every political society, [parties] are unavoidable. A difference of interests, real or supposed, is the most natural and fruitful source of these.”
— James Madison (1792)
“[Political parties] serve to distract the public and [weaken the government]. Parties [stir up] the community with ill-founded jealousies and false alarms.”
— George Washington (1796)
1	What were James Madison and George Washington disagreeing about in these
statements?	_________
A the necessity of political parties	f Citi 21 (a) h
B the rise of sectional rivalry
C the right of Americans to donate funds to political parties D fear that political parties will use intimidation to elect their candidates
Examine the question. This question tests your ability to recognize two different points of view. Recall what you know. Both passages deal with the emergence of political parties. Choice B is wrong, since they are not about sectionalism. Choices C and P are also wrong. The documents say nothing about donations or the use of intimidation.
The best answer is Choice A. Madison saw the emergence of political parties as unavoidable, while Washington feared that political parties would distract and weaken the government.
Mw try answering some additional questions on your own.
2	Alexander Hamilton’s economic plan was designed to —
F help build the national economy G encourage British imports
H prevent Congressional control of interstate commerce J strengthen the powers of state governments
3	Why did President George Washington caution Americans against forming alliances
with foreign nations in his Farewell Address?	________
A
He feared trade with Latin America would be harmed. 1 Hist 5(E) ) B
He was troubled that France might establish colonies in the Americas. C
He worried that the nation might later be dragged into a foreign war. D
He sought to protect America’s Western frontier. Name
CHAPTER 10: The Early Republic, 1789-1828	195
Eli Whitney and Samuel Slater were important to the spread of the Industrial Revolution to the United States because they —	Csts
A created new methods of production	C increased steel production
B devised new forms of transportation	D built steam-powered machines
Use the graph and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
10	What conclusion can be drawn from the information in the graph?
F
The U.S. government encour- aged foreign trade between 1800 and 1812.
G
American trade was affected by events taking place in Europe. H
Trade increased sharply with the passage of the Embargo Acts J
American trading ships were attacked by France and Great Britain. Source: Historical Statistics of the United States
11	A major reason President Thomas Jefferson supported the purchase of the Louisiana Territory in 1803 was that it —
A gave the United States ownership of Florida	1 (OQ
B allowed the United States to gain control of California C gave the United States control of the Mississippi River D removed the Spanish from North America
12	Washington’s Proclamation of Neutrality (1793), Jefferson’s Embargo Act (1807), and the Monroe Doctrine (1823) were all efforts to —
F avoid political conflicts with European nations	( Hist 5(E) )
G directly support European revolutions H aid Great Britain in its war against France J promote military alliances
13	The decision in Marbury v. Madison (1803) was important because it —
A upheld the constitutionality of the National Bank	(Govt 18(B) j
B restricted Congress’s power to use the “elastic clause”
C permitted the federal government to regulate interstate commerce D established the Supreme Court’s power to judge the constitutionality of laws
14	Which areas were added to the United States by the Louisiana Purchase?
F territory from the Atlantic Ocean to the Appalachians G territory from the Appalachians to the Mississippi River H territory from the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific Ocean J territory from the Mississippi River to the Rocky Mountains
CHAPTER 10: The Early Republic, 1789-1828	197
18	The decision in Gibbons v. Ogden (1824) basically addressed which of the following issues?
F the issue of congressional privileges	(Govt is(s) j
G the regulation of interstate commerce H the right of states to tax a federal property
J the Supreme Court’s right to declare Congressional acts unconstitutional
19	One similarity in the foreign policies of Presidents George Washington, Thomas
Jefferson, and James Monroe was that they —	________
A favored France over England	f Hist 5(E);
B sought colonies in other parts of the world
C came to the defense of Latin American nations D sought to avoid involvement in European political struggles
20	Which power did the U.S. Supreme Court establish in Marbury v. Madison?__________
F judicial review	)
G hearing appeals from lower federal courts
H deciding cases involving two or more states J judicial independence through lifetime tenure
21	President George Washington pursued a foreign policy of neutrality during his administration because he believed that —
A treaties were prohibited by the Constitution B the United States should not expand by force
C the nation should develop its own interests in the Western Hemisphere D alliances should be established with both France and England
22	Under John Marshall’s leadership the Supreme Court issued decisions that —_____
F declared racial segregation laws unconstitutional	f citt 22(a)_;
G gave states the power to tax the Bank of the United States
H increased the ability of Congress to limit the powers of the President J emphasized the supremacy of federal laws over state laws
23	During the early 1800s, major improvements to a nationwide system of trade were advanced with the —
A construction of canals	i sts 27(B) j
B use of gasoline-powered boats on rivers C completion of the transcontinental railroad D construction of an interstate highway system
24	Which was an important leadership quality of President George Washington?
F strong support for the emerging party system	(citi 22(A) J
G a willingness to listen to different points of view H a failure to make his own decisions
J eagerness to engage in conflict with European powers
