chapter 28 the onset of the cold war the potsdam summit i am getting ready to go see stalin and churchill president truman wrote to his mother in july 1945 and it is a chore on board the cruiser augusta the new president continued to complain about the upcoming potsdam conference in his diary.
how i hate this trip he confided.
but i have to make it win lose or draw and we must win.
i am giving nothing away except to save starving people and even then i hope we can only help them to help themselves halfway around the world joseph stalin left moscow a day late because of a slight heart attack.
the russian leader hated to fly so he traveled by rail.
moreover he ordered the heavily guarded train to detour around poland for fear of an ambush further delaying his arrival.
when he made his entrance into potsdam a suburb of berlin miraculously spared the total destruction that his forces had created in the german capital he was ready to claim the spoils of war.
these two men one the veteran revolutionary who had been in power for two decades the other an untested leader in office for barely three months symbolized the enormous differences that now separated the wartime allies.
stalin was above all a realist.
brutal in securing total control at home he was more flexible in his foreign policy bent on exploiting russias victory in world war ii rather than aiming at world domination.
cunning and caution were the hallmarks of his diplomatic style.
small in stature ungainly in build he radiated a catlike quality as he waited behind his unassuming faade ready to dazzle an opponent with his brilliant terrifying tactical mastery truman in contrast personified traditional wilsonian idealism.
lacking roosevelts guile the new president placed his faith in international cooperation.
like many americans he believed implicitly in his countrys innate goodness.
self assured to the point of cockiness he came to potsdam clothed in the armor of self righteousness.
truman and stalin met for the first time on july 17 1945.
i told stalin that i am no diplomat the president recorded in his diary but usually said yes and no to questions after hearing all the argument the russian dictators reaction to truman remains a mystery but truman believed the first encounter went well.
i can deal with stalin he wrote.
he is honest but smart as hell together with winston churchill and his replacement clement attlee whose labour party had just triumphed in british elections truman and stalin clashed for the next ten days over such difficult issues as reparations the polish border and the fate of eastern europe.
truman presented the ideas and proposals formulated by his advisers he saw his task as essentially procedural and when he presided he moved the agenda along in brisk fashion.
after he churchill truman and stalin during the potsdam conference in july 1945.
the conference revealed the growing divergence among the wartime allies that soon led to the onset of the cold war.
chapter 28 the onset of the cold war had banged through three items one day he commented i am not going to stay around this terrible place all summer just to listen to speeches.
ill go home to the senate for that in an indirect roundabout way he informed stalin of the existence of the atomic bomb tested successfully in the new mexico desert just before the conference began.
truman offered no details and the impassive stalin asked for none commenting only that he hoped the united states would make good use of it against the japanese reparations proved to be the crucial issue at potsdam.
the russians wanted to rebuild their war ravaged economy with german industry the united states feared it would be saddled with the entire cost of caring for the defeated germans.
a compromise was finally reached.
each side would take reparations primarily from its own occupation zone a solution that foreshadowed the future division of germany.
because they could not agree on how to govern europe wrote historian daniel yergin truman and stalin began to divide it the other issues were referred to the newly created council of foreign ministers which would meet in the fall in london.
he potsdam conference thus ended on an apparent note of harmony beneath the surface however the bitter antagonism of the cold war was festering.
a dozen years later truman reminisced to an old associate about potsdam.
what a show that was describing himself as an innocent idealist surrounded by wolves he claimed that all the agreements reached there were broken as soon as the unconscionable russian dictator returned to moscow he added ruefully and i liked the little son of a bitch potsdam marked the end of the wartime alliance.
america and russia each distrustful of the other began to engage in a long and bitter confrontation.
for the next decade the two superpowers would vie for control of postwar europe and later clash over the spread of communism to asia.
by the time trumans and stalins successors met for the next summit conference at geneva in 1955 the cold war was at its height.
t the cold war begins how did the cold war begin.
the conflict between the united states and the soviet union began gradually.
for two years the nations tried to adjust their differences over the division of europe postwar economic aid and the atomic bomb through discussion and negotiation.
the council of foreign ministers provided the forum.
beginning in london during the fall of 1945 and meeting with their russian counterparts in paris new york and moscow american diplomats searched for a way to live in peace with a suspicious soviet union.
the division of europe the fundamental disagreement was over who would control postwar europe.
in the east the red army had swept over poland and the balkans laying the basis for soviet domination there.
american and british forces had liberated western europe from scandinavia to italy.
the russians mindful of past invasions from the west across the plains of poland were intent on imposing communist governments loyal to moscow in the soviet sphere.
the united states on the other hand upheld the principle of national self determination insisting the people in each country should freely choose their postwar rulers.
the soviets saw the demand for free elections as subversive since they knew that popularly chosen regimes would be unfriendly to russia.
suspecting american duplicity stalin brought down an iron curtain churchills phrase from the baltic to the adriatic as he created a series of satellite governments.
germany was the key.
the temporary zones of occupation gradually hardened into permanent lines of division.
ignoring the potsdam conference agreement that the country be treated as an economic unit the united states and great britain were by 1946 refusing to permit the russians to take reparations from the industrial western zones.
the initial harsh occupation policy gave way to more humane treatment of the german people and a slow but steady economic recovery.
the united states and england merged their zones and championed the idea of the unification of all germany.
russia fearing a resurgence of german military power responded by intensifying the communization of its zone which included the jointly occupied city of berlin.
by 1947 england france and the united states were laying plans to transfer their authority to an independent west germany.
the soviet union consolidated its grip on eastern europe in 1946 and 1947.
one by one communist regimes replaced coalition governments in poland hungary romania and bulgaria.
moving cautiously to avoid provoking the west stalin used communism as a means to dominate half of europe both to protect the security of the soviet state and to advance its international power.
the climax came in march 1948 when a coup in czechoslovakia overthrew a democratic government and gave the soviets a strategic foothold in central europe.
the division of europe was an inevitable aftereffect of world war ii.
both sides were intent on imposing their values in the areas liberated by their troops.
the russians were no more likely to withdraw from eastern europe than the united states and britain were from germany france and italy.
a frank recognition of competing spheres of influence might have avoided further escalation of tension.
but the western nations remembering hitlers aggression in the 1930s began to see stalin as an equally dangerous threat to their well being.
instead of accepting him as a cautious leader bent on protecting russian security they perceived him as an aggressive dictator leading a communist drive for world domination.
withholding economic aid world war ii had inflicted enormous damage on russia.
the brutal fighting had taken between fifteen and twenty million russian lives destroyed more than thirty thousand factories and torn up forty thousand miles of railroad track.
the industrialization the cold war begins read the document churchills iron curtain speech march 5 1946 iceland hamburg western bloc communist bloc soviet zone hanover berlin nonaligned nations british zone finland iron curtain norway sweden 500 miles soviet zone 500 kilometers north sea ireland den.
soviet union united kingdom french zone frankfurt american zone neth.
poland belg.
atlantic ocean germany czech.
france switz.
romania 100 miles berlin airlift 1948 1949 100 kilometers bulg.
italy spain a ck se bla yugoslavia portugal hun.
french alb.
morocco greece british berlin soviet american morocco fr.
algeria fr.
tunisia fr.
medi cyprus terranea n sea europe after world war ii the heavy red line splitting germany shows in graphic form the division of europe between the western and soviet spheres of influence.
from stettin in the baltic to trieste in the adriatic said winston churchill in a speech at fulton missouri in 1946 an iron curtain has descended across the continent that stalin had achieved at such great sacrifice in the 1930s had been badly set back even agricultural production had fallen by half during the war.
outside aid and assistance were vital for the reconstruction of the soviet union.
american leaders knew of russias plight and hoped to use it to good advantage.
wartime ambassador averell harriman wrote in 1944 that economic aid was one of the most effective weapons at our disposal in dealing with russia.
president truman was convinced that economically we held all the cards and the russians had to come to us there were two possible forms of postwar assistance loans and lend lease.
in january 1945 the soviets requested a 6 billion loan to finance postwar reconstruction.
despite initial american encouragement president roosevelt deferred action on this request as relations with russia cooled the chances for action dimmed.
our experience commented harriman in april 1945 had incontrovertibly proved it was not possible to bank goodwill in moscow by the wars end the loan request though never formally turned down was dead.
lend lease proved no more successful.
in the spring of 1945 congress instructed the administration not to use lend lease for postwar reconstruction.
president truman went further however by signing an order on may 11 1945 terminating all shipments to russia including those already at sea.
the state department saw the action as applying leverage against the soviet union stalin termed it brutal heeding russian protests truman resumed lend lease shipments but only until the war was over in august.
after that all lend lease ended.
deprived of american assistance the russians were forced to rebuild their economy through reparations.
american and british resistance prevented them from taking reparations in western germany but the soviets systematically removed factories and plants from other areas they controlled including their zone of germany eastern europe and manchuria.
slowly the russian economy recovered from the war but the bitterness over the american refusal to extend aid convinced stalin of western hostility and thus deepened the growing antagonism between the soviet union and the united states.
chapter 28 the onset of the cold war the atomic dilemma overshadowing all else was the atomic bomb.
used by the united states with deadly success at hiroshima and nagasaki the new weapon raised problems that would have been difficult for even friendly nations to resolve.
given the uneasy state of soviet american relations the effect was disastrous.
the wartime policy followed by roosevelt and churchill ensured a postwar nuclear arms race.
instead of informing their major ally of the developing atomic bomb they kept it a closely guarded secret.
stalin learned of the manhattan project through espionage and responded by starting a soviet atomic program in 1943.
by the time truman informed stalin of the weapons existence at potsdam the russians aided by a steady stream of information from spies in the united states were well on the way to making their own bomb.
after the war the united states developed a disarmament plan that would turn control of fissionable material then the processing plants and ultimately the american stockpile of bombs over to an international agency.
when president truman appointed financier bernard baruch to present this proposal to the united nations baruch insisted on changing it in several important ways adding sanctions against violators and exempting the international agency from the un veto.
ignoring scientists who pleaded for a more cooperative position baruch followed instead the advice of army chief of staff dwight d eisenhower who cited the rapid demobilization of the american armed forces from nearly twelve million personnel in 1945 to fewer than two million in 1947 to argue that we cannot at this time limit our capability to produce or use this weapon in effect the baruch plan with its multiple stages and emphasis on inspection would preserve the american atomic monopoly for the indefinite future.
the soviets responded predictably.
diplomat andrei gromyko presented a simple plan calling for a total ban on the production and use of the new weapon as well as the destruction of all existing bombs.
the russian proposal was founded on the same perception of national self interest as the baruch plan.
although russia had also demobilized rapidly it still had nearly three million men under arms in 1947 and wanted to maximize its conventional strength by outlawing the atomic bomb.
no agreement was possible.
neither the united states nor the soviet union could abandon its position without surrendering a vital national interest.
wanting to preserve its monopoly america stressed inspection and control hoping to neutralize the u s advantage russia advocated immediate disarmament.
the nuclear dilemma inherent in the soviet american rivalry blocked any negotiated settlement.
instead the two superpowers agreed to disagree.
trusting neither each other nor any form of international cooperation each concentrated on taking maximum advantage of its wartime gains.
thus the russians exploited the territory they had conquered in europe while the united states retained its economic and strategic advantages over the soviet union.
the result was the cold war.
orderly of mind marshall had the capability honed in world war ii to think in broad strategic terms.
an extraordinarily good judge of ability he relied on gifted subordinates to handle the day to day implementation of his policies.
in the months after taking office he came to rely on two men in particular dean acheson and george kennan.
acheson an experienced washington lawyer and bureaucrat was appointed undersecretary of state and given free rein by marshall to conduct american diplomacy.
in appearance he seemed more british than american with his impeccable ivy league clothes and bushy mustache.
a man of keen intelligence he had a carefully cultivated reputation for arrogance and a low tolerance for mediocrity.
as an ardent anglophile he wanted to see the united states take over a faltering britains role as the supreme arbiter of world affairs.
recalling the lesson of munich he opposed appeasement and advocated a policy of negotiating only from strength.
george kennan marshalls other mainstay headed the newly created policy planning staff.
a career foreign service officer kennan had become a soviet expert mastering russian history and culture as well as speaking the language fluently.
he served in moscow after read the document george f kennan the long telegram 1946 containment what was containment and why was it adopted.
a major departure in american foreign policy occurred in january 1947 when general george c marshall the wartime army chief of staff became secretary of state.
calm mature and george f kennan 1904 2005 was an american political advisor diplomat political scientist and historian.
kennan was instrumental in developing the policy of containment concerning the soviet union that dominated the immediate post world war ii era.
containment read the document george marshall the marshall plan 1947 iceland u s aid per country in millions of dollars containment of russian expansive tendencies such a policy of halting soviet aggression would not lead to any immediate victory kennan warned.
in the long run however he believed that the united states could force the soviet union to adopt more reasonable policies and live in peace with the west.
the truman doctrine ba ltic sea the initial step toward containment came in response to an urgent british request.
since march 1946 sweden finland england had been supporting the greek government in a bitter civil norway war against communist guerrillas.
north oslo stockholm sea on february 21 1947 the british moscow united informed the united states that they kingdom could no longer afford to aid greece den.
london or turkey the latter under heavy presdublin copenhagen soviet union ireland east sure from the soviets for access to the germany mediterranean.
believing the russians berlin warsaw neth.
responsible for the strife in greece poland atlantic belg.
west in fact they were not marshall germany ocean paris czech.
acheson and kennan quickly decided lux.
vienna the united states would have to france budapest aus.
assume britains role in the eastern hun.
romania trieste mediterranean.
bucharest belgrade black worried about congressional supsea yugo.
port especially since the republicans bulgaria madrid portugal sofia had gained control of congress in 1946 lisbon istanbul rome italy alb.
spain marshall called a meeting with the legislative leadership in late february.
he mediter outlined the problem then acheson ran turkey athens ea n greece took over to warn that a highly posse a sible soviet breakthrough might open algeria tunisia morocco three continents to soviet penetration comparing the situation in greece marshall plan aid to europe 1948 1952 the marshall plan also known as the to one rotten apple spoiling an entire european recovery program provided aid totaling 13 billion to european countries following world war ii.
barrel acheson warned that the cormost went to former allies great britain and france but former enemies italy and west germany also received ruption of greece would infect iran substantial aid.
to receive the grants countries pledged to control inflation and lower tariffs.
and all to the east.
it would also carry u s recognition in 1933 and again during world war ii developing infection to africa through asia minor and egypt and to europe there a profound distrust for the soviet regime.
in a crucial telegram through italy and france claiming that the soviets were playing in 1946 he warned that the kremlin believed that there can be no one of the greatest gambles in history acheson concluded that we compromise with rival power and advocated a policy of containand we alone were in a position to break up the play ment arguing that only strong and sustained resistance could halt the bipartisan group of congressional leaders was deeply the outward flow of russian power.
as self assured as acheson impressed.
finally republican senator arthur m vandenberg kennan believed that neither congress nor public opinion should spoke up saying he would support the president but adding that interfere with the conduct of foreign policy by the experts.
to ensure public backing truman would have to scare hell out of in the spring of 1947 a sense of crisis impelled marshall the american people.
acheson and kennan to set out on a new course in american the president followed the senators advice.
on march 12 1947 diplomacy.
dubbed containment after an article by kennan in he asked congress for 400 million for military and economic assisforeign affairs the new policy both consolidated the evolving tance to greece and turkey.
in stating what would become known postwar anticommunism and established guidelines that would as the truman doctrine he made clear that more was involved shape americas role in the world for more than two decades.
what than just these two countries the stakes in fact were far higher.
it kennan proposed was a long term patient but firm and vigilant must be the policy of the united states truman told the congress chapter 28 the onset of the cold war to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressure after a brief debate both the house and the senate approved the program by margins of better than three to one.
the truman doctrine marked an informal declaration of cold war against the soviet union.
truman used the crisis in greece to secure congressional approval and build a national consensus for the policy of containment.
in less than two years the civil war in greece ended but the american commitment to oppose communist expansion whether by internal subversion or external aggression placed the united states on a collision course with the soviet union around the globe.
the marshall plan despite american interest in controlling soviet expansion into greece western europe was far more vital to u s interests than was the eastern mediterranean.
yet by 1947 many americans believed that western europe was open to soviet penetration.
the problem was economic in nature.
despite 9 billion in piecemeal american loans england france italy and the other european countries had great difficulty in recovering from world war ii.
food was scarce with millions existing on less than fifteen hundred calories a day industrial machinery was broken down and obsolete and workers were demoralized by years of depression and war.
the cruel winter of 1947 the worst in fifty years compounded the problem.
resentment and discontent led to growing communist voting strength especially in italy and france.
if the united states could not reverse the process it seemed as though all of europe might drift into the communist orbit.
in the weeks following proclamation of the truman doctrine american officials dealt with this problem.
secretary of state marshall returning from a frustrating council of foreign ministers meeting in moscow warned that the patient is sinking while the doctors deliberate acheson believed that it was time to extend american economic power in europe both to call an effective halt to the soviet unions expansionism and to create a basis for political stability and economic well being the experts drew up a plan for the massive infusion of american capital to finance the economic recovery of europe.
speaking at a harvard commencement on june 5 1947 marshall presented the broad outline.
he offered extensive economic aid to all the nations of europe if they could reach agreement on ways to achieve the revival of a working economy in the world so as to permit the emergence of political and social conditions in which free institutions can exist the fate of the marshall plan depended on the reaction of the soviet union and the u s congress.
marshall had taken in the words of one american diplomat a hell of a gamble by including russia in his offer of aid.
at a meeting of the european nations in paris in july 1947 the soviet foreign minister ended the suspense by abruptly withdrawing.
neither the soviet union nor its satellites would take part apparently because moscow saw the marshall plan as an american attempt to weaken soviet control over eastern europe.
the other european countries then made a formal request for 17 billion in assistance over the next four years.
congress responded cautiously to the proposal appointing a special joint committee to investigate.
the administration lobbied vigorously pointing out that the marshall plan would help the united states by stimulating trade with europe as well as checking soviet expansion.
it was the latter argument however that proved decisive.
when the czech coup touched off a war scare in march 1948 congress quickly approved the marshall plan by heavy majorities.
over the next four years the huge american investment paid rich dividends generating a broad industrial revival in western europe that became self sustaining by the 1950s.
the threat of communist domination faded and a prosperous europe proved to be a bonanza for american farmers miners and manufacturers.
the western military alliance the third and final phase of containment came in 1949 with the establishment of the north atlantic treaty organization nato.
nato grew out of european fears of russian military aggression.
recalling hitlers tactics in the 1930s the people of western europe wanted assurance that the united states would protect them from attack as they began to achieve economic recovery.
american diplomats were sympathetic.
people could not go ahead and make investments for the future commented averell harriman without some sense of security england france and the low countries belgium the netherlands and luxembourg began the process in march 1948 when they signed the brussels treaty providing for collective self defense.
in january 1949 president truman called for a broader defense pact including the united states ten european nations from norway in the north to italy in the south joined the united states and canada in signing the north atlantic treaty in washington on april 4 1949.
this historic departure from the traditional policy of isolation the united states had not signed such a treaty since the french alliance in the eighteenth century caused extensive debate but the senate ratified it in july by a vote of 82 to 13.
there were two main features of nato.
first the united states committed itself to the defense of europe in the key clause which stated that an armed attack against one or more shall be considered an attack against them all in effect the united states was extending its atomic shield over europe.
the second feature was designed to reassure worried europeans that the united states would honor this commitment.
in late 1950 president truman appointed general dwight d eisenhower to the post of nato supreme commander and authorized the stationing of four american divisions in europe to serve as the nucleus of the nato army.
it was believed the threat of american troop involvement in any russian assault would deter the soviet union from making such an attack.
the western military alliance escalated the developing cold war.
whatever its advantage in building a sense of security among worried europeans it represented an overreaction to the soviet danger.
americans and europeans alike were attempting to apply the lesson of munich to the cold war.
but stalin was not hitler and the soviets were not the nazis.
there was no evidence of any russian plan to invade western europe and in the face of the american atomic bomb none was likely.
nato only intensified russian fears of the west and thus increased the level of international tension.
the berlin blockade the main russian response to containment came in 1948 at the wests most vulnerable point.
american british french and soviet troops each occupied a sector of berlin but the city was the cold war expands located more than a hundred miles within the russian zone of germany see the map of postwar europe on p 669.
stalin decided to test his opponents resolve by cutting off all rail and highway traffic to berlin on june 20 1948.
the timing was very awkward for harry truman.
he had his hands full resisting efforts to force him off the democratic ticket and he faced a difficult reelection effort against a strong republican candidate governor thomas e dewey of new york.
immersed in election year politics truman was caught unprepared by the berlin blockade.
the alternatives were not very appealing.
the united states could withdraw its forces and lose not just a city but the confidence of all europe it could try to send in reinforcements and fight for berlin or it could sit tight and attempt to find a diplomatic solution.
truman made the basic decision in characteristic fashion telling the military that there would be no thought of pulling out.
we were going to stay period an aide reported truman as saying.
in the next few weeks the president and his advisers developed ways to implement the decision.
rejecting proposals for provoking a showdown by sending an armored column down the main highway the administration adopted a two phase policy.
the first part was a massive airlift of food fuel and supplies for the ten thousand troops and the two million civilians in berlin.
a fleet of fifty two c 54s and eighty c 47s began making two daily round trip flights to berlin carrying 2 500 tons every twenty four hours.
then to guard against soviet interruption of the berlin airlift truman transferred sixty american b 29s planes capable of delivering atomic bombs to bases in england.
the president was bluffing the b 29s were not equipped with atomic bombs but at the time the threat was effective.
for a few weeks the world teetered on the edge of war.
stalin did not attempt to disrupt the flights to berlin but he rejected all american diplomatic initiatives.
although at any time the russians could have halted it by jamming radar or shooting down the defenseless cargo planes the airlift gradually increased to more than 4 000 tons a day.
governor dewey patriotically supported the presidents policy thus removing foreign policy from the presidential campaign.
yet for truman the tension was fierce.
in early september he asked his advisers to brief him on bases bombs moscow leningrad etc i have a terrible feeling afterward that we are very close to war he confided in his diary.
i hope not slowly the tension eased.
the russians did not shoot down any planes and the daily airlift climbed to nearly 7 000 tons.
truman a decided underdog won a surprising second term in november over a complacent dewey in part because the berlin crisis had rallied the nation behind his leadership.
in early 1949 the soviets gave in ending the blockade in return for another meeting of the council of foreign ministers on germany a conclave that proved as unproductive as all the earlier ones.
the berlin crisis marked the end of the initial phase of the cold war.
the airlift had given the united states a striking political victory showing the world the triumph of american ingenuity over russian stubbornness.
yet it could not disguise the fact that the cold war had cut europe in two.
behind the iron curtain the russians had consolidated control over the areas won by their troops in the war while the united states had used the marshall plan to revitalize western europe.
but a divided continent was a far cry from the wartime hopes for a peaceful world.
and the rivalry that began in europe would soon spread into a worldwide contest among the super powers.
the cold war expands how did the cold war expand from europe to asia.
the rivalry between the united states and the soviet union grew in the late 1940s and early 1950s.
both sides began to rebuild their military forces with new methods and new weapons.
equally significant the diplomatic competition spread from europe to asia as each of the superpowers sought to enhance its influence in the far east.
by the time truman left office in early 1953 the cold war had taken on global proportions.
the military dimension after world war ii american leaders were intent on reforming the nations military system in light of their wartime experience.
two goals were uppermost.
first nearly everyone agreed in the aftermath of pearl harbor that the u s armed services should be unified into an integrated military system.
the developing cold war reinforced this decision.
without unification declared george marshall in 1945 there can be little hope that we will be able to maintain through the years a military posture that will secure for us a lasting peace equally important planners realized was the need for new institutions to coordinate military and diplomatic strategy so the nation could cope effectively with threats to its security.
in 1947 congress passed the national security act.
it established a department of defense headed by a civilian secretary of cabinet rank presiding over three separate services the army the navy and the new air force.
in addition the act created the central intelligence agency cia to coordinate the intelligence gathering activities of various government agencies.
finally the act provided for a national security council nsc composed of the service secretaries the secretary of defense and the secretary of state to advise the president on all matters regarding the nations security.
despite the appearance of equality among the services the air force quickly emerged as the dominant power in the atomic age based on its capability both to deter an enemy from attacking and to wage war if deterrence failed.
president truman intent on cutting back defense expenditures favored the air force in his 1949 military budget allotting this branch more than one half the total sum.
after the czech coup and the resulting war scare congress granted an additional 3 billion to the military.
the appropriation included funds for a new b 36 to replace the b 29 as the nations primary strategic bomber.
american military planners received even greater support in the fall of 1949 when the soviet union exploded its first atomic bomb.
president truman appointed a high level committee to explore mounting an all out effort to build a hydrogen bomb to maintain american nuclear supremacy.
some scientists had technical objections to the h bomb which was still far from being perfected while others opposed the new weapon on moral grounds claiming that its enormous destructive power intended to be one thousand times greater than the atomic bomb made it unthinkable.
george kennan suggested a new effort at international arms control with the soviets but dean acheson who succeeded marshall as secretary of state in early 1949 believed it was imperative that the united states develop the hydrogen bomb before the soviet union.
when chapter 28 the onset of the cold war view the closer look berlin airlift the berlin airlift june 1948 may 1949 was organized by the truman administration and the western allies to overcome the rail roadways and canals blockade of west berlin instituted by the soviet union.
over two hundred thousand american and british air force flights over west berlin delivered approximately nearly five thousand tons of food and other necessities to west berliners in order to break successfully the soviet blockade.
acheson presented the committees favorable report to the president in january 1950 truman took only seven minutes to decide to go ahead with the awesome new weapon.
at the same time acheson ordered the policy planning staff headed by paul nitze after kennan resigned in protest to draw up a new statement of national defense policy.
nsc 68 as the document eventually became known was based on the premise that the soviet union sought to impose its absolute authority over the rest of the world and thus mortally challenged the united states.
rejecting such options as appeasement or a return to isolation nitze advocated a massive expansion of american military power so the united states could halt and overcome the soviet threat.
contending the nation could afford to spend upward of 50 percent of its gross national product for security nsc 68 proposed increasing defense spending from 13 to 45 billion annually.
approved in principle by the national security council in april 1950 nsc 68 stood as a symbol of the truman administrations determination to win the cold war regardless of cost.
the cold war in asia the soviet american conflict developed more slowly in asia.
at yalta the two superpowers had agreed to a far eastern balance of power with the russians dominating northeast asia and the americans in control of the pacific including both japan and its former island empire.
the united states moved quickly to consolidate its sphere of influence.
general douglas macarthur in charge of japanese occupation denied the soviet union any role in the reconstruction of japan.
instead he supervised the transition of the japanese government into a constitutional democracy shaped along western lines in which communists were barred from all government posts.
the japanese willingly renounced war in their new constitution relying instead the cold war expands on american forces to protect their security.
american policy was equally nationalistic in the pacific.
a trusteeship arrangement with the united nations merely disguised the fact that the united states held full control over the marshall mariana and caroline islands.
american scientists conducted atomic bomb tests at bikini atoll in 1946 and by 1949 macarthur was declaring that the entire pacific had become an anglo saxon lake and our line of defense runs through the chain of islands fringing the coast of asia as defined at yalta china lay between the soviet and american spheres.
when world war ii ended the country was torn between chiang kai sheks nationalists in the south and mao tse tungs communists in the north.
chiang had many advantages including american political and economic backing and official soviet recognition.
but corruption was widespread among the nationalist leaders and a raging inflation that soon reached 100 percent a year devastated the chinese middle classes and thus eroded chiangs base of power.
mao used tight discipline and patriotic appeals to strengthen his hold on the peasantry and extend his influence.
when the soviets abruptly vacated manchuria in 1946 after stripping it of virtually all the industrial machinery japan had installed mao inherited control of this rich northern province.
ignoring american advice chiang rushed north to occupy manchurian cities overextending his supply lines and exposing his forces to communist counterattack.
american policy sought to prevent a chinese civil war.
before he became secretary of state george marshall undertook the difficult task of forming a coalition government between chiang and mao.
for a few months in early 1946 marshall appeared to have succeeded but chiangs attempts to gain control of manchuria doomed the agreement.
in reality there was no basis for compromise.
chiang insisted he was going to liquidate communists while mao was trying to play the united states against russia in his bid for power.
by 1947 as china plunged into full scale civil war the truman administration had given up any meaningful effort to influence the outcome.
political mediation had failed military intervention was out of the question so soon after world war ii and a policy of continued american economic aid served only to appease domestic supporters of chiang kai shek 80 percent of the military supplies ended up in communist hands.
the chinese conflict climaxed at the end of the decade.
maos forces drove the nationalists out of manchuria in late 1948 and advanced across the yangtze by mid 1949.
acheson released a lengthy report justifying american policy in china on the grounds that the civil war there was beyond the control of the government of the united states an american military adviser concurred telling congress that the nationalist defeat was due to the worlds worst leadership and a complete loss of will to fight republican senators however disagreed blaming american diplomats for sabotaging the nationalists and terming achesons report a 1054 page white wash of a wishful do nothing policy while the domestic debate raged over responsibility for the loss of china chiangs forces fled the mainland for sanctuary on formosa taiwan in december 1949.
two months later mao and stalin signed a sino soviet treaty of mutual assistance that clearly placed china in the russian orbit.
the american response to the communist triumph in china was twofold.
first the state department refused to recognize the legitimacy of the new regime in beijing maintaining instead formal diplomatic relations with the nationalists on formosa.
citing the sino soviet alliance assistant secretary of state dean rusk called the beijing regime a colonial russian government and declared it is not the government of china.
it does not pass the first test.
it is not chinese then to compensate for the loss of china the united states focused on japan as its main ally in asia.
the state department encouraged the buildup of japanese industry and the pentagon expanded american bases on the japanese home islands and okinawa.
a japanese american security pact led to the end of american occupation by 1952.
the cold war had now split east asia in two.
the korean war the showdown between the united states and the soviet union in asia came in korea.
traditionally the cockpit of international rivalry in northeast asia korea had been divided at the view the map the korean war 1950 1953 soviet union china lu ya farthest un advance nov 1950 r sea of japan north korea pyongyang truce line panmunjom 38th parallel seoul inchon landing sept 15 1950 pusan perimeter farthest north korean advance sept 1950 south korea pusan yellow sea 150 miles 150 kilometers international boundaries 1950 un offensive sept nov.
1950 north korean invasion june sept.
1950 communist chinese offensive nov 1950 jan.
1951 the korean war 1950 1953 after a year of rapid movement up and down the korean peninsula the fighting stalled just north of the 38th parallel.
the resulting truce line has divided north and south korea since the july 1953 armistice.
chapter 28 the onset of the cold war 38th parallel in 1945.
the russians occupied the industrial north installing a communist government under the leadership of kim il sung.
in the agrarian south syngman rhee a conservative nationalist emerged as the american sponsored ruler.
neither regime heeded a un call for elections to unify the country.
the two superpowers pulled out most of their occupation forces by 1949.
the russians however helped train a well equipped army in the north while the united states fearful rhee would seek unification through armed conquest gave much more limited military assistance to south korea.
on june 25 1950 the north korean army suddenly crossed the 38th parallel in great strength.
stalin had approved this act of aggression in advance.
in january 1950 the soviet leader had told mao tse tung that he was ready to overthrow the yalta settlement in the far east and to hell with it he exclaimed to mao.
in april when kim il sung came to moscow to gain approval for the assault on south korea stalin gave it willingly apparently in the belief that the united states was ready to abandon syngman rhee.
but the ever cautious stalin warned kim not to count on soviet assistance saying if you should get kicked in the teeth i shall not lift a finger.
you have to ask mao for all the help in may despite expressing some reservations mao also approved the planned north korean aggression.
both stalin and mao had badly miscalculated the american response.
president truman saw the invasion as a clear cut case of soviet aggression reminiscent of the 1930s.
communism was acting in korea just as hitler mussolini and the japanese had acted ten fifteen and twenty years earlier he commented in his memoirs.
following achesons advice the president convened the un security council and taking advantage of a temporary soviet boycott secured a resolution condemning north korea as an aggressor and calling on the member nations to engage in a collective security action.
within a few days american troops from japan were in combat in south korea.
the conflict which would last for more than three years was technically a police action fought under un auspices in reality the united states was at war with a soviet satellite in asia.
in the beginning the fighting went badly as the north koreans continued to drive down the peninsula.
but by august american forces had halted the communist advance near pusan.
in september general macarthur changed the whole complexion of the war by carrying out a brilliant amphibious assault at inchon on the waist of korea cutting off and destroying most of the north korean army in the south.
encouraged by this victory truman began to shift from his original goal of restoring the 38th parallel to a new one the unification of korea by military force.
the administration ignored beijings repeated warnings not to invade north korea.
i should think it would be sheer madness for the chinese to intervene commented acheson.
despite cia reports of a massive chinese force assembling in manchuria president truman and his advisers continued to believe that the soviet union not ready for all out war would hold china in check.
general macarthur was equally certain that china would not attack his troops in korea.
we are no longer fearful of their intervention he told truman in october adding that if they crossed the yalu into korea there would be the greatest slaughter rarely has an american president received worse advice.
china was not a soviet puppet.
when un forces crossed the 38th parallel and moved confidently toward the yalu the chinese launched a devastating counterattack in late november which caught macarthur by surprise and drove his armies out of north korea by the end of the year.
macarthur finally stabilized the fighting near the 38th parallel but when truman decided to give up his attempt to unify korea the general protested to congress calling for a renewed offensive and proclaiming there is no substitute for victory truman courageously relieved the popular hero of the pacific of his command on april 11 1951.
at first macarthur seemed likely to force the president to back down.
huge crowds came forward to welcome him home and hear him call for victory over the communists in asia.
at a special congressional hearing the administration struck back effectively by warning that macarthurs strategy would expose all europe to soviet attack.
general omar bradley trumans chief military adviser succinctly pointed out that a showdown with communism in asia would be the wrong war at the wrong place at the wrong time and with the wrong enemy congress and the american people came to accept macarthurs recall.
the korean war settled into a stalemate near the 38th parallel as truce talks with the communists bogged down.
the president had achieved his primary goal defense of south korea and the principle of collective security.
yet by taking the gamble to unify korea by force he had confused the american people and embarrassed the united states in the eyes of the world.
in the last analysis the most significant result of the korean conflict was the massive american rearmament it brought about.
the war led to the implementation of nsc 68 the army expanded to 3 5 million troops the defense budget increased to 50 billion a year by 1952 and the united states acquired distant military bases from saudi arabia to morocco.
america was now committed to waging a global contest against the soviet union with arms as well as words.
the cold war at home how did the cold war affect life in america.
the cold war cast a long shadow over american life in the late 1940s and early 1950s.
truman tried to carry on the new deal reform tradition he had inherited from fdr but the american people were more concerned about events abroad.
the republican party used both growing dissatisfaction with postwar economic adjustment and fears of communist penetration of the united states to revive its sagging fortunes and regain control of the white house in 1952 for the first time in twenty years.
trumans troubles matching his foreign policy successes with equal achievements at home was not easy for harry s truman.
as a loyal supporter of franklin d roosevelts new deal programs during his senate career truman had earned a reputation for being a hardworking reliable and intensely partisan legislator.
but he was relatively unknown to the general public and his background as a missouri county official associated with kansas city machine politics did little the cold war at home to inspire confidence in his ability to lead the nation.
surprisingly well read especially in history and biography truman possessed sound judgment the ability to reach decisions quickly and a fierce and uncompromising sense of right and wrong.
two weaknesses marred his performance in the white house.
one was a fondness for old friends which resulted in the appointment of many missouri and senate cronies to high office.
men such as attorney general tom clark secretary of the treasury charles snyder and white house military aide harry vaughn brought little credit to the truman administration while the loss of such effective public servants as secretary of the interior harold ickes and labor secretary frances perkins hurt it.
the presidents other serious limitation was his lack of political vision.
failing to pursue a coherent legislative program of his own he tried to perpetuate fdrs new deal and as a result engaged in a running battle with congress.
the postwar mood was not conducive to an extension of new deal reforms.
americans were weary of shortages and sacrifices they wanted the chance to buy the consumer goods denied them under wartime conditions.
but in the rush to convert industry from producing planes and tanks to cars and appliances problems soon emerged.
prices and wages rose quickly as congress voted to end wartime controls.
with prices going up 25 percent in two years workers demanded higher wages to offset the loss of overtime pay.
a wave of labor unrest swept over the country in the spring of 1946 culminating in two critical strikes a walkout by coal miners that threatened to close down much of american industry and a paralyzing strike by railroad workers.
president truman was caught in the middle.
sensitive to union demands he permitted businesses to negotiate large pay increases for their workers and then pass on the cost to consumers in the form of higher prices.
he criticized congress for weakening wartime price controls but he failed to offer anything else to curb inflation.
homemakers blamed him for the rising price of food while organized labor condemned truman as the countrys no.
1 strikebreaker when he asked congress for power to draft striking railway workers into the army.
in the face of this rising discontent trumans efforts to extend the new deal met with little success.
congress ignored his september 1945 call for measures to ensure economic security and enacted only the employment act of 1946.
this legislation created the council of economic advisers to assist the president and asserted the principle that the government was responsible for the state of the economy but it failed to address trumans original goal of mandatory federal planning to achieve full employment.
the republicans took advantage of increasing public dissatisfaction with postwar economic woes to attack the democrats.
to err is truman the gop proclaimed and then adopted a very effective two word slogan for the 1946 congressional elections had enough the american people weary of inflation and labor unrest responded by electing republican majorities in both the house and senate for the first time since 1930 overrode his veto of the taft hartley act in 1947.
designed to undo the prolabor tilt of the wagner act the taft hartley act outlawed specific labor union activities including the closed shop and secondary boycotts and it permitted the president to invoke an eighty day cooling off period to delay strikes that might endanger national health or safety.
despite trumans claim that it was a slave labor bill unions were able to survive its provisions.
president trumans political fortunes reached their lowest ebb in early 1948.
former vice president henry a wallace claiming to represent the new deal announced his third party progressive candidacy in the presidential contest that year.
worried democratic party leaders sought to persuade truman to step aside and allow general dwight d eisenhower to become the democratic candidate.
when eisenhower turned down bids from both parties the democrats reluctantly nominated truman.
his prospects for victory in the fall however looked very dim especially after disgruntled southerners bolted from the democratic party in protest over a progressive civil rights platform.
the dixiecrats as they became known nominated strom thurmond the governor of south carolina on a states rights party ticket.
the defection of the dixiecrats in the south and wallaces liberal followers in the north led political experts to predict an almost certain republican victory.
governor thomas e dewey of new york the gop candidate was so sure of winning that he waged a cautious and bland campaign designed to give him a free hand once he was in the white house.
with nothing to lose truman election of 1948 electoral vote by state democratic harry s truman 24 105 695 republican thomas e dewey 21 969 170 states rights strom thurmond 1 169 021 minor parties henry wallace et al.
the presidents relations with congress became even stormier after the 1946 elections.
truman successfully vetoed two gop measures to give large tax cuts to the wealthy but congress 1 296 898 48 537 784 truman vindicated popular vote chapter 28 the onset of the cold war barnstormed around the country denouncing the do nothing republican eightieth congress.
the presidents give em hell tactics reminded voters of how much they owed the democrats for helping them survive the great depression.
to the amazement of the pollsters truman won a narrow but decisive victory in november.
the old roosevelt coalition farmers organized labor urban ethnic groups and blacks had held together enabling truman to remain in the white house and the democrats to regain control of congress.
there was one more reason for trumans win in 1948.
during this election held at the height of the berlin crisis the gop failed to challenge trumans conduct of the cold war.
locked in a tense rivalry with the soviet union the american people saw no reason to reject a president who had countered aggression overseas with the truman doctrine and the marshall plan.
the republicans committed to support the bipartisan policy of containment had allowed the democrats to preempt the foreign policy issue.
until they found a way to challenge trumans cold war policies gop leaders had little chance to regain the white house.
the loyalty issue program ordering security checks of government employees in order to root out communists.
originally intended to remove subversives for whom reasonable grounds exist for belief that the person involved is disloyal within four years the loyalty review board was dismissing workers as security risks if there was reasonable doubt of their loyalty.
thousands of government workers lost their jobs charged with guilt by association with radicals or with membership in left wing organizations.
often those who were charged had no chance to face their accusers.
the most famous disclosure came in august 1948 when whittaker chambers a repentant communist accused alger hiss of having been a soviet spy in the 1930s.
when hiss who had been a prominent state department official denied the charges chambers led investigators to a hollowed out pumpkin on his maryland farm.
inside the pumpkin were microfilms of confidential government documents.
chambers claimed that hiss had passed the state department materials to him in the late 1930s.
although the statute of limitations prevented a charge of treason against hiss he was convicted of perjury in january 1950 and sentenced to a five year prison term.
in 1948 the justice department further heightened fears of subversion.
it charged eleven officials of the communist party with advocating the violent overthrow of the government.
after a long trial the jury found them guilty and the party officials received prison sentences and heavy fines in 1951 the supreme court upheld the convictions as constitutional.
such repressive measures failed however to reassure the nation.
events abroad intensified the sense of danger.
the communist triumph in china in the fall of 1949 came as a shock soon there were charges that fellow travelers in the state department despite trumans surprising victory in 1948 there was one area on which the democrats were vulnerable.
the fear of communism abroad that had led to the bipartisan containment policy could be used against them at home by politicians who were more willing to exploit the publics deep seated anxiety.
fear of radicalism had been a recurrent feature of american life since the early days of the republic.
federalists had tried to suppress dissent with the alien and sedition acts in the 1790s the knownothings had campaigned against foreigners and catholics in the 1850s and the red scare after world war i had been directed against both aliens and radicals.
the cold war heightened the traditional belief that subversion from abroad endangered the republic.
bold rhetoric from members of the truman administration portraying the men in the kremlin as inspired revolutionaries bent on world conquest frightened the american people.
they viewed the soviet union as a successor to nazi germany a totalitarian police state that threatened the basic liberties of a free people.
a series of revelations of communist espionage activities reinforced these fears sparking a second red scare.
canadian officials uncovered a soviet spy ring in 1946 and the house un american activities committee huac held hearings indicating that communist agents had flourished in the agriculture and treasury departments in the 1930s.
although truman tried to dismiss the loyalty issue as a red herring he felt compelled to take protective measures thus lending substance to the charges of subvera jubilant harry truman on the morning after his 1948 election win displays the headline blazoned sion.
in march 1947 he initiated a loyalty on the front page of the chicago daily tribune a newspaper that believed the pollsters.
the cold war at home read the document ronald reagan testimony before huac 1947 alger hiss accused of being a communist spy by whittaker chambers takes an oath during his august 1948 hearings before the house un american activities committee.
hisss conviction on charges of perjury convinced many americans that internal subversion threatened the nations survival.
were responsible for the loss of china in september 1949 when the truman administration announced that the russians had detonated their first atomic bomb the end of americas nuclear monopoly was blamed on soviet espionage.
in early 1950 klaus fuchs a british scientist who had worked on the wartime manhattan project admitted giving the russians vital information about the a bomb.
a few months later the government charged american communists ethel and julius rosenberg with conspiracy to transmit atomic secrets to the soviet union.
in 1951 a jury found the rosenbergs guilty of espionage and judge irving kaufman sentenced them to die for what he termed their loathsome offense despite their insistent claims of innocence and worldwide appeals on their behalf the rosenbergs were electrocuted on june 19 1953.
thus by the early 1950s nearly all the ingredients were at hand for a new outburst of hysteria fear of russia evidence of espionage and a belief in a vast unseen conspiracy.
the only element missing was a leader to release the new outburst of intolerance.
mccarthyism in action on february 12 1950 senator joseph r mccarthy of wisconsin delivered a routine lincolns birthday speech in wheeling west virginia.
this little known republican suddenly attracted national attention when he declared i have here in my hand a list of 205 a list of names that were made known to the secretary of state as being members of the communist party and who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in the state department the charge that there were communists in the state department on different occasions with the number changed to 57 then 81 was never substantiated.
but mccarthys wheeling speech triggered a four and a half year crusade to hunt down alleged communists in government.
the stridency and sensationalism of the senators accusations soon won the name mccarthyism.
mccarthys basic technique was the multiple untruth.
he leveled a bevy of charges of treasonable activities in government.
while officials were refuting his initial accusations he brought forth a steady stream of new ones so the corrections never caught up with the latest blast.
he failed to unearth a single confirmed communist in government but he kept the truman administration in turmoil.
drawing on an army of informers primarily disgruntled federal workers with grievances against their colleagues and superiors mccarthy charged government agencies with harboring and protecting communist agents and accused the state department of deliberately losing the cold war.
his briefcase bulged with documents but he did very little actual research relying instead on reports often outdated from earlier congressional investigations.
he exploited the press with great skill combining current accusations with promises of future disclosures to guarantee headlines.
the secret of mccarthys power was the fear he engendered among his senate colleagues.
in 1950 maryland senator millard tydings who headed a committee critical of mccarthys activities failed to win reelection when mccarthy opposed him after that other senators ran scared.
mccarthy delighted in making sweeping startling charges of communist sympathies against prominent public figures.
a favorite target was patrician secretary of state dean acheson whom mccarthy ridiculed as the red dean with his cane spats and tea sipping little finger he even went after general george marshall claiming that the wartime army chief of staff was an agent of the communist conspiracy.
nor were fellow republicans immune.
one gop senator was described as a living miracle in that he is without question the only man who has lived so long with neither brains nor guts the attacks on the wealthy famous and privileged won mccarthy a devoted national following though at the height of his influence in early 1954 he gained the approval of only 50 percent of the respondents in a gallup poll.
mccarthy drew a disproportionate backing from working class catholics and ethnic groups especially the irish poles and italians who normally voted democratic.
he offered a simple solution to the complicated cold war defeat the enemy at home rather than continue to engage in costly foreign aid programs and entangling alliances abroad.
above all mccarthy appealed to conservative republicans in the midwest who shared his right wing views and felt cheated by trumans upset victory in 1948.
even gop leaders who viewed mccarthys tactics with distaste such as robert a taft of ohio quietly encouraged him to attack the vulnerable democrats.
chapter 28 the onset of the cold war watch the video mccarthyism and the politics of fear in the early 1950s u s.
senator joseph mccarthy a republican politician from wisconsin made a stream of sensational unsubstantiated and damaging accusations about alleged communists working in the state department and other u s government agencies and institutions.
sen mccarthys prominence suffered a fatal downfall when he maliciously attacked top officials and others in the u s army in 1954 and he was subsequently censured by his colleagues in the u s senate the republicans in power in 1952 the gop capitalized on a growing sense of national frustration to capture the presidency.
the stalemate in korea and the second red scare created a desire for political change revelations of scandals by several individuals close to truman intensified the feeling that someone needed to clean up the mess in washington in dwight d eisenhower the republican party found the perfect candidate to explore what one senator called k1c2 korea communism and corruption.
immensely popular because of his amiable manner winning smile and heroic stature eisenhower alone appeared to have the ability to unite a divided nation.
in the 1952 campaign ike displayed hidden gifts as a politician in running against adlai stevenson the eloquent illinois governor whose appeal was limited to diehard democrats and liberal intellectuals.
eisenhower allowed his young running mate senator richard m nixon of california to hammer away at the democrats on the communist and corruption issues but he himself delivered the most telling blow of all on the korean war.
speaking in detroit in late october just after the fighting had intensified again in korea ike promised if elected he would go personally to the battlefield in an attempt to bring the korean war to an early and honorable end the election of 1952 candidate eisenhower stevenson party republican democratic popular vote 33 778 963 27 314 992 electoral vote that does it ike is in several reporters exclaimed after they heard this pledge.
the hero of world war ii had clinched his election by committing himself to end an unpopular war.
ten days later the cold war at home watch the video ike for president campaign ad 1952 in the 1952 presidential campaign republican presidential candidate dwight d eisenhower was the first presidential candidate to make effective use of television spot advertising.
eisenhowers televised ads help defeat his democratic opponent adlai stevenson in the 1952 election.
he won the presidency handily carrying thirty nine states including four in the formerly solid democratic south.
the republican party however did not fare as well in congress it gained just a slight edge in the house and controlled the senate by only one seat.
once elected eisenhower moved quickly to fulfill his campaign pledge.
he spent three days in early december touring the battlefront in korea quickly ruling out the new offensive the military favored.
small attacks on small hills he later wrote would not end the war instead he turned to diplomacy relying on subtle hints to china on the possible use of nuclear weapons to break the stalemated peace talks.
these tactics together with the death of joseph stalin in early march finally led to the signing of an armistice on july 27 1953 which ended the fighting but left korea divided as it had been before the war near the 38th parallel.
the new president was less effective in dealing with the problem raised by senator mccarthys continuing witch hunt.
instead of toning down his anticommunist crusade after the republican victory in 1952 mccarthy used his new position as chairman of the senate committee on government operations as a base for ferreting out communists on the federal payroll.
he made a series of charges against the foreign affairs agencies and demanded that certain books be purged from american information libraries overseas.
eisenhowers advisers urged the president to use his own great prestige to stop mccarthy.
but ike refused such a confrontation saying i will not get into a pissing contest with a skunk eisenhower preferred to play for time hoping the american people would eventually come to their senses.
the wisconsin senator finally overreached himself.
in early 1954 he uncovered an army dentist suspected of disloyalty and proceeded to attack the upper echelons of the u s army telling one much decorated general that he was not fit to wear the uniform the controversy culminated in the televised army mccarthy hearings.
for six weeks the senator revealed his crude bullying behavior to the american people.
viewers were repelled by his frequent outbursts that began with the insistent cry point of order mr chairman point of order and by his attempt to slur the reputation of a young lawyer associated with army counsel joseph welch.
this last maneuver led welch to condemn mccarthy for chapter 28 the onset of the cold war his reckless cruelty and ask rhetorically as millions watched on television have you no sense of decency sir courageous republicans led by senators ralph flanders of vermont and margaret chase smith of maine joined with democrats to bring about the senates censure of mccarthy in december 1954 by a vote of sixty seven to twenty two.
once rebuked mccarthy fell quickly from prominence.
he died three years later virtually unnoticed and unmourned.
yet his influence was profound.
not only did he paralyze national life with what a senate subcommittee described as the most nefarious campaign of half truth and untruth in the history of the republic but he also helped impose a political and cultural conformity that froze dissent for the rest of the 1950s.
long after mccarthys passing the nation tolerated loyalty oaths for teachers the banning of left wing books in public libraries and the blacklisting of entertainers in radio television and films.
freedom of expression was inhibited and the opportunity to try out new ideas and approaches was lost as the united states settled into a sterile cold war consensus.
while dwight eisenhower could claim that his policy of giving mccarthy enough rope to hang himself had worked it is possible that a bolder and more forthright presidential attack on the senator might have spared the nation some of the excesses of the second red scare.
he would settle for a relaxation of tensions with the soviet union.
in part he was motivated by a deeply held concern about the budget.
defense spending had increased from 13 billion to 50 billion under truman ike was convinced the nation was in danger of going bankrupt unless military spending was reduced.
as president he inaugurated a new look for american defense cutting back on the army and navy and relying even more heavily than truman had on the air force and its nuclear striking power.
as a result the defense budget dropped below 40 billion annually.
in 1954 dulles announced reliance on massive retaliation in fact a continuance of trumans policy of deterrence.
rather than becoming involved in limited wars such as korea the united states would consider the possibility of using nuclear weapons to halt any communist aggression that threatened vital u s interests anywhere in the world.
while he permitted dulles to make his veiled nuclear threats eisenhowers fondest dream was to end the arms race.
sobered by the development of the hydrogen bomb successfully tested by the united states in november 1952 and by the soviet union in august 1953 the president began a new effort at disarmament with the russians.
yet before this initiative could take effect ike had to weather a series of crises around the world that tested his skill and patience to the utmost.
entanglement in indochina eisenhower wages the cold war how successful was eisenhower at dealing with the foreign policy issues facing the united states.
dwight d eisenhower came into the presidency in 1952 unusually well prepared to lead the nation at the height of the cold war.
his long years of military service had exposed him to a wide variety of international issues both in asia and in europe and to an even broader array of world leaders such as winston churchill and charles de gaulle.
he was not only an experienced military strategist but a gifted politician and diplomat as well.
he was blessed with a sharp pragmatic mind and organizational genius that enabled him to plan and carry out large enterprises grasping the precise relationship between the parts and the whole.
above all he had a serene confidence in his own ability.
at the end of his first day in the white house he confided in his diary plenty of worries and difficult problems.
but such has been my portion for a long time the result is that this just seems like a continuation of all ive been doing since july 1941 eisenhower chose john foster dulles as his secretary of state.
the myth soon developed that ike had given dulles free rein to conduct american diplomacy.
appearances were deceptive.
eisenhower preferred to work behind the scenes.
he let dulles make the public speeches and appearances before congressional committees where the secretarys hard line views placated gop extremists.
but dulles carefully consulted with the president before every appearance meeting frequently with eisenhower at the white house and telephoning him several times a day.
ike respected his secretary of states broad knowledge of foreign policy and skill in conducting american diplomacy but he made all the major decisions himself.
theres only one man i know who has seen more of the world and talked with more people and knows more than he does ike said of dulles and thats me from the outset eisenhower was determined to bring the cold war under control.
ideally he wanted to end it but as a realist the first crisis facing the new president came in indochina.
since 1950 the united states had been giving france military and economic aid in a war in indochina against communist guerrillas led by ho chi minh.
the chinese increased their support to hos forces known as the vietminh after the korean war ended by the spring of 1954 the french were on the brink of defeat.
the vietminh had surrounded nearly ten thousand french troops at dien bien phu deep in the interior of northern indochina in desperation france turned to the united states for help.
admiral arthur radford chairman of the joint chiefs of staff proposed an american air strike to lift the siege.
although the other joint chiefs had strong objections to involving american forces in another asian war so soon after korea hawkish republican senators were clamoring for action.
eisenhower decided against radfords bold proposal but he killed it in his typically indirect fashion.
fearful that an air attack would lead inevitably to the use of ground troops ike insisted that both congress and american allies in europe approve the strike in advance.
congressional leaders recalling the recent korean stalemate were reluctant to agree the british were appalled and ruled out any joint action.
the president used these objections to reject intervention in indochina in 1954.
years later he stated his reasons more candidly.
the jungles of indochina would have swallowed up division after division of united states troops he explained.
equally important he believed that u s involvement in frances war would have compromised the american tradition of anticolonialism dien bien phu fell to the vietminh in may 1954.
at an international conference held in geneva a few weeks later indochina was divided at the 17th parallel.
ho gained control of north vietnam while the french continued to rule in the south with provision for a general election within two years to unify the country.
the election was never held largely because eisenhower feared it would result in an overwhelming mandate for ho.
instead the united states gradually took over from the french in south vietnam sponsoring a new government in saigon headed by ngo dinh diem a vietnamese eisenhower wages the cold war read the document dwight d eisenhower letters on dien bien phu 1954 a french soldier stands guard over a truckload of vietnamese nationalists captured in the fighting in indochina.
french efforts to quash the rebellion in vietnam ended on may 7 1954 when the vietminh took the french stronghold at dien bien phu.
nationalist from a northern catholic family.
while eisenhower can be given credit for refusing to engage american forces on behalf of french colonialism in indochina his determination to resist communist expansion had committed the united states to a long and eventually futile struggle to prevent ho chi minh from achieving his long sought goal of a unified independent vietnam.
containing china the communist government in beijing posed a serious challenge for the eisenhower administration.
senate republicans led by william knowland of california blamed the democrats for the loss of china.
they viewed mao as a puppet of the soviet union and insisted the united states recognize the nationalists on formosa as the only legitimate government of china.
while state department experts realized there were underlying tensions between china and russia maos intervention in the korean war had convinced most americans that the chinese communists were an integral part of a larger communist effort at world domination.
thus truman and acheson had abandoned any hope of trying to exploit differences between mao and stalin by wooing china away from the soviet union.
eisenhower and dulles chose to accentuate the potential conflict between russia and china.
by taking a strong line against china the united states could make the chinese realize that russia was unable to protect their interests at the same time such a hawkish policy would please congressional conservatives such as knowland.
ultimately eisenhower and dulles hoped that a policy of firmness would not only contain communist chinese expansion in asia but also drive a wedge between moscow and beijing.
a crisis in the formosa straits provided the first test of the new policy.
in the fall of 1954 communist china threatened to seize coastal islands notably quemoy and matsu occupied by the nationalists.
fearful that seizure of these offshore islands would be the first step toward an invasion of formosa eisenhower permitted dulles to sign a security treaty with chiang kai shek committing complete the assignment america enters the middle east on myhistorylab feature essay h arry truman never liked disagreeing with george marshall.
the secretary of state was in trumans view the greatest living american and as the architect of the american victory in world war ii marshall possessed a stature no civilian and certainly no accidental president such as truman remained in the spring of 1948 could hope to match.
marshall adamantly opposed an action recommended by several of trumans closest advisers.
the british government had decided to relinquish control of palestine the region on the eastern shore of the mediterranean it had inherited from the ottoman empire after world war i.
the united nations general assembly in november 1947 proposed partitioning palestine into two states one controlled by the arab inhabitants of the region the other controlled by the jewish inhabitants.
the un plan provoked violence between the arabs and jews with each group struggling to position itself most favorably for the moment the british left.
the u s state department advocated a cautious policy in the evolving situation.
robert lovett the american undersecretary of state told truman that hasty recognition of the new jewish state israel would constitute buying a pig in a poke that the united states didnt know what kind of government israel would have what the boundaries of the new jewish state would be or how israels neighbors would respond to the creation of this novel entity.
george marshall was even more adamant than lovett.
marshall knew that truman was being told by his political advisers that recognition of israel america enters the middle east would help him and the democrats in the upcoming 1948 elections but the secretary of state thoroughly rejected the idea that politics should influence such a crucial foreign policy decision.
these considerations have nothing to do with the issue marshall told the president.
i dont think politics should play any part in this clark clifford was the adviser who made the strongest case for early recognition and marshall resented that clifford was even present at the meetings regarding israel.
the secretary of state told truman in the bluntest of terms if you follow cliffords advice and if i were to vote in the election i would vote against you well that was rough as a cob truman remarked after marshall left the oval office.
i never saw the general so furious but truman had reasons for going ahead with recognition and politics was only one.
the cold war was under way and truman feared that the soviet union would recognize israel before the united states did giving moscow a potential advantage in the middle east at a time when that oil rich region was becoming critical in the balance of international power.
moreover the jewish people had been promised a homeland by the british many years before and israel was the manifestation of that promise.
to be sure britains promises didnt bind the united states but britain was americas ally and truman felt a certain obligation to follow through on britains behalf.
finally the jews had suffered horribly during world war ii and although a jewish state wouldnt bring back the six million slaughtered in the holocaust it would provide the jews of the world a refuge against future threats.
truman gave marshall time to cool off confident that the generals military training would incline him to support or at least not oppose his commander in chief once the president made up his mind.
and when truman did choose in favor of early recognition of israel marshall gritted his teeth but indeed held his tongue.
on may 14 1948 fifteen minutes after the official proclamation of the jewish state of israel the united states announced its recognition.
this first american step into the middle east was followed by others.
in 1951 the populist prime minister of iran mohammad mossadeq announced a plan to nationalize the anglo iranian oil company a giant firm that held exclusive rights to develop and exploit irans richest oil fields.
the british government was the principal shareholder in anglo iranian and the companys identity and presence reminded iranians of the power britain had long wielded over their country.
mossadeqs nationalization plan was intended to break britains hold forever.
the british government not surprisingly resisted the nationalization effort.
the british approached the truman administration about joining in a secret operation to overthrow mossadeq.
truman had consented to the 1947 establishment of the central intelligence agency but he never lost his fear that the spy agency would become an american gestapo as he called it and he rejected the british overture.
but after dwight eisenhower succeeded truman in the white house the british reproposed their plan.
they argued that mossadeq was either a communist in disguise or the dupe of communists and that if he remained in power iran and its oil would slip into the grasp of the neighboring soviet union.
eisenhower took this possibility very seriously.
he couldnt know that things would happen the way the british predicted but neither could he know that they would not happen that way.
at a moment when the cold war was spreading beyond europe and becoming a global contest eisenhower didnt want to risk letting the soviets seize iran.
accordingly he approved a joint british american plan against mossadeq.
operation ajax as it was labeled called for the constitutional monarch of iran the shah to demand mossadeqs resignation.
if mossadeq resisted as he was expected to do the cia and its british counterpart would mobilize mobs in tehran to force the prime minister from office.
a pro shah general would send tanks into the streets and complete the coup.
the plan went off with only minor glitches and the pro american shah assumed power.
the eisenhower administration brokered an agreement between the iranian government and the british over the fate of the angloiranian oil company an agreement that awarded american companies a share of iranian production.
to keep the shah in power the united states sent large amounts of economic and military aid to tehran.
the american aid helped the shah suppress dissent in iran but made him increasingly unpopular with the masses of the iranian people who over time transferred that animosity to the united states.
washington won back a bit of credibility with the peoples of the middle east three years later.
the british government had a new enemy gamal abdel nasser an egyptian colonel who seized power in cairo and nationalized the suez canal company another vestige of britains declining empire.
the british talked france and israel who had their own reasons for disliking nasser into a tripartite operation to overthrow the egyptian leader.
in october 1956 the three countries attacked egypt near the suez canal hoping the military pressure would result in nassers downfall.
eisenhower refused to back them.
the president distrusted nasser but president harry truman left listened to secretary of state george marshall right on most matters of foreign policy but charted his own course regarding israel.
he didnt think the egyptian leaders actions warranted a middle eastern war.
he told the british the ringleaders of the suez operation in eisenhowers accurate assessment that they must shut down the nascent war at once.
when they hesitated he threatened to use americas trump cards against the british oil and the dollar.
the president prepared to block oil shipments from the americas to britain and to let the british currency the pound decline against the dollar.
a loss of american oil would squeeze british industry and transport a collapse of the pound would ravage british finance.
the british had no choice but to acquiesce in eisenhowers ultimatum.
the suez war halted almost as soon as it began causing much soul searching in britain where the fiasco symbolized the end of britains pretensions to great power status.
the american role in the wars end momentarily belied the prevalent impression in the middle east that washington would always stand with the european imperialists and the zionists the label applied to the israelis by the arabs in a crisis.
yet the good feeling faded before long and it only underscored the larger reality that by the end of 1956 the united states had become the most important outside power in the middle east.
how america would play its new role remained to be seen but henceforward nothing of substance would occur in the middle east without requiring a significant response from the united states.
questions for discussion 1.
why did truman decide to recognize israel in 1948.
why did eisenhower side with the british in iran but against them when they invaded egypt together with the french and israelis during the suez crisis in 1956.
chapter 28 the onset of the cold war the united states to defend formosa.
when the communists began shelling the offshore islands eisenhower persuaded congress to pass a resolution authorizing him to use force to defend formosa and closely related localities despite repeated requests however the president refused to say whether he would use force to repel a chinese attack on quemoy or matsu.
instead he and dulles hinted at the use of nuclear weapons carefully stating that their action would depend on whether they considered an attack on the offshore islands part of a larger offensive aimed at formosa.
the chinese leaders unsure whether eisenhower was bluffing decided not to test american resolve.
the shelling ended in 1955 and when the communists resumed it again in 1958 another firm but equally ambiguous american response forced them to desist.
the apparent refusal of the soviet union to come to chinas aid in these crises with the united states contributed to a growing rift between the two communist nations by the end of the 1950s.
unfortunately the eisenhower administration failed to take full advantage of the opportunity that it had helped to create.
covert actions amid these dangerous crises the eisenhower administration worked behind the scenes in the 1950s to expand the nations global influence.
in 1953 the cia was instrumental in overthrowing a popularly elected government in iran and placing the shah in full control of that country.
see the feature essay america enters the middle east pp.
closer to home in latin america eisenhower once again relied on covert action.
in 1954 the cia masterminded the overthrow of a leftist regime in guatemala.
the immediate advantage was in denying the soviets a possible foothold in the western hemisphere but latin americans resented the thinly disguised interference of the united states in their internal affairs.
more important when fidel castro came to power in cuba in 1959 the eisenhower administration after a brief effort at conciliation adopted a hard line that helped drive cuba into the soviet orbit and led to new attempts at covert action.
eisenhowers record as a cold warrior was thus mixed.
his successful ending of the korean war and his peacekeeping efforts in indochina and formosa and in the suez crisis are all to his credit.
yet his reliance on coups and subversion directed by the cia in iran and guatemala reveal ikes corrupting belief that the ends justified the means.
and despite the 1952 campaign call for the liberation of eastern europe eisenhower accepted soviet domination of this region refusing to act on behalf of east german protesters in 1953 or hungarian freedom fighters in 1956.
nevertheless eisenhower did display an admirable ability to stay calm and unruffled in moments of great tension reassuring the nation and the world.
and above all he could boast as he did in 1962 of his ability to keep the peace.
in those eight years he reminded the nation we lost no inch of ground to tyranny.
one war was ended and incipient wars were blocked waging peace eisenhower hoped to ease cold war tensions by ending the nuclear arms race.
the advent of the hydrogen bomb intensified his concern over nuclear warfare by 1955 both the.
chapter 25 transition to modern america wheels for the millions the moving assembly line that henry ford perfected in 1913 for manufacture of the model t marked only the first step toward full mass production and the beginning of americas worldwide industrial supremacy.
a year later ford began buying large plots of land along the rouge river southeast of detroit michigan.
he already had a vision of a vast industrial tract where machines moving through a sequence of carefully arranged manufacturing operations would transform raw materials into finished cars trucks and tractors.
the key would be control over the flow of goods at each step along the way from lake steamers and railroad cars bringing in the coal and iron ore to overhead conveyor belts and huge turning tables carrying the moving parts past the stationary workers on the assembly line.
everything must move ford commanded and by the mid 1920s at river rouge as the plant became known it did.
ford began fulfilling his industrial dream in 1919 when he built a blast furnace and foundry to make engine blocks for both the model t and his tractors.
by 1924 more than forty thousand workers were turning out nearly all the metal parts used in making ford vehicles.
one tractor factory was so efficient that it took just over twenty eight hours to convert raw ore into a new farm implement.
visitors from all over the world came to marvel at river rouge.
some were disturbed by the jumble of machines by 1926 there were forty three thousand in operation and the apparent congestion on the plant floor but industrial experts recognized that the arrangement led to incredible productivity because the work moves and the men stand still a trained engineer summed it up best when he wrote that a visitor to the plant sees each unit as a carefully designed gear which meshes with other gears and operates in synchronism with them the whole forming one huge perfectly timed smoothly operating industrial machine of almost unbelievable efficiency in may 1927 after producing more than fifteen million model ts ford closed the assembly line at highland park.
for the next six months his engineers worked on designing a more compact and efficient assembly line at river rouge for the model a which went into production in november.
by then river rouge had more than justified fords vision.
ford had brought together everything at a single site and on a scale no one else had ever attempted concluded historian geoffrey perrett.
the rouge plant became to a generation of engineers far more than a factory.
it was a monument mass production born in highland park in 1913 and perfected at river rouge in the 1920s became the hallmark of american industry.
other car makers copied fords methods and soon his emphasis on the flow of parts moving past stationary workers became the standard in nearly every american factory.
the moving assembly line with its emphasis on uniformity speed precision the development of the efficient and compact automobile assembly line by engineers at the ford motor company in the late 1920s enabled the cost efficient mass production of automobiles.
and coordination took away the last vestiges of craftsmanship and turned workers into near robots.
it led to amazing efficiency that produced both high profits for manufacturers and low prices for buyers.
by the mid 1920s the cost of the model t had dropped from 950 to 290.
ost important mass production contributed to a consumer goods revolution.
american factories turned out a flood of automobiles electrical appliances and other items that made life easier and more pleasant for most americans.
the result was the creation of a distinctively modern america one marked by the material abundance that has characterized american society ever since.
but the abundance came at a price.
the 1920s have been portrayed as a decade of escape and frivolity and for many americans they were just that.
but those years also were an era of transition a time when the old america of individualistic rural values gave way to a new america of conformist urban values.
the transition was often wrenching and many americans clung desperately to the old ways.
modernity finally won but not without a struggle.
m the second industrial revolution what was new about the american economy in the 1920s.
the first industrial revolution in the late nineteenth century had catapulted the united states into the forefront among the worlds richest and most highly developed nations.
with the advent of the new consumer goods industries the american people by the 1920s enjoyed the highest standard of living of any nation on earth.
after a brief postwar depression 1922 saw the beginning of a great boom that peaked in 1927 and lasted until 1929.
in this brief period american industrial output nearly doubled and the gross national product rose by 40 percent.
most of this explosive growth took place in industries producing consumer goods automobiles appliances furniture and clothing.
equally important the national per capita income increased by 30 percent to 681 in 1929.
american workers became the highest paid in history.
combined with the expansion of installment credit programs that allowed customers to buy now and chapter 25 transition to modern america pay later this income growth allowed a purchasing spree like nothing the nation had ever experienced.
the key to the new affluence lay in technology.
the moving assembly line pioneered by ford became a standard feature in nearly all american plants.
electric motors replaced steam engines as the basic source of energy in factories by 1929 70 percent of all industrial power came from electricity.
efficiency experts broke down the industrial process into minute parts using time and motion studies and then showed managers and workers how to maximize the output of their labor.
production per worker hour increased an amazing 75 percent over the decade in 1929 a workforce no larger than that of 1919 was producing almost twice as many goods.
the automobile industry the nature of the consumer goods revolution can best be seen in the automobile industry which became the nations largest in the 1920s.
rapid growth was its hallmark.
in 1920 there were ten million cars in the nation by the end of the decade twenty six million were on the road.
production jumped from fewer than two million units a year to more than five million by 1929.
the automobile boom at its peak from 1922 to 1927 depended on the apparently insatiable appetite of the american people for cars.
but as the decade continued the market became saturated as more and more of those who could afford the new luxury had become car owners.
marketing became as crucial as production.
automobile makers began to rely heavily on advertising and annual model changes seeking to make customers dissatisfied with their old vehicles and eager to order new ones.
despite these efforts sales slumped in 1927 when ford stopped making the model t picked up again the next year with the new model a but began to slide again in 1929.
the new industry revealed a basic weakness in the consumer goods economy once people had bought an item with a long life they would be out of the market for a few years.
in the affluent 1920s few noticed the emerging economic instability.
instead contemporary observers focused on the stimulating effect the automobile had on the rest of the economy.
the mass production of cars required huge quantities of steel entire new rolling mills had to be built to supply sheet steel for car bodies.
rubber factories boomed with the demand for tires and paint and glass suppliers had more business than ever before.
the auto changed the pattern of city life leading to a suburban explosion.
real estate developers no longer dependent on streetcars and railway lines could now build houses in ever wider concentric circles around the central cities.
the automobile had a profound effect on all aspects of american life in the 1920s.
filling stations appeared on the main streets replacing the smithies and stables of the past.
in kansas city jess d nichols built the first shopping center country club plaza and thus set an example quickly followed by other suburban developers.
even in smaller communities the car ruled.
in muncie indiana site of a famous sociological survey in the 1920s one elder replied when asked what was taking place i can tell you whats happening in just four letters a u t o a nation that had always revered symbols of movement from the mayflower to the covered wagon now had a new icon to worship.
patterns of economic growth automobiles were the most conspicuous of the consumer products that flourished in the 1920s but certainly not the only ones.
the electrical industry grew almost as quickly.
central power stations where massive steam generators converted coal into electricity brought current into the homes of city and town dwellers.
two thirds of all american families enjoyed electricity by the end of the decade and they spent vast sums on washing machines vacuum cleaners refrigerators and ranges.
the new appliances eased the burdens of housework and ushered in an age of leisure.
radio broadcasting and motion picture production also boomed in the 1920s.
the early success of kdka in pittsburgh stimulated the growth of more than eight hundred independent radio stations and by 1929 nbc had formed the first successful radio network.
five nights a week amos n andy a comic serial featuring two blackface vaudevillians held the attention of millions of americans.
the film industry thrived in hollywood reaching its maturity in the mid 1920s when in every large city there were huge theaters seating as many as four thousand people.
with the advent of the talkies by 1929 average weekly movie attendance climbed to nearly one hundred million.
other industries prospered as well.
production of light metals such as aluminum and magnesium grew into a major business.
chemical engineering came of age with the invention of synthetics ranging from rayon for clothing to cellophane for packaging.
americans found a whole new spectrum of products to buy cigarette lighters wristwatches heat resistant glass cooking dishes and rayon stockings to name just a few.
the corporation continued to be the dominant economic unit in the 1920s.
growing corporations now had hundreds of thousands of stockholders and one individual or family rarely held more than 5 percent of the stock.
the enormous profits generated by the corporations enabled their managers to finance growth and expansion internally thus freeing companies from their earlier dependence on investment bankers like j p morgan.
voicing a belief in social responsibility and enlightened capitalism the new professional class operated independently free from outside restraint.
in the final analysis the corporate managers were accountable only to other managers.
another wave of mergers accompanied the growth of corporations during the 1920s.
from 1920 to 1928 some eight thousand mergers took place as more and more small firms proved unable to compete effectively with the new giants.
by the end of the decade the two hundred largest nonfinancial corporations owned almost half of the countrys corporate wealth.
the automobile industry set the example for other areas.
the greatest abuses took place in public utilities promoters such as samuel insull built vast paper empires by gaining control of power companies and then draining them of their assets.
the most distinctive feature of the new consumer oriented economy was the emphasis on marketing.
advertising earnings rose from 1 3 billion in 1915 to 3 4 billion in 1926.
skillful practitioners such as edward bernays and bruce barton sought to control public taste and consumer spending by identifying the good life with the possession of the latest product of american industry whether it be a car a refrigerator or a brand of cigarettes.
chain stores advanced rapidly at the expense of small retail shops.
the second industrial revolution view the closer look the great white way times square howard thains painting the great white way times square captures the bright lights and excitement of new yorks entertainment center in the roaring twenties.
source collection of the new york historical society accession number 1963 150.
a p dominated the retail food industry growing from 400 stores in 1912 to 15 500 by 1932.
woolworths five and tens spread almost as rapidly while such drugstore chains as rexall and liggetts both owned by one huge holding company opened outlets in nearly every town and city in the land.
uniformity and standardization the characteristics of mass production now prevailed.
the farmer in kansas bought the same kind of car the same groceries and the same pills as the factory worker in pennsylvania.
sectional differences in dress food and furniture began to disappear.
even the regional accents that distinguished americans in different parts of the country were threatened with extinction by the advent of radio and films which promoted a standard national dialect devoid of any local flavor.
economic weaknesses the new era as business leaders labeled the decade was not as prosperous as it first appeared.
the revolution in consumer goods disguised the decline of many traditional industries in the 1920s.
railroads overcapitalized and poorly managed suffered from chapter 25 transition to modern america internal woes and from competition with the growing trucking industry.
the coal industry was also troubled with petroleum and natural gas beginning to replace coal as a fuel.
the use of cotton textiles declined with the development of rayon and other synthetic fibers.
the new england mills moved south in search of cheap labor leaving behind thousands of unemployed workers and virtual ghost towns in the nations oldest industrial center.
hardest hit of all was agriculture.
american farmers had expanded production to meet the demands of world war i when they fed their own nation and most of europe as well.
a sharp cutback of exports in 1919 caused a rapid decline in prices.
by 1921 farm exports had fallen by more than 2 billion.
throughout the 1920s the farmers share of the national income dropped until by 1929 the per capita farm income was only 273 compared to the national average of 681.
urban workers were better off than farmers in the 1920s but they did not share fully in the decades affluence.
the industrial labor force remained remarkably steady during this period of economic growth technical innovations meant the same number of workers could produce far more than before.
most new jobs appeared in the lower paying service industry.
during the decade factory wage rates rose only a modest 11 percent in 1929 nearly half of all american families had an income of less than 1 500.
at the same time however conditions of life improved.
prices remained stable even dropping somewhat in the early 1920s so workers enjoyed a gain in real wages.
organized labor proved unable to advance the interests of workers in the 1920s.
conservative leadership in the afl neglected the task of organizing the vast number of unskilled laborers in the mass production industries.
aggressive management weakened the appeal of unions by portraying them as radical organizations after a series of strikes in 1919.
many businesses used injunctions and yellow dog contracts which forbade employees to join unions to establish open shops and deny workers the benefits of collective bargaining.
other employers wooed their workers away from unions using techniques of welfare capitalism spending money to improve plant conditions and winning employee loyalty with pensions paid vacations and company cafeterias.
the net result was a decline in union membership from a postwar high of five million to less than three million by 1929.
black workers remained on the bottom both economically and socially.
nearly half a million african americans had migrated northward from the rural south during world war i.
some found jobs in northern industries but many more worked in menial service areas collecting garbage washing dishes and sweeping floors.
yet even these jobs offered them a better life than they found on the depressed southern farms where millions of african americans still lived in poverty and so the migration continued.
the black ghettos in northern cities grew rapidly in the 1920s chicagos african american population doubled during the decade while new yorks rose from 152 467 to 327 706 with most african americans living in harlem.
middle and upper class americans were the groups who thrived in the 1920s.
the rewards of this second industrial revolution went to the managers the engineers bankers and executives who directed the new industrial economy.
corporate profits nearly doubled in ten years and income from dividends rose 65 percent nearly six times the rate of increase in workers wages.
bank accounts reflecting the accumulated savings of the upper middle and wealthy classes rose from 41 1 billion to 57 9 billion.
these were the people who bought the fine new houses in the suburbs and who could afford more than one car.
their conspicuous consumption helped fuel the prosperity of the 1920s but their disposable income eventually became greater than their material wants.
the result was speculation as those with idle money began to invest heavily in the stock market to reap the gains from industrial growth.
the economic trends of the decade had both positive and negative implications for the future.
on one hand there was the solid growth of new consumer based industries.
automobiles and appliances were not passing fancies their production and use became a part of the modern american way of life creating a high standard of living that roused the envy of the rest of the world.
the future pattern of american culture cars and suburbs shopping centers and skyscrapers was determined by the end of the 1920s.
but at the same time there were ominous signs of danger.
the unequal distribution of wealth the growth of consumer debt the saturation of the market for cars and appliances and the rampant speculation all contributed to economic instability.
the boom of the 1920s would end in a great crash yet the achievements of the decade would survive even that dire experience to shape the future of american life.
city life in the jazz age how did life in the cities change after world war i.
the city replaced the countryside as the focal point of american life in the 1920s.
the 1920 census revealed that for the first time slightly more than half of the population lived in cities defined broadly to include all places of more than 2 500 people.
during the decade the metropolitan areas grew rapidly as both whites and blacks from rural areas came seeking jobs in the new consumer industries.
between 1920 and 1930 cities with populations of 250 000 or more had added some eight million people to their ranks.
new york city grew by nearly 25 percent while detroit more than doubled its population during the decade.
the skyscraper soon became the most visible feature of the city.
faced with inflated land prices builders turned upward developing a distinctively american architectural style in the process.
new york led the way with the ornate woolworth building in 1913.
the sleek 102 story empire state building completed in 1931 was for years the tallest building in the world.
other cities erected their own jagged skylines.
by 1929 there were 377 buildings more than 20 stories tall across the nation.
most significantly the skyscraper came to symbolize the new mass culture.
the new york skyscrapers are the most striking manifestation of the triumph of numbers wrote one french observer.
one cannot understand or like them without first having tasted and enjoyed the thrill of counting or adding up enormous totals and of living in a gigantic compact and brilliant world in the metropolis life was different.
the old community ties of home church and school were absent but there were important city life in the jazz age gains to replace them new ideas new creativity new perspectives.
some city dwellers became lost and lonely without the old institutions others thrived in the urban environment.
women and the family the urban culture of the 1920s witnessed important changes in the american family.
this vital institution began to break down under the impact of economic and social change.
a new freedom for women and children seemed to be emerging in its wake.
although world war i accelerated the process of women leaving the home for work the postwar decade witnessed a return to the slower pace of the prewar years.
during the 1920s there was no permanent gain in the number of working women.
two million more women were employed in 1930 than in 1920 but this represented an increase of only 1 percent.
most women workers moreover had low paying jobs ranging from stenographers to maids.
the number of women doctors actually decreased and even though women earned nearly one third of all graduate degrees only 4 percent of full professors were female.
for the most part the professions were reserved for men with women relegated to such fields as teaching and nursing.
women had won the right to vote in 1920 but the nineteenth amendment proved to have less impact than its proponents had hoped.
adoption of the amendment robbed women of a unifying cause and the exercise of the franchise itself did little to change prevailing sex roles.
men remained the principal breadwinners in the family women cooked cleaned and reared the children.
the creation and fulfillment of a successful home a ladies home journal writer advised women is a bit of craftsmanship that compares favorably with building a beautiful cathedral the feminist movement however still showed signs of vitality in the 1920s.
social feminists pushing for humanitarian reform won enactment of the sheppard towner act of 1921 which provided for federal aid to establish state programs for maternal and infant health care.
although the failure to enact a child labor amendment in 1925 marked the beginning of a decline in humanitarian reform for the rest of the decade womens groups continued to work for good government measures for the inclusion of women on juries and for consumer legislation.
one group of activists led by alice pauls national womans party nwp lobbied for full equality for women under the law.
in 1923 the nwp succeeded in having an equal rights amendment introduced in congress.
the amendment stated simply men and women shall have equal rights throughout the united states and every place subject to its jurisdiction most other womens organizations notably the league of women voters opposed the amendment because it threatened gender specific legislation such as the sheppard towner act that women had fought so hard to enact.
the drive for the era in the 1920s failed.
growing assertiveness had a profound impact on feminism in the 1920s.
instead of crusading for social progress young women concentrated on individual self expression by rebelling against victorian restraints.
in the larger cities some quickly adopted what critic h l mencken called the flapper image portrayed most strikingly by artist john held jr.
cutting their hair short raising their skirts above the knee and binding their breasts flappers set out to compete on equal terms with men on the golf course and in the speakeasy.
young women delighted in shocking their elders they rouged their cheeks and danced the charleston.
women smoked cigarettes and drank alcohol in public more freely than before.
the flappers assaulted the traditional double standard in sex demanding that equality with men should include sexual fulfillment before and during marriage.
new and more liberal laws led to a sharp rise in the divorce rate by 1928 there were 166 divorces for every 1 000 marriages compared to only 81 in 1900.
the sense of womans emancipation was heightened by a continuing drop in the birthrate and by the abundance of consumer goods.
with fewer children to care for and with washing machines and vacuum cleaners to ease their household labor it seemed that women of the 1920s would have more leisure time.
yet appearances were deceptive.
advertisers eagerly sought out women as buyers of labor saving consumer products but wives exercised purchasing power only as delegated by their husbands.
in addition many women were not in the position to put the new devices to use one fourth of the homes in cleveland lacked running water in the 1920s and three quarters of the nations families did not have washing machines.
the typical childless woman spent between fortythree and fifty hours a week on household duties for mothers the average workweek was fifty six hours far longer than that of their husbands.
and despite the talk of the new woman the flappers fell victim to the sex role conditioning of their parents.
boys continued to play with guns and grew up to head their families girls played with dolls and looked forward to careers as wives and mothers.
in the 1920s as in the 1790s concluded historian june sochen marriage was the only approved state for women the family however did change.
it became smaller as easier access to effective birth control methods enabled couples to limit the number of their offspring.
more and more married women took jobs outside the home bringing in an income and gaining a measure of independence although their rate of pay was always lower than that for men.
young people who had once joined the labor force when they entered their teens now discovered adolescence as a stage of life.
a high school education was no longer uncommon and college attendance increased.
prolonged adolescence led to new strains on the family in the form of youthful revolt.
freed of the traditional burden of earning a living at an early age many young people in the 1920s went on a spree.
heavy drinking casual sexual encounters and a constant search for excitement became the hallmarks of the upper class youth immortalized by f scott fitzgerald.
i have been kissed by dozens of men one of his characters commented.
i suppose ill kiss dozens more the theme of rebellion against parental authority which runs through all aspects of the 1920s was at the heart of the youth movement.
the roaring twenties excitement ran high in the cities as both crime waves and highly publicized sports events flourished.
prohibition ushered in such distinctive features of the decade as speakeasies bootleggers and bathtub gin.
crime rose sharply as middle and upper class americans willingly broke the law to gain access to alcoholic beverages.
city streets became the scene of violent shoot outs chapter 25 transition to modern america between rival bootleggers by 1929 chicago had witnessed more than read the document elanor rowland wembridge petting and the campus 1925 five hundred gangland murders.
underworld czars controlled illicit empires al capones produced revenue of 60 million a year.
sports became a national mania in the 1920s as people found more leisure time.
golf boomed with some two million men and women playing on nearly five thousand courses across the country.
spectator sports attracted even more attention.
boxing drew huge crowds to see fighters such as jack dempsey and gene tunney.
baseball attendance soared.
more than twenty million fans attended games in 1927 the year babe ruth became a national idol by hitting sixty home runs.
on college campuses football became more popular than ever.
universities vied with each other in building massive stadiums seating upward of seventy thousand people.
in what frederick lewis allen called the ballyhoo years the popular yearning for excitement led people to seek vicarious thrills in all kinds of ways applauding charles lindberghs solo flight across the atlantic cheering gertrude ederles swim across the english channel and flocking to such bizarre events as six day bicycle races dance marathons and flagpole sittings.
it was a time of pure pleasure seeking when people sought to escape from the increasingly drab world of the assembly line by worshiping heroic sheik with sheba is the title of this john held jr drawing which appeared on a 1925 cover of judge magazine.
helds drawings define the image of the flapper era the young woman with rolled down stockings individuals.
sex became another popular and rouged knees and the young man with cigarette and pocket flask at the wheel of his car.
topic in the 1920s as victorian permissiveness joyfully with the automobile giving couples an standards began to crumble.
sophisticated city dwellers seemed easy way to escape parental supervision.
to be intent on exploring a new freedom in sexual expression.
there is considerable debate however over the extent of plays and novels focused on adultery and the new urban the sexual revolution in the 1920s.
later studies by dr alfred c tabloids led by the new york daily news delighted in telling kinsey showed that premarital intercourse was twice as common their readers about love nests and kept women.
the popular among women born after 1900 than for those born before the songs of the decade such as hot lips and burning kisses turn of the century.
but a contemporary survey of more than two were less romantic and more explicit than those of years before.
thousand middle class women by katherine b davis found that hollywood exploited the obsession with sex by producing only percent of those who were married had had sexual relations movies with such provocative titles as up in mabels room before marriage and that only 14 percent of the single women a shocking night and women and lovers.
theda bara and clara had engaged in intercourse.
actual changes in sexual behavior bow the vamp and the it girl set the model for feminine are beyond the historians reach hidden in the privacy of the bedseductiveness while rudolph valentino became the heartthrob of room but the old victorian prudishness was a clear casualty of millions of american women.
young people embraced the new city life in the jazz age the 1920s.
sex was no longer a taboo subject at least in urban areas men and women now could discuss it openly and many of them did.
the flowering of the arts the greatest cultural advance of the 1920s was visible in the outpouring of literature.
the city gave rise to a new class of intellectuals writers who commented on the new industrial society.
many had been uprooted by world war i.
they were bewildered by the rapidly changing social patterns of the 1920s and appalled by the materialism of american culture.
some fled to europe to live as expatriates congregating in paris cafs to bemoan the loss of american innocence and purity.
others stayed at home observing and condemning the excesses of a business civilization.
all shared a sense of disillusionment and wrote pessimistically of the flawed promise of american life.
yet ironically their body of writing revealed a profound creativity that suggested america was coming of age intellectually.
the exiles included the poets t s eliot and ezra pound and the novelist ernest hemingway.
pound discarded rhyme and meter in a search for clear cold images that conveyed reality.
like many of the writers of the 1920s he reacted against world war i expressing a deep regret for the tragic waste of a whole generation in defense of a botched civilization eliot who was born in missouri but became a british subject displayed even more profound despair.
in the waste land which appeared in 1922 he evoked images of fragmentation and sterility that had a powerful impact on the other disillusioned writers of the decade.
he reached the depths in the hollow men 1925 a biting description of the emptiness of modern man.
ernest hemingway sought redemption from the modern plight in the romantic individualism of his heroes.
preoccupied with violence he wrote of men alienated from society who found a sense of identity in their own courage and quest for personal honor.
his own experiences ranging from driving an ambulance in the war to stalking lions in africa made him a legendary figure his greatest effect on other writers however came from his sparse direct and clean prose style.
the writers who stayed home were equally disdainful of contemporary american life.
f scott fitzgerald chronicled american youth in this side of paradise 1920 and the great gatsby 1925 writing in bittersweet prose about the beautiful and the damned amid the glitter of life among the wealthy on long islands north shore came the haunting realization of emptiness and lack of human concern.
sinclair lewis became the most popular of the critical novelists.
main street published in 1920 satirized the values of small town america as dull complacent and narrow minded babbitt which appeared two years later poked fun at the commercialism of the 1920s portraying george babbitt as the stereotype of the lazy smug middle class businessman who hailed the decade as a new era.
most savage of all was h l mencken the baltimore newspaperman and literary critic who founded american mercury magazine in 1923.
declaring war on homo boobiens mencken mocked everything he found distasteful in america from the rotary club to the ku klux klan.
from boy scouts and from home cooking from odd fellows funerals from socialists from christians good lord deliver us he pleaded.
it was not difficult to discover menckens dislikes including jews as his published diary makes clear the hard part was finding out what he affirmed other than wit and a clever turn of phrase.
a born cynic he served as a zealous guardian of public rationality in an era of excessive boosterism.
the cultural explosion of the 1920s was surprisingly broad.
it included novelists such as sherwood anderson and john dos passos who described the way the new machine age undermined such traditional american values as craftsmanship and a sense of community and playwrights such as eugene oneill maxwell anderson and elmer rice who added greatly to the stature of american theater.
women writers were particularly effective in dealing with regional themes.
edith wharton continued to write penetratingly about eastern aristocrats in books such as the house of mirth 1905 and the age of innocence 1921 willa cather and ellen glasgow focused on the plight of women in the midwest and the south respectively in their short stories and novels.
these writers portrayed their heroines in the traditional roles of wives and mothers playwright zona gale on the other hand who won the pulitzer prize for drama in 1920 for miss lulu bett used her title character to depict the dilemmas facing an unmarried woman in american society.
art and especially music made significant advances as well.
edward hopper and charles burchfield captured the ugliness of city life and the loneliness of its inhabitants in their realistic paintings.
aaron copland and george gershwin added a new vitality to american music.
but african americans migrating northward brought the most significant contribution the spread of jazz first to st louis kansas city and chicago and finally to new york.
the form of jazz known as the blues so expressive of the suffering of african americans became an authentic national folk music and performers such as louis armstrong enjoyed popularity around the world.
the cultural growth of the 1920s was the work of blacks as well as whites.
du bois the editor of the newspaper crisis became the intellectual voice of the black community developing in new york citys harlem.
in 1917 james weldon johnson who had been a professor of literature at fisk university published fifty years and other poems in which the title poem commented on the half century of suffering that had followed the emancipation proclamation and called for the promise of that period to be redeemed think you that john browns spirit stops.
that lovejoy was but idly slain.
or do you think those precious drops from lincolns heart were shed in vain.
as other african american writers gathered around them du bois and johnson became the leaders of the harlem renaissance.
the naacp moved its headquarters to harlem and in 1923 the urban league began publishing opportunity a magazine devoted to scholarly studies of racial issues including black nationalism and emigration to africa.
see the feature essay marcus garvey racial redemption and black nationalism pp.
african american literature blossomed rapidly.
in 1922 critics hailed the appearance of claude mckays book of verses white shadows.
in stark images mckay expressed both his resentment against racial injustice and his pride in blackness.
complete the assignment marcus garvey racial redemption and black nationalism on myhistorylab feature essay marcus garvey racial redemption and black nationalism read the document pearson profiles marcus garvey marcus garveys advocacy of black nationalism and independent black entrepreneurship were in part discredited by his trial and conviction for mail fraud.
he is shown here in custody on the way to atlanta federal prison in 1925.
i n a world of wolves one should go armed wrote marcus garvey in 1919 and one of the most powerful defensive weapons within the reach of negroes is the practice of race first in all parts of the world this emphasis on black solidarity reflected garveys belief that racial oppression and exploitation lay at the heart of most of the worlds societies.
negro equality he insisted would come not through integration or civil rights legislation but only by transforming black heritage from a mark of inferiority into the basis of a program of pride and liberation.
the world has made being black a crime he declared and instead of making it a crime i hope to make it a virtue nowhere did these ideas find a more enthusiastic reception than in the united states.
world war i brought american blacks to northern cities in unprecedented numbers but the postwar economic slump aggravated already existing racial tensions.
urban slums job discrimination disfranchisement and segregation gave powerful reinforcement to black disillusionment with white america and to garveys message of black nationalism and racial redemption.
garveys upbringing in jamaica under the color based caste system of the british ruled west indies convinced him that only black solidarity could lead his race out of subjugation.
dreaming of an independent black africa he embraced black nationalism and economic self help and in 1914 he molded these ideas into a vision of the negro race redeemed through his new organization the united negro improvement association unia.
in 1916 garvey toured the united states and american blacks responded so strongly to his message that he moved unia headquarters to harlem.
with a new weekly the negro world garvey advanced his crusade for racial redemption and separatism.
the paper extolled the beauty of black skin color and african features and his editorials demanded economic selfreliance and collective black action.
up you mighty race he exhorted.
you can accomplish what you will garvey put his principles into practice in 1919 when he launched the black star line bsl a steamship corporation that he believed would demonstrate black competence in business enhance racial pride and strengthen the bonds among blacks worldwide.
a company brochure offered every black investor the promise of easy dividends and an opportunity to climb the ladder of success for only 5 per share.
in november 1919 the bsl launched its first of three ships and stock sales soared.
spirits were equally high at unias first international convention held in new york in 1920 which brought together several thousand delegates from all forty eight states and more than twenty countries.
after leading the opening day parade which stretched for several miles through the streets of harlem garvey delivered the keynote address before a crowd of twenty five thousand inherent right.
to possess himself of africa the convention also urged the teaching of black history in schools demanded an end to lynching and segregation and elected garvey as the provisional president of africa.
garveys vision began to unravel with his liberian rehabilitation project.
the black african republic welcomed his offer of financial and technical assistance through the unia and in late 1920 he began to raise money for a reconstruction loan.
in subsequent months however he diverted much of the proceeds to keep the ailing bsl afloat.
with large capital outlays poor management and high operating costs garveys dream of a maritime empire verged on financial collapse.
the establishment black press accused garvey of adventurism opportunism and diversion from the real path of progress.
his views on the ku klux klan made him even more controversial.
while deploring klan terror and violence garvey voiced appreciation of klan candor on race relations we are the descendents of a suffering people.
we are the descendents of a people determined to suffer no longer.
we shall now organize the 400 000 000 negroes of the world into a vast organization to plant the banner of freedom on the great continent of africa if europe is for europeans then africa shall be for the black peoples of the world.
so stark a statement of racial separatism and suspicion of whites appalled other black leaders.
du bois described him as the most dangerous enemy of the negro race and a black newspaper promised to drive garvey and garveyism in all its sinister viciousness from the american soil yet marcus garvey and his message endured by 1921 the unia had more than eight hundred official and unofficial branches.
garveys battle with black leaders was but one of his challenges.
in may 1923 he and three associates went on trial for mail fraud in the sale others echoed his sentiments.
unia delegates meeting in harlem approved the declaration of rights of the negro peoples of the world which declared that the black man had an i regard the klan the anglo saxon clubs and white american societies as better friends of the race than all other groups of hypocritical whites put together.
i like honesty and fair play.
you may call me a klansman if you will but potentially every white man is a klansman as far as the negro in competition with whites socially economically and politically is concerned.
of bsl stock.
the evidence suggested that while bsls leaders made poor business decisions neither garvey nor his executives drew large salaries or lived lavishly at company expense.
the bsl may have been ill advised and badly managed but it does not appear to have been fraudulent.
the jury however found garvey guilty despite acquitting his codefendants and the judge sentenced him to the maximum five year term.
on february 8 1925 garvey entered the federal penitentiary at atlanta.
ironically once he was behind bars he gained the support of many of his erstwhile detractors who protested the severity of white justice.
under mounting pressure president coolidge commuted garveys sentence in 1927.
immediate deportation followed as required by u s immigration law.
on december 10 1927 garvey returned to jamaica where one of the largest crowds in the islands history greeted him with a heros welcome.
garvey tried in vain to revitalize the unia in jamaica but with the onset of the great depression american blacks concentrated more on survival than on racial nationalism.
garvey slipped into obscurity and died in 1940 at the age of fiftytwo.
despite this end however his movement had inspired many blacks who were disgusted by the hypocrisy of american democracy and frustrated by the failure of gradualism to improve their lot.
his appeals offered them an alternative to the legalistic approach of the more conservative black establishment and an emphasis on pride in their heritage that influenced many black americans in succeeding generations.
questions for discussion 1.
why did w e b.
du bois and other black leaders find marcus garvey so threatening.
why did garvey embrace the ku klux klan.
chapter 25 transition to modern america watch the video the harlem renaissance archibald motley barbecue.
motley one of the artists of the harlem renaissance combined the traditions of his native new orleans with the energy and rhythms of 1920s harlem.
countee cullen and langston hughes won critical acclaim for the beauty of their poems and the eloquence in their portrayals of the black tragedy.
art and music also flourished during harlems golden age.
plays and concerts at the 135th street ymca floor shows at happy rhones nightclub attended by many white celebrities rent parties where jazz musicians played to raise money to help writers artists and neighbors pay their bills all were part of the ferment that made harlem the negro capital of the world in the 1920s.
almost everything seemed possible above 125th street in the early twenties for these americans who were determined to thrive separately to better proclaim the ideals of integration commented historian david lewis.
you could be black and proud politically assertive and economically independent creative and disciplined or so it seemed although its most famous writers were identified with new yorks harlem the new african american cultural awareness spread to other cities in the form of poetry circles and theater groups.
the number of african americans graduating from college rose from 391 in 1920 to 1 903 by 1929.
although blacks were still an oppressed minority in the america of the 1920s they had taken major strides toward achieving cultural and intellectual fulfillment.
in retrospect there is a striking paradox about the literary flowering of the 1920s.
nearly all the writers black as well as white cried out against the conformity and materialism of the contemporary scene.
they were critical of mass production and reliance on the machine they wrote wistfully of the disappearance of the artisan and of a more relaxed way of life.
few took any interest in politics or in social reform.
they retreated instead into individualism seeking an escape into their art from the prevailing business civilization.
whether they went abroad or stayed home the writers of the 1920s turned inward to avoid being swept up in the consumer goods revolution.
yet despite their withdrawal and perhaps because of it they produced an astonishingly rich and varied body of work.
american writing had a greater intensity and depth than in the past american writers despite their alienation had placed their country in the forefront of world literature.
the rural counterattack how did conservatives resist the changes of the decade.
the shift of population from the countryside to the city led to heightened social tensions in the 1920s.
intent on preserving traditional social values rural americans saw in the city all that the rural counterattack was evil in contemporary life.
saloons whorehouses little italys alert new york postal employee detected sixteen bombs addressed and little polands communist cells free love and atheism to a variety of famous citizens including john d rockefeller and all were identified with the city.
accordingly the countryside finally on june 2 a bomb shattered the front of attorney general struck back at the newly dominant urban areas aiming to a mitchell palmers home.
although the man who delivered it was restore the primacy of the anglo saxon and predominantly blown to pieces authorities quickly identified him as an italian protestant culture they revered.
this counterattack won conanarchist from philadelphia.
siderable support in the cities from those so recently uprooted in the ensuing public outcry attorney general palmer from their rural backgrounds.
led the attack on the alien threat.
a quaker and progressive other factors contributed to the intensity of the counterattack.
palmer abandoned his earlier liberalism to launch a massive the war had unleashed a nationalistic spirit that craved unity and roundup of foreign born radicals.
in a series of raids that began conformity.
in a nation where one third of the people were foreign born the attack on immigrants and the call for 100 percent read the document a mitchell palmer on the menace of communism 1920 americanism took on a frightening zeal.
when the war was over groups such as the american legion tried to root out un american behavior and insisted on cultural as well as political conformity.
the prewar progressive reform spirit added to the social tension.
stripped of much of its former idealism progressivism focused on such social problems as drinking and illiteracy to justify repressive measures such as prohibition and immigration restriction.
the result was tragic.
amid the emergence of a new urban culture the movements aimed at preserving the values of an earlier america succeeded only in complicating life in an already difficult period of cultural transition.
the fear of radicalism the first and most intense outbreak of national alarm the red scare came in 1919.
the heightened nationalism of world war i aimed at achieving unity at the expense of ethnic diversity found a new target in bolshevism.
the russian revolution and the triumph of marxism frightened many americans.
a growing turn to communism among american radicals especially the foreign born accelerated these fears.
although the numbers involved were tiny at most there were sixty thousand communists in the united states in 1919 they were highly visible.
located in the cities their influence appeared to be magnified with the outbreak of widespread labor unrest.
a general strike in seattle a police strike in boston and a violent strike in the iron and steel industry thoroughly alarmed the american people in the spring and summer of 1919.
a series of bombings led to panic.
first the mayor of strikebound seattle received a small brown package containing a homemade bomb then an united states attorney general a mitchell palmer organized and implemented law enforcement raids against suspected communists and other radicals in 1919 and 1920.
the palmer raids part of a nationwide red scare involved the arrest of over three thousand persons and the deportation of over five hundred resident aliens.
chapter 25 transition to modern america on november 7 federal agents seized suspected anarchists and communists and held them for deportation with no regard for due process of law.
in december 249 aliens including such well known radical leaders as emma goldman and alexander berkman were sent to russia aboard the buford dubbed the soviet ark by the press.
nearly all were innocent of the charges against them.
a month later palmer rounded up nearly four thousand suspected communists in a single evening.
federal agents broke into homes meeting halls and union offices without search warrants.
many native born americans were caught in the dragnet and spent several days in jail before being released aliens rounded up were deported without hearings or trials.
for a time it seemed that the red scare reflected the prevailing views of the american people.
instead of condemning their governments action citizens voiced their approval and even urged more drastic steps.
one patriot said his solution to the alien problem was simple s o s ship or shoot general leonard wood the former army chief of staff favored placing bolsheviks on ships of stone with sails of lead while evangelist billy sunday preferred to take these ornery wild eyed socialists and stand them up before a firing squad and save space on our ships inflamed by public statements like these a group of legionnaires in centralia washington dragged a radical from the town jail castrated him and hanged him from a railway bridge.
the coroners report blandly stated that the victim jumped off with a rope around his neck and then shot himself full of holes the very extremism of the red scare led to its rapid demise.
in early 1920 courageous government officials from the department of labor insisted on due process and full hearings before anyone else was deported.
prominent public leaders began to speak out against the acts of terror.
charles evans hughes the defeated gop candidate in 1916 offered to defend six socialists expelled from the new york legislature ohio senator warren g harding the embodiment of middle class values expressed his opinion that too much has been said about bolshevism in america finally palmer himself with evident presidential ambition went too far.
in april 1920 he warned of a vast revolution to occur on may 1 the entire new york city police force some eleven thousand strong was placed on duty to prepare for imminent disaster.
when no bombings or violence took place on may day the public began to react against palmers hysteria.
despite a violent explosion on wall street in september that killed thirty three people the red scare died out by the end of 1920.
palmer passed into obscurity the tiny communist party became torn with factionalism and the american people tried hard to forget their loss of balance.
yet the red scare exerted a continuing influence on american society in the 1920s.
the foreign born lived in the uneasy realization that they were viewed with hostility and suspicion.
two italian aliens in massachusetts nicola sacco and bartolomeo vanzetti were arrested in may 1920 for a payroll robbery and murder.
they faced a prosecutor and jury who condemned them more for their ideas than for any evidence of criminal conduct and a judge who referred to them as those anarchist bastards despite a worldwide effort that became the chief liberal cause of the 1920s the courts rejected all appeals.
sacco a shoemaker and vanzetti a fish peddler died in the electric chair on august 23 1927.
their fate symbolized the bigotry and intolerance that lasted through the 1920s and made that decade one of the least attractive in american history.
prohibition in december 1917 congress passed the eighteenth amendment prohibiting the manufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages and sent the amendment to the states for ratification.
a little over a year later in january 1919 nebraska was the necessary thirty sixth state to ratify and prohibition became the law of the land.
effective january 16 1920 the volstead act which implemented prohibition banned most commercial production and distribution of beverages containing more than one half of 1 percent of alcohol by volume.
exceptions were made for medicinal and religious uses of wine and spirits.
production for ones own private use was also allowed.
prohibition was the result of both a rural effort of the anti saloon league backed by methodist and baptist clergy men and the urban progressive concern over the social disease of drunkenness especially among industrial workers.
the moral issue had already led to the enactment of prohibition laws in twenty six states by 1920 the real tragedy would occur in the effort to extend this noble experiment to the growing cities where it was deeply resented by ethnic groups such as the germans and the irish and was almost totally disregarded by the well to do and the sophisticated.
prohibition did in fact lead to a decline in drinking.
americans consumed much less alcohol in the 1920s than in the prewar years.
rural areas became totally dry and in the cities the consumption of alcoholic beverages dropped sharply among the lower classes who could not afford the high prices for bootleg liquor.
among the middle class and the wealthy however drinking became fashionable.
bootleggers supplied whiskey which quickly replaced lighter spirits such as wine and beer.
the alcohol was either smuggled from abroad a 40 million a year business by 1924 or illicitly manufactured in america.
exotic products such as jackass brandy soda pop moon and yack yack bourbon were common and all could be fatal.
despite the risk of illness or death from extraordinarily high alcohol content or poorly controlled distillation americans consumed some 150 million quarts of liquor a year in the 1920s.
bootleggers took in nearly 2 billion annually about 2 percent of the gross national product.
urban resistance to prohibition finally led to its repeal in 1933.
but in the intervening years it damaged american society by breeding a profound disrespect for the law.
the flamboyant excesses of bootleggers were only the more obvious evils spawned by prohibition.
in city after city police openly tolerated the traffic in liquor and judges and prosecutors agreed to let bootleggers pay merely token fines creating almost a system of licenses.
prohibition satisfied the countrysides desire for vindication yet rural and urban america alike suffered from this overzealous attempt to legislate morals.
the ku klux klan the most ominous expression of protest against the new urban culture was the rebirth of the ku klux klan.
on thanksgiving night in 1915 on stone mountain in georgia colonel william j.
the rural counterattack read the document court statements from sacco and vanzetti italian immigrants nicola sacco and bartolomeo vanzetti were accused of killing a paymaster and stealing about 16 000 in 1920.
many believed they were convicted and executed in 1927 because of their anarchistic beliefs.
simmons and thirty four followers founded the modern klan.
only native born white gentile americans were permitted to join the invisible empire knights of the ku klux klan membership grew slowly during world war i but after 1920 fueled by postwar fears and shrewd promotional techniques the klan mushroomed.
in villages towns and small cities across the nation no longer simply in the south anglo saxon protestant men flocked into the newly formed chapters seeking to relieve their anxiety over a changing society by embracing the klans unusual rituals and by demonstrating their hatred against those they considered a threat to american values.
the klan of the 1920s unlike the night riders of the post civil war era was not just antiblack the threat to american culture as klansmen perceived it came also from immigrants jews and catholics.
they attributed much of the tension and conflict in society to the prewar flood of immigrants foreigners who spoke different languages worshiped in strange churches and lived in distant threatening cities.
the klansmen struck back by coming together and enforcing their own values.
they punished blacks who did not know their place women who practiced the new morality and aliens who refused to conform.
beating flogging burning with acid even murder were condoned.
they also tried more peaceful methods of coercion formulating codes of behavior and seeking community wide support.
the klan entered politics at first hesitantly then with growing confidence.
the kkk gained control of the legislatures in texas oklahoma oregon and indiana in 1924 it blocked a resolution of censure at the democratic national convention.
with an estimated five million members by the mid 1920s the klan seemed to be fully established.
much of its appeal lay in the sanctuary it offered to people anxious about the direction of american society.
protestant to the core the klan provided reassurance sometimes missing in members churches.
members were beguiled by the titles ranging from imperial wizard to grand dragon and they gloried in the ritual that centered around the letter k thus each klan had its own klalendar held its weekly klonklave in the local klavern and followed the rules set forth in the kloran.
members found a sense of identity in the group activities whether they were peaceful picnics ominous parades in white robes or fiery cross burnings at night.
although it was a mens organization the klan did not neglect the family.
there was a womens order a junior order for boys and a tri k klub for girls.
members had to be born in america but foreign born protestants were allowed to join a special krusaders affiliate.
only blacks catholics jews and prostitutes were beyond redemption to these lonely and anxious men who came together to chant united we stick divided were stuck.
the better we stick the better we klux.
the klan fell even more quickly than it rose.
its more violent activities which included kidnapping lynching setting fire to synagogues and catholic churches and in one case murdering a priest began to offend the nations conscience.
misuse of funds and sexual scandals among klan leaders notably in indiana repelled many of the rank and file effective counterattacks by traditional politicians ousted the kkk from control in texas and oklahoma.
membership declined sharply after 1925 by the end of the decade the klan had virtually chapter 25 transition to modern america read the document creed of klanswomen 1924 a 1925 ku klux klan demonstration in cincinnati ohio attended by nearly thirty thousand robed members and marked by the induction of eight thousand young boys in the junior order.
only native born white americans who believe in the tenets of the christian religion were admitted into the klan.
the original klan formed during the reconstruction era to terrorize former slaves disbanded in 1869.
the klan that formed in 1915 declined after the mid 1920s but did not officially disband until 1944.
two years later a third klan emerged focusing on the civil rights movement and communism.
disappeared.
but its spirit lived on testimony to the recurring demons of nativism and hatred that have surfaced periodically throughout the american experience.
immigration restriction the nativism that permeated the klan found its most successful outlet in the immigration legislation of the 1920s.
the sharp increase in immigration in the late nineteenth century had led to a broad based movement spearheaded by organized labor and by new england aristocrats such as henry cabot lodge to restrict the flow of people from europe.
in 1917 over wilsons veto congress enacted a literacy test that reduced the number of immigrants allowed into the country.
the war caused a much more drastic decline from an average of 1 million a year between 1900 and 1914 to only 110 000 in 1918.
after the armistice however rumors began to spread of an impending flood of people seeking to escape war ravaged europe.
kenneth roberts a popular historical novelist warned that all europe was on the move with only the limits of available steamship space likely to stem the flow.
worried congressmen spoke of a barbarian horde and a foreign tide that would inundate the united states with dangerous and deadly enemies of the country even though the actual number of immigrants 810 000 in 1920 fewer than the prewar yearly average did not match these projections congress in 1921 passed an emergency immigration act.
the new quota system restricted immigration from europe to 3 percent of the number of nationals from each country living in the united states in 1910.
the 1921 act failed to satisfy the nativists.
the quotas still permitted more than five hundred thousand europeans to come to the united states in 1923 nearly half of them from southern and eastern europe.
the declining percentage of nordic immigrants alarmed writers such as madison grant who warned the american people the anglo saxon stock that had founded the nation was about to be overwhelmed by lesser breeds with inferior genes.
these immigrants adopt the language of the native american they wear his clothes and are beginning to take his women but they seldom adopt his religion or understand his ideals grant wrote.
psychologists relying on primitive iq tests used by the army in world war i confirmed this judgment.
see the feature essay in chapter 24 measuring the mind pp.
one senator politics of the 1920s claimed that all the nations ills were due to an intermingled and mongrelized people as he demanded that racial purity replace the older reliance on the melting pot.
in 1924 congress adopted the national origins quota act which limited immigration from europe to 150 000 a year allocated most of the available slots to immigrants from great britain ireland germany and scandinavia and banned all asian immigrants.
the measure passed congress with overwhelming rural support.
the new restrictive legislation marked the most enduring achievement of the rural counterattack.
unlike the red scare prohibition and the klan the quota system would survive until the 1960s enforcing a racist bias that excluded asians and limited the immigration of italians greeks and poles to a few thousand a year while permitting a steady stream of irish english and scandinavian immigrants.
the large corporations no longer dependent on armies of unskilled immigrant workers did not object to the 1924 law the machine had replaced the immigrant on the assembly line.
yet even here the victory was not complete.
a growing tide of mexican laborers exempt from the quota act flowed northward across the rio grande to fill the continuing need for unskilled workers on the farms and in the service trades.
the mexican immigrants as many as one hundred thousand a year marked the strengthening of an element in the national ethnic mosaic that would grow in size and influence until it became a major force in modern american society.
the fundamentalist challenge the most significant and as it turned out longest lasting challenge to the new urban culture was rooted in the traditional religious beliefs of millions of americans who felt alienated from city life from science and from much of what modernization entailed.
sometimes this challenge was direct as when christian fundamentalists campaigned against the teaching of evolution in the public schools.
their success in tennessee touched off a court battle the scopes trial that drew the attention of the entire country to the small town of dayton in the summer of 1925.
see the law and society essay the scopes monkey trial pp.
other aspects of the fundamentalist challenge were more subtle but no less important in countering the modernizing trend.
as middle and upper class americans drifted into a genteel christianity that stressed good works and respectability the baptist and methodist churches continued to hold on to the old faith.
in addition aggressive fundamentalist sects such as the churches of christ the pentecostals and jehovahs witnesses grew rapidly.
while church membership increased from 41 9 million in 1916 to 54 5 million in 1926 the number of churches actually declined during the decade.
more and more rural dwellers drove their cars into town instead of going to the local crossroads chapel.
many of those who came to the city in the 1920s brought their religious beliefs with them and found new outlets for their traditional ideas.
thus evangelist aimee semple mcpherson enjoyed amazing success in los angeles with her church of the four square gospel building the angelus temple to seat more than five thousand worshipers.
and in fort worth the reverend j frank norris erected a six thousand seat sanctuary for the first baptist church bathing it in spotlights so it could be seen for thirty miles across the north texas prairie.
far from dying out as divinity professor thomas g oden noted biblical fundamentalism retained remarkable grassroots strength among the organization men and the industrialized mass society of the 20th century the rural counterattack while challenged by the city did enable some older american values to survive in the midst of the new mass production culture.
politics of the 1920s how did the politics of the 1920s reflect changes in the economy and in american society.
the tensions between the city and the countryside also shaped the course of politics in the 1920s.
on the surface it was a republican decade.
the gop grand old party controlled the white house from 1921 to 1933 and had majorities in both houses of congress from 1919 to 1931.
the republicans used their return to power after world war i to halt further reform legislation and to establish a friendly relationship between government and business.
important shifts were taking place however in the american electorate.
the democrats although divided into competing urban and rural wings were laying the groundwork for the future by winning over millions of new voters especially among the ethnic groups in the cities.
the rising tide of urban voters indicated a fundamental shift away from the republicans toward a new democratic majority.
harding coolidge and hoover the republicans regained the white house in 1920 with the election of warren g harding of ohio.
a dark horse contender harding won the gop nomination when the convention deadlocked and he became the compromise choice.
handsome and dignified harding reflected both the virtues and blemishes of small town america.
originally a newspaper publisher in marion he had made many friends and few enemies throughout his career as a legislator lieutenant governor and finally after 1914 u s senator.
conventional in outlook harding was a genial man who lacked the capacity to govern and who as president broadly delegated power.
he made some good cabinet choices notably charles evans hughes as secretary of state and herbert c hoover as secretary of commerce but two corrupt officials attorney general harry daugherty and secretary of the interior albert fall sabotaged his administration.
daugherty became involved in a series of questionable deals that led ultimately to his forced resignation fall was the chief figure in the teapot dome scandal.
two oil promoters gave fall nearly 400 000 in loans and bribes in return he helped them secure leases on naval oil reserves in elk hills california and teapot dome wyoming.
the scandal came to light after hardings death from a heart attack in 1923.
fall eventually served a year in jail and the reputation of the harding administration never recovered.
chapter 25 transition to modern america read the document executive orders and senate resolutions on teapot dome during the administration of william h taft the u s government had set aside tracts of oil rich land to be held in reserve for the u s navy to be used in case of national emergency.
the land was under the control and discretion of the secretary of the navy.
vice president calvin coolidge assumed the presidency upon hardings death and his honesty and integrity quickly reassured the nation.
coolidge born in vermont of old yankee stock had first gained national attention in 1919 as governor of massachusetts when he had dealt firmly with a boston police strike by declaring there is no right to strike against the public safety by anybody anywhere any time a reserved reticent man coolidge became famous for his epigrams which contemporaries mistook for wisdom.
the business of america is business he proclaimed.
the man who builds a factory builds a temple the man who works there worships there consistent with this philosophy he believed his duty was simply to preside benignly not govern the nation.
four fifths of all our troubles in this life would disappear he said if we would just sit down and be still calvin coolidge one observer noted aspired to become the least president the country ever had he attained his desire satisfied with the prosperity of the mid 1920s the people responded favorably.
coolidge was elected to a full term by a wide margin in 1924.
politics of the 1920s when coolidge announced in 1927 that he did not choose to run herbert hoover became the republican choice to succeed him.
by far the ablest gop leader of the decade hoover epitomized the american myth of the self made man.
orphaned as a boy he had worked his way through stanford university and had gained both wealth and fame as a mining engineer.
during world war i he had displayed admirable administrative skills in directing wilsons food program at home and relief activities abroad.
sober intelligent and immensely hardworking hoover embodied the nations faith in individualism and free enterprise.
as secretary of commerce under harding and coolidge he had sought cooperation between government and business.
he used his office to assist american manufacturers and exporters in expanding their overseas trade and he strongly supported a trade association movement to encourage cooperation rather than cutthroat competition among smaller american companies.
he did not view business and government as antagonists.
instead he saw them as partners working together to achieve efficiency and affluence for all americans.
his optimistic view of the future led him to declare in his speech accepting the republican presidential nomination in 1928 that we in america today are nearer to the final triumph over poverty than ever before in the history of any land republican policies during the 1920 campaign warren harding urged a return to not heroism but healing not nostrums but normalcy misreading his speechwriters normality he coined a new word that became the theme for the republican administrations of the 1920s.
aware that the public was tired of zealous reformminded presidents such as teddy roosevelt and woodrow wilson harding and his successors sought a return to traditional republican policies.
in some areas they were successful but in others the republican leaders were forced to adjust to the new realities of a mass production society.
the result was a mixture of traditional and innovative measures that was neither wholly reactionary nor entirely progressive.
the most obvious attempt to go back to the republicanism of william mckinley came in tariff and tax policy.
fearful of a flood of postwar european imports congress passed an emergency tariff act in 1921 and followed it a year later with the protectionist fordney mccumber tariff act.
the net effect was to raise the basic rates substantially over the moderate underwood tariff schedules of the wilson period.
secretary of the treasury andrew mellon a wealthy pittsburgh banker and industrialist worked hard to achieve a similar return to normalcy in taxation.
condemning the high wartime tax rates on businesses and wealthy individuals mellon pressed for repealing an excess profits tax on corporations and slashing personal rates on the very rich.
using the new budget system adopted by congress in 1921 he reduced government spending from its world war i peak of 18 billion to just over 3 billion by 1925 thereby creating a slight surplus.
congress responded in 1926 by cutting the highest income tax bracket to a modest 20 percent.
the revenue acts of the 1920s greatly reduced the burden of taxation by the end of the decade the government was collecting one third less than it had in 1921 and the number of people paying income taxes dropped from more than 6 5 million to 4 million.
yet the greatest relief went to the wealthy.
the public was shocked to learn in the 1930s that j p morgan jr and his nineteen partners had paid no income tax at all during the depths of the great depression.
the growing crisis in american farming during the decade forced the republican administrations to seek new solutions.
the end of the european war led to a sharp decline in farm prices and a return to the problem of overproduction.
southern and western lawmakers formed a farm bloc in congress to press for special legislation for american agriculture.
the farm bloc supported the higher tariffs which included protection for constituents crops and helped secure passage of legislation to create federal supervision over stockyards packinghouses and grain trading.
this special interest legislation failed to get at the root of overproduction however.
farmers then supported more controversial measures designed to raise domestic crop prices by having the government sell the surplus overseas at low world prices.
coolidge vetoed the legislation on grounds that it involved unwarranted government interference in the economy.
yet the governments role in the economy increased rather than lessened in the 1920s.
republicans widened the scope of federal activity and nearly doubled the ranks of government employees.
herbert hoover led the way in the commerce department establishing new bureaus to help make american industry more efficient in housing transportation and mining.
under his leadership the government encouraged corporations to develop welfare programs that undercut trade unions and he tried to minimize labor disturbances by devising new federal machinery to mediate disputes.
instead of going back to the laissez faire tradition of the nineteenth century the republican administrations of the 1920s were pioneering a close relationship between government and private business.
the divided democrats while the republicans ruled in the 1920s the democrats seemed bent on self destruction.
the wilson coalition fell apart in 1920 as pent up dissatisfaction stemming from the war enabled harding to win by a landslide.
the pace of the second industrial revolution and the growing urbanization split the party in two.
one faction was centered in the rural south and west.
traditional democrats who had supported wilson stood for prohibition fundamentalism the klan and other facets of the rural counterattack against the city.
in contrast a new breed of democrat was emerging in the metropolitan areas of the north and midwest.
immigrants and their descendants began to become active in the democratic party.
catholic or jewish in religion and strongly opposed to prohibition they had little in common with their rural counterparts.
the split within the party surfaced dramatically at the national convention in new york in 1924.
held in madison square garden a hall built in the 1890s and too small and chapter 25 transition to modern america cramped for the more than one thousand delegates the convention soon degenerated into what one observer described as a snarling cursing tenuous suicidal homicidal roughhouse city slickers mocked the rubes and hicks from the sticks populist orators struck back by denouncing the city as wanting in national ideals devoid of conscience.
rooted in corruption directed by greed and dominated by selfishness an urban resolution to condemn the ku klux klan led to a spirited response from the rural faction and its defeat by a single vote.
then for nine days in the midst of a stifling heat wave the delegates divided between alfred e smith the governor of new york and william g mcadoo of california wilsons secretary of the treasury.
when it became clear that neither the city nor the rural candidate could win a majority both men withdrew on the 103rd ballot the weary democrats finally chose john w davis a former west virginia congressman and new york corporation lawyer as their compromise nominee.
in the ensuing election the conservative davis had difficulty setting his views apart from those of republican president calvin coolidge.
for the discontented senator robert la follette of wisconsin offered an alternative by running on an independent progressive party ticket.
coolidge won easily receiving 15 million votes to 8 million for davis and nearly 5 million for la follette.
davis had made the poorest showing of any democratic candidate in the twentieth century.
election of 1928 electoral vote by state popular vote republican herbert c hoover 21 391 381 democratic alfred e smith 15 016 443 330 725 minor parties 36 738 549 the election of 1924 candidate coolidge davis la follette party republican democrat progressive popular vote 15 725 016 8 386 503 4 822 856 electoral vote yet the democrats were in far better shape than this setback indicated.
beginning in 1922 the party had made heavy inroads into the gop majority in congress.
the democrats took seventy eight seats away from the republicans in that election many of them in the cities of the east and midwest.
in new york alone they gained thirteen new congressmen all but one in districts with heavy immigrant populations.
even in 1924 the republican vote in large cities declined as many urban voters chose la follette in the absence of an attractive democratic candidate.
in 1926 the democrats came within one vote of controlling the senate and picked up nine more seats in the house in metropolitan areas.
the large cities were swinging clearly into the democratic column all the party needed was a charismatic leader who could fuse the older rural elements with the new urban voters.
the election of 1928 the selection of al smith as the democratic candidate in 1928 indicated the growing power of the city.
born on the lower east side of manhattan of mixed irish german ancestry smith was the prototype of the urban democrat.
he was catholic he was associated with a big city machine he was a wet who wanted to end prohibition.
starting out in the fulton fish market as a boy he had joined tammany hall and gradually climbed the political ladder rising from subpoena server to state legislator to governor a post he held with distinction for nearly a decade.
rejected by rural democrats in 1924 he still had to prove he could unite the south and west behind his leadership.
his lack of education poor grammar and distinctive new york accent all hurt him as did his eastern provincialism.
when reporters asked him about his appeal in the states west of the mississippi he replied what states are west of the mississippi the choice facing the american voter in 1928 seemed unusually clear cut.
herbert hoover was a protestant a dry and an oldstock american who stood for efficiency and individualism smith was a catholic a wet and a descendant of immigrants who was closely associated with big city politics.
just as smith appealed to new voters in the cities so hoover won the support of many oldline democrats who feared the city tammany hall and the pope.
yet beneath the surface as allan j lichtman points out there were striking similarities between smith and hoover both were self made men who embodied the american belief in freedom of opportunity and upward mobility.
neither advocated any significant degree of economic change nor any redistribution of national wealth or power.
though religion proved to be the most important issue in the minds of the voters hurting smith far more than prohibition or his identification with the city the democratic candidates failure to spotlight the growing cracks in prosperity or to offer alternative economic policies ensured his defeat.
conclusion the old and the new the 1928 election was a dubious victory for the republicans.
hoover won easily defeating smith by more than six million votes and carrying such traditionally democratic states as oklahoma texas and florida.
but smith succeeded for the first time in winning a majority of votes for the democrats in the nations twelve largest cities.
a new democratic electorate was emerging consisting of catholics and jews irish and italians poles and greeks.
now the task was to unite the traditional democrats of the south and west with the urban voters of the northeast and midwest.
watch the video prosperity of the 1920s and the great depression conclusion the old and the new the election night celebrations at hoover campaign headquarters were muted by prohibition and by the president elects natural reserve.
had hoover known what lay just ahead for the country and for his presidency no doubt the party would have been even more somber.
during the 1920s america struggled to enter the modern era.
the economics of mass production and the politics of urbanization drove the country forward but the persistent appeal of individualism and rural based values held it back.
americans achieved greater prosperity than ever before but the prosperity was unevenly distributed.
further as the outbursts of nativism ethnic and racial bigotry and intolerance revealed prosperity hardly guaranteed generosity or unity.
nor for that matter did it guarantee continued prosperity even for those who benefited initially.
as much as america changed during the 1920s in one crucial respect the country remained as before.
the american economy for all its remarkable productive capacity was astonishingly fragile.
this was the message hoover was soon to learn.
the development of mile long breadlines in cities and towns throughout the country following the onset of the great depression in 1929 symbolized the crushing end of the prosperity of the 1920s.
complete the assignment the scopes monkey trial contesting cultural differences on myhistorylab law and society d uring the postwar 1920s a new america emerged.
largely urban secular and focused on the future the modern culture challenged the traditional values and familiar way of life of many americans especially those living in rural areas.
intense cultural conflict characterized the decade.
those who saw in modern culture numerous threats to the moral fabric of the nation increasingly turned to their faith for stability and comfort.
the popularity of protestant fundamentalism which held to a literal interpretation of the bible increased dramatically during this period particularly in the south.
according to fundamentalists one of the key modernist attacks on traditional religious beliefs came from the realm of science.
advancements in science in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries fueled modernization and americans increasingly placed their faith in the authority of science and progress.
there was growing acceptance of charles darwins theory of evolution which demonstrated that plants and animals including humans evolved from lower life forms by a process of natural selection.
by the 1920s discussion of evolution theory had entered public school classrooms.
though many americans could reconcile a belief in evolution with their religious beliefs fundamentalists thought the theory of evolution contradicted the biblical story of creation and was therefore blasphemous particularly the notion that humans evolved from a lower primate form.
fundamentalists led a charge against evolution particularly against its teaching in the schools and several southern states turned to the scopes monkey trial contesting cultural differences legislation to keep the scientific theory out of the classroom.
such a law was introduced in tennessee by john w butler a state representative.
the statute passed both houses of the tennessee legislature by a large majority and was signed into law by the governor in march 1925.
the butler act as it became known made it unlawful for a teacher in statesupported schools to teach any theory that denies the story of divine creation of man as taught in the bible and to teach instead that man has descended from a lower order of animals violating the law was designated a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of 100 to 500 for each offense.
in response to the butler act the american civil liberties union aclu advertised for teachers in tennessee willing to challenge the new law in court.
civic boosters in dayton eager to draw attention to their small town in eastern tennessee persuaded john scopes a science teacher and assistant football coach in dayton to accept the aclu offer.
scopes was a logical choice.
he opposed the antievolution law on philosophical grounds and he had little to lose personally being twenty four and single and with no particular desire to remain in dayton.
furthermore he was a likable young man popular around town and with otherwise conventional views and so wouldnt muddy the legal waters by provoking the judge or jury unnecessarily.
scopes admitted that anyone teaching from the states approved biology textbook hunters civic biology which included sections on evolution of animals and humans would be breaking the new law.
scopes had used the text as a substitute biology teacher.
he agreed to be arrested to test the law in court.
from the start tennessee v john thomas scopes was about far more than scopes.
supporters and opponents of the antievolution law converged on dayton from around the country.
the laws supporters brought in the renowned orator william jennings bryan a three time democratic nominee for president former secretary of state and fervent christian fundamentalist to assist the prosecution headed by chief prosecutor a thomas stewart attorney general of tennessee.
since the early 1920s bryan had led the charge against the theories of charles darwin and the teaching of evolution in the schools his syndicated newspaper column weekly bible talks frequently hammered darwinism and what bryan considered excessive faith in science.
the aclu summoned counsel for the defense and clarence darrow one of the most celebrated trial lawyers in america in the 1920s volunteered his services as the chief defense attorney.
he delighted in defending unpopular causes including labor activists he had defended socialist leader eugene v debs in the pullman strike of 1894 political radicals and murder suspects.
he was also an outspoken agnostic doubting the existence of god and a vocal critic of christian fundamentalists including bryan.
a small army of reporters descended upon dayton including journalist h l mencken widely known for his biting wit and disdain for middle america who was writing for the baltimore sun and the american mercury.
from all over america and from various foreign countries the journalists came eager to convey to their readers every detail of the monkey trial as the trial was dubbed.
the new technology of radio supplemented the newspaper coverage especially after judge john raulston agreed to allow microphones in the courtroom.
the proceedings opened on friday july 10.
to the prosecution the case was fairly simple.
they held that the state had the constitutional right to set the curriculum in state funded schools.
the question to be decided was whether scopes had violated the butler act by covering the theory of evolution in his classroom.
prosecution witnesses including a school official and several of scopess students testified that he had.
darrow and the defense argued principally that the antievolution law violated several clauses of the tennessee constitution as well as the guarantee of freedom of speech and provision for separation of church and state in the first amendment of the u s constitution.
contending that the law also violated the fourteenth amendments declaration that no state was permitted to pass a law that abridged citizens privileges darrow argued if today you can take a thing like evolution and make it a crime to teach it in the public school tomorrow you can make it a crime to teach it in the private schools and the next year you can make it a crime to teach it to the hustings or in the church darrow and the defense team wanted to introduce scientific evidence supporting the theory of evolution by summoning a number of scientists from various fields as expert witnesses.
the prosecution protested opening the case to this wider issue.
i say bar the door and not allow science to enter declared stewart the chief prosecutor.
after hearing arguments from both sides and initial testimony from the defenses first witness the court sided with stewart and tennessee.
the evidence of experts would shed no light on the issues judge raulston ruled.
it was bryans speech for the prosecution that brought real excitement to the courtroom and the nationwide attention to dayton that the citys supporters had hoped for.
the great commoner as bryan was known commenced softly conveying an impression of calm reason.
but as he warmed to his subject his voice rose and his words became more intense.
he denied that he or most of the citizens of tennessee advocated teaching the bible in schools.
and even if they did advocate it the tennessee constitution prevented them.
the question at hand was different bryan said.
the question is can a minority in this state come in and compel a teacher to teach that the bible is not true and make the parents of these children pay the expenses of the teacher to tell their children what these people believe is false and dangerous.
has it come to a time when the minority can take charge of a state like tennessee and compel the majority to pay their teachers while they take religion out of the heart of the children of the parents who pay the teachers.
bryan was a master at working an audience and the jurors and spectators in the courtroom and a larger group listening in the yard outside the court hung on his every word.
they laughed as he lampooned the darwinians they nodded agreement as he affirmed the teachings of the bible.
they thundered their approval of his wry observation the christian believes that man came from above but the evolutionist believes he must have come from below following a loud amen from the audience darrow who had been sitting silently through bryans long speech interjected i hope the reporters got the amens in the record.
i want somewhere at some point to find some court where a picture of this will be painted such information in the official record would ensure higher courts a more complete picture of the atmosphere in the courtroom.
denied the opportunity to call on expert witnesses to provide support for the theory of evolution darrow found another opportunity after the defense made an unusual request to place bryan on the witness stand.
there was some question as to whether bryan could or should testify as he had no firsthand knowledge of what scopes had or hadnt done and was no expert on the constitutions of tennessee or the united states.
but the defense asked permission to question bryan as an expert witness on the bible.
bryan indicated willingness and judge raulston who relished the publicity the case was generating let the two celebrities go at each other.
what resulted was one of the most dramatic courtroom scenes in american history.
darrow asked bryan whether he had given considerable study to the bible bryan responded i have studied the bible for about fifty years or some time more than that.
given that opening darrow went on to ask questions designed to undermine a strictly literal interpretation of the bible.
darrow do you claim that everything in the bible should be literally interpreted.
bryan i believe everything in the bible should be accepted as it is given there.
some of the bible is given illustratively.
for instance ye are the salt of the earth i would not insist that man was actually salt or that he had flesh of salt but it is used in the sense of salt as saving gods people.
darrow pressed on.
did bryan believe that a whale swallowed jonah.
bryan when i read that a big fish swallowed jonah it does not say whale darrow doesnt it.
are you sure.
bryan that is my recollection of it.
a big fish and i believe it and i believe in a god who can make a whale and can make a man and make both do what he pleases.
darrow continued his line of questioning asking bryan to interpret other passages of the bible.
had joshua really made the sun stand still.
bryan i believe what the bible says.
did that mean that the sun actually stood still or that the earth stopped spinning.
for that matter did mr bryan believe that the earth circled the sun or vice versa.
bryan assured darrow and the court that he knew that the earth orbited the sun.
but he allowed that the author of the joshua passage might not have.
i believe that the bible is inspired an inspired author.
whether one who wrote as he was directed to write understood the things he was writing about i dont know darrow interrupted but bryan went on i believe it was inspired by the almighty and he may have used language that could be understood at that time instead of using language that could not be understood until darrow was born listeners siding with bryan but squirming under darrows questioning broke into loud applause here.
when the applause recurred darrow said sarcastically great applause from the bleachers bryan from those whom you call yokels darrow i have never called them yokels.
the exchange grew nastier.
bryan those are the people whom you insult.
darrow you insult every man of science and learning in the world because he does not believe in your fool religion.
judge raulston i will not stand for that.
darrow for what he is doing.
judge raulston i am talking to both of you.
such dignity as the trial initially possessed had disappeared by now.
after the exchange continued for some time darrow asked bryan if he had ever wondered where cains wife came from.
no sir bryan replied.
i leave the agnostics to hunt for her darrow asked bryan if the six days of creation were twenty four hour days.
bryan allowed that they might have been longer.
finally tom stewart broke into darrows questioning.
what is the purpose of this examination the chief prosecutor demanded.
the purpose is to cast ridicule on everybody who believes in the bible bryan asserted.
darrow answered differently.
we have the purpose of preventing bigots and ignoramuses from controlling the education of the united states darrow was allowed to continue his questioning about creation.
might it have lasted more than a modern week.
bryan granted that it could have.
how much more.
it might have continued for millions of years darrows examination of bryan lasted two hours.
before the end it was obvious that it had little to do with the case at hand but everything to do with the larger issue joined by darrow and bryan.
as a reporter for the nashville banner explained in reality it was a debate between darrow and bryan on biblical history on agnosticism and belief in revealed religion not surprisingly judgments regarding the outcome of the debate depended on the source of those judgments.
the new york times thought darrow scored a clear victory.
bryans complete lack of interest in many of the things closely connected with such religious questions as he had been supporting for many years was strikingly shown again and again by mr darrow the times explained.
the memphis commercial appeal thought bryan had held his own darrow succeeded in showing that bryan knows little about the science of the world.
bryan succeeded in bearing witness bravely to the faith which he believes transcends all the learning of men the reaction to the trials verdict was similar.
scopes to no ones surprise was convicted of violating the law and judge raulston fined him 100.
even darrow intending to appeal the verdict to a higher court recommended that the jury find scopes guilty.
antievolutionists in tennessee and elsewhere took the conviction as vindication of their beliefs.
but to many americans with more secular views the conviction was simply further evidence of the wrongheadedness of bryan and the tennessee legislature.
when bryan died suddenly just five days after the trial ended a southern journalist approached darrow for comment.
people down here believe that bryan died of a broken heart because of your questioning the journalist said.
darrow referring to bryans notoriously large appetite reportedly responded broken heart nothing.
he died of a busted belly h l mencken remarked god aimed at darrow missed and hit bryan instead the scopes trial settled nothing.
the defense appealed the conviction to the tennessee supreme court where it was set aside on a technicality.
but the antievolution law was left intact and stood for another forty years until the tennessee legislature repealed it in 1967.
in the immediate aftermath of the scopes trial both sides claimed moral victory and the rift that gave rise to the case simply grew wider.
fundamentalism was discredited in large parts of urban america but it sank roots in the rural regions of the country becoming stronger than ever if sometimes less visible.
several state legislatures considered antievolution bills in the latter half of the 1920s but only georgia and mississippi actually passed laws restricting teaching of darwins theory.
concern over diminishing sales in the south and west however drove textbook publishers to revise coverage of evolution in many textbooks deemphasizing the topic or eliminating it entirely.
with or without legislation opposing its teaching evolution did disappear from many classrooms.
in 1960 the liberal new republic declared the monkey trial is now a historical curiosity a judgment that proved premature when evolution reemerged as a controversial issue.
the constitutional question of whether the first amendment permitted states to ban teaching of a theory that contradicted religious beliefs had not been resolved by the scopes case.
in the 1968 case epperson v arkansas however the u s supreme court ruled that such bans were unconstitutional.
during the 1970s and 1980s various sunbelt school districts mandated that creationism essentially the biblical version of lifes origins though typically without the explicit references to genesis be given equal time in the classroom with evolution.
arkansas and louisiana passed such laws but in 1987 the u s supreme court ruled in edwards v aguillard that these laws were also unconstitutional.
still the issue refused to die.
in 1999 the kansas school board ordered that the theory of evolution should be deemphasized in the states classrooms.
the kansas board eventually changed its mind but in 2005 it reversed course again directing teachers to point out the deficiencies in the theory of evolution in the name of intelligent design the latest variant of creationism.
other states considered similar measures demonstrating if nothing else that the scopes trial was far more than a curiosity from the past.
questions for discussion 1.
why did different observers interpret the outcome of the scopes trial so differently.
why does the issue of evolution in the public schools continue to resurface decades after laws banning its teaching were found unconstitutional.
chapter 25 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 25 transition to modern america on myhistorylab time line 1919 u s agents arrest 1 700 in red scare raids eighteenth amendment prohibition ratified nineteenth amendment passed granting women the right to vote fordney mccumber tariff becomes law t s eliot publishes the waste land newspapers expose ku klux klan graft torture and murder senate probes teapot dome scandal national origins quota act restricts immigration from europe and bans immigration from asia 1925 john scopes convicted of teaching theory of evolution in violation of tennessee law july charles lindbergh completes first nonstop transatlantic flight from new york to paris may sacco and vanzetti executed august babe ruth hits 60th home run september 1928 hoover defeats smith for president chapter review the second industrial revolution the rural counterattack what was new about the american economy in the 1920s.
how did conservatives resist the changes of the decade.
the american economy in the 1920s underwent a second industrial revolution.
powered by electricity and featuring the mass production of automobiles and other consumer goods the second industrial revolution lifted the american standard of living to new heights.
p 589 the changes of the 1920s alarmed many conservatives who tried to resist them.
the police and courts cracked down on radicals prohibition outlawed liquor the ku klux klan attacked immigrants and minorities congress restricted immigration and fundamentalist christians decried the changing code of morality and the teaching of evolution in the schools.
p 598 city life in the jazz age politics in the 1920s how did life in the cities change after world war i.
during the 1920s the focus of american life shifted to the cities which for the first time contained most of the american population.
women found new opportunities to express themselves and sports music literature and the arts flourished as never before.
p 592 how did the politics of the 1920s reflect changes in the economy and in american society.
the 1920s were a decade of republican politics.
presidents harding coolidge and hoover favored business and the wealthy.
in the election of 1928 voters had a clear choice between hoover the candidate of the countryside and conservatism and al smith the candidate of the cities and change hoover won in a landslide.
p 603 key terms and definitions harlem renaissance an african american cultural literary and artistic movement centered in harlem in new york city in the 1920s.
harlem the largest black community in the world outside of africa was considered the cultural capital of african americans.
p 595 prohibition the ban on the manufacture sale and transportation of alcoholic beverages in the united states.
the eighteenth amendment adopted in 1919 established prohibition.
it was repealed by the twentyfirst amendment in 1933 p 600 red scare a wave of anticommunist antiforeign and antilabor hysteria that swept over america in 1919.
it resulted in the deportation of many alien residents and violated the civil liberties of many of its victims.
p 599 nativism hostility to things foreign.
p 602 national origins quota act this 1924 law established a quota system that restricted immigration from asia and southern and eastern europe and reduced the annual total of immigrants.
p 603 study resources scopes trial also called the monkey trial the 1924 scopes trial was a contest between modern liberalism and religious fundamentalism.
john t scopes was prosecuted for teaching darwinian evolution in defiance of tennessee state law.
he was found guilty and fined 100.
scopess conviction was later set aside on a technicality.
p 603 teapot dome scandal a 1924 scandal in which secretary of the interior albert fall was convicted of accepting bribes in exchange for leasing government owned oil lands in wyoming teapot dome and california elks hill to private businessmen.
p 603 critical thinking questions 1.
how did the automobile increase the independence of young people during the 1920s.
what did the red scare and the desire for immigration reform have in common.
why did the new opportunities for women upset conservatives.
how did the presidential election of 1928 reflect the anxieties of the postwar era.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 25 on myhistorylab the second industrial revolution view the closer look the great white way times square p 591 city life in the jazz age read the document elanor rowland wembridge petting and the campus 1925 p 594 complete the assignment marcus garvey racial redemption and black nationalism p 596 read the document garvey p 594 pearson profiles marcus watch the video watch the video the harlem renaissance p 598 the rural counterattack read the document a mitchell palmer on the menace of communism 1920 p 599 read the document vanzetti p 601 court statements from sacco and read the document 1924 p 602 creed of klanswomen politics of the 1920s read the document executive orders and senate resolutions on teapot dome p 604 watch the video prosperity of the 1920s and the great depression p 607 complete the assignment the scopes monkey trial contesting cultural differences p 608 indicates study plan media assignment franklin d roosevelt and the new deal contents and learning objectives questions the great depression pg.
614 the impact of the new deal pg.
627 what were the causes and effects of the great depression.
what was the lasting impact of the new deal.
fighting the depression pg.
619 end of the new deal pg.
630 how did franklin roosevelt fight the depression.
how and why did the new deal end.
roosevelt and reform pg.
624 feature essay eleanor roosevelt and the quest for social justice how did the new deal reform american life.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 24 the nation at war the sinking of the lusitania on the morning of may 1 1915 the german government took out the following important advertisement in the new york world as a warning to americans and other voyagers setting sail for england notice travellers intending to embark on the atlantic voyage are reminded that a state of war exists between germany and her allies and great britain and her allies that the zone of war includes the waters adjacent to the british isles that in accordance with formal notice given by the imperial german government vessels flying the flag of great britain or of any of her allies are liable to destruction in those waters and that travelers sailing in the war zone on ships of great britain or her allies do so at their own risk.
at 12 30 that afternoon the british steamship lusitania set sail from new york to liverpool.
secretly it carried a load of ammunition as well as passengers.
the steamer was two hours late in leaving but it held several speed records and could easily make up the time.
the passenger list of 1 257 was the largest since the outbreak of war in europe in 1914.
alfred g vanderbilt the millionaire sportsman was aboard so were charles frohman a famous new york theatrical producer and elbert hubbard a popular writer who jested that a submarine attack might help sell his new book.
while some passengers chose the lusitania for speed others liked the modern staterooms more comfortable than the older ships of the competing american line.
six days later the lusitania back on schedule reached the coast of ireland.
german u boats were known to patrol the dangerous waters.
when the war began great britain imposed a naval blockade of germany.
in return germany in february 1915 declared the area around the british isles a war zone all enemy vessels armed or unarmed were at risk.
germany had only a handful of u boats but the submarines were a new and frightening weapon.
on behalf of the united states president woodrow wilson protested the german action and on february 10 he warned germany of its strict accountability for any american losses resulting from u boat attacks.
off ireland the passengers lounged on the deck of the lusitania.
as if it were peacetime the ship sailed with the sinking of the lusitania the american people learned firsthand of the horrors of total war.
president wilsons decision to protest the incident through diplomacy kept the united states out of the war but only temporarily.
chapter 24 the nation at war straight ahead with no zigzag maneuvers to throw off pursuit.
but the submarine u 20 was there and its commander seeing a large ship fired a single torpedo.
seconds after it hit a boiler exploded and blew a hole in the lusitanias side.
the ship listed immediately hindering the launching of lifeboats and in eighteen minutes it sank.
nearly 1 200 people died including 128 americans.
as the ships bow lifted and went under the u 20 commander for the first time read the name lusitania.
the sinking the worst since the titanic went down with 1 500 people in 1912 horrified americans.
theodore roosevelt called it an act of piracy and demanded war.
most americans however wanted to stay out of war like wilson they hoped negotiations could solve the problem.
there is such a thing wilson said a few days after the sinking as a man being too proud to fight.
there is such a thing as a nation being so right that it does not need to convince others by force in a series of diplomatic notes wilson demanded a change in german policy.
the first lusitania note may 13 1915 called on germany to abandon unrestricted submarine warfare disavow the sinking and compensate for lost american lives.
germany sent an evasive reply and wilson drafted a second lusitania note june 9 insisting on specific pledges.
fearful the demand would lead to war secretary of state william jennings bryan resigned rather than sign the note.
wilson sent it anyway and followed with a third note july 21 almost an ultimatum warning germany that the united states would view similar sinkings as deliberately unfriendly unbeknownst to wilson germany had already ordered u boat commanders not to sink passenger liners without warning.
in august 1915 a u boat mistakenly torpedoed the british liner arabic killing two americans.
wilson protested and germany eager to keep the united states out of the war backed down.
the arabic pledge september 1 promised that u boats would stop and warn liners unless they tried to resist or escape.
germany also apologized for american deaths on the arabic and for the rest of 1915 u boats hunted freighters not passenger liners.
lthough wilsons diplomacy had achieved his immediate goal the lusitania and arabic crises contained the elements that led to war.
trade and travel tied the world together and americans no longer hid behind safe ocean barriers.
new weapons such as the submarine strained old rules of international law.
but while americans sifted the conflicting claims of great britain and germany they hoped for peace.
a generation of progressives inspired with confidence in human progress did not easily accept war.
a wilson also hated war but he found himself caught up in a worldwide crisis that demanded the best in american will and diplomacy.
in the end diplomacy failed and in april 1917 the united states entered a war that changed the nations history.
building on several major trends in american foreign policy since the 1890s the years around world war i firmly established the united states as a world power confirmed the countrys dominance in latin america and ended with a war with germany and her allies that had far reaching results including establishing the united states as one of the worlds foremost economic powers.
a new world power what were the main events that showed the united states was becoming a world power.
as they had in the late nineteenth century americans after 1900 continued to pay relatively little attention to foreign affairs.
newspapers and magazines ran stories every day about events abroad but people paid closer attention to what was going on at home.
walter lippmann one of the twentieth centurys most outstanding political commentators once said i cannot remember taking any interest whatever in foreign affairs until after the outbreak of the first world war for americans at the time foreign policy was something to be left to the president in office an attitude the presidents themselves favored.
foreign affairs became an arena in which they could exert a free hand largely unchallenged by congress or the courts and roosevelt taft and wilson all took advantage of the opportunity to do so.
the foreign policy they pursued from 1901 to 1920 was aggressive and nationalistic.
during these years the united states intervened in europe the far east and latin america.
it dominated the caribbean.
in 1898 the united states left the peace table possessing the philippines puerto rico and guam.
holding distant possessions required a colonial policy it also required a change in foreign policy reflecting an outward approach.
from the caribbean to the pacific policy makers paid attention to issues and countries they had earlier ignored.
like other nations in these years the united states built a large navy protected its colonial empire and became increasingly involved in international affairs.
the nation also became more and more involved in economic ventures abroad.
turning out goods from textiles to steel mass production industries sold products overseas and financiers invested in asia africa latin america and europe.
during the years between the spanish american war and world war i investments abroad rose from 445 million to 2 5 billion.
while investments and trade never wholly dictated american foreign policy they fostered greater involvement in foreign lands.
i took the canal zone convinced the united states should take a more active international role theodore roosevelt spent his presidency preparing the nation for world power.
working with secretary of war elihu root he modernized the army using lessons learned from the war with spain.
roosevelt and root established the army war college a new world power caribbean sea panama coln cristobal a gr ch panama canal zone gatun locks es r.
gatun lake pedro miguel locks miraflores locks 5 miles 5 kilometers panama panam balboa nicaragua panama canal panama canal pacific ocean caribbean sea panama canal zone costa rica locks panama railroad colombia pacific ocean the panama canal zone construction of the canal began in 1904 and despite landslides steamy weather and yellow fever work was completed in 1914 imposed stiff tests for the promotion of officers and in 1903 created a general staff to oversee military planning and mobilization.
determined to end dependence on the british fleet roosevelt doubled the strength of the navy during his term in office.
stretching his authority to the limits roosevelt took steps to consolidate the countrys new position in the caribbean and central america.
european powers which had long resisted american initiatives there now accepted american supremacy.
preoccupied with problems in europe and africa great britain agreed to u s plans for an isthmian canal in central america and withdrew much of its military force from the area.
roosevelt wanted a canal to link the atlantic and pacific oceans across the isthmus connecting north and south america.
when the war with spain started in 1898 the battleship oregon took seventy one days to sail from san francisco around cape horn to its battle station in the atlantic years later naval experts still shuddered at the memory.
secretary of state john hay negotiated with britain the hay pauncefote treaty of 1901 that permitted the united states to construct and control an isthmian canal providing it would be free and open to ships of all nations.
delighted roosevelt began selecting the route.
one route fifty miles long wandered through the rough swampy terrain of the panama region of colombia.
a french company had recently tried and failed to dig a canal there.
to the northwest another route ran through mountainous nicaragua.
although two hundred miles in length it followed natural water ways a factor that would make construction easier.
an isthmian canal commission investigated both routes in 1899 and recommended the shorter route through panama.
roosevelt backed the idea and he authorized hay to negotiate an agreement with the colombian charg daffaires thomas herrn.
the hay herrn convention 1903 gave the united states a 99 year lease with option for renewal on a canal zone six miles in width.
in exchange the united states agreed to pay colombia a one time fee of 10 million and an annual rental of 250 000.
to roosevelts dismay the colombian senate rejected the treaty in part because it infringed on colombian sovereignty.
the colombians also wanted more money.
calling them jack rabbits and contemptible little creatures roosevelt considered seizing panama then hinted he would welcome a panamanian revolt from colombia.
in november 1903 the panamanians took the hint and roosevelt moved quickly to support them.
sending the cruiser nashville to prevent colombian troops from putting down the revolt he promptly recognized the new republic of panama.
two weeks later the hay bunau varilla treaty with panama granted the united states control of a canal zone ten miles wide across the isthmus of panama.
in return the united states guaranteed the independence of panama and agreed to pay the same fees offered colombia.
using giant steam shovels and thousands of laborers from jamaica engineers cut their way across the isthmus.
on august 15 1914 the first ocean steamer sailed through the completed canal which had cost 375 million to build.
roosevelts actions angered many latin americans.
trying to soothe feelings wilson agreed in 1914 to pay colombia 25 million in cash give it preferential treatment in using the canal and express sincere regret over american actions.
roosevelt was furious and his friends in the senate blocked the agreement.
colombian american relations remained strained until 1921 when the two countries signed a treaty that included wilsons first two provisions but omitted the apology.
for his part roosevelt took great pride in the canal calling it by far the most important action in foreign affairs defending his methods he said in 1911 if i had followed traditional conservative methods i would have submitted a dignified state paper of two hundred pages to congress and the debate on it would have been going on yet but i took the canal zone and let congress debate and while the debate goes on the canal does also the roosevelt corollary with interests in puerto rico cuba and the canal the united states developed a caribbean policy to ensure its dominance in the region.
it established protectorates over some countries and subsidized others to keep them dependent.
when necessary the united states purchased islands to keep them out of the hands of other powers as in the case of the danish west indies now the virgin islands bought in 1917 to prevent the germans from acquiring them.
from 1903 to 1920 the united states intervened often in latin america to protect the canal promote regional stability and exclude foreign influence.
one problem worrying american policy makers was the scale of latin american debts to european powers.
many countries in the western hemisphere owed money to european governments and banks and often these nations were poor prone to revolution and unable to pay.
the situation invited european intervention.
in 1902 venezuela defaulted on debts england germany and italy sent venezuela an ultimatum and blockaded its ports.
american pressure forced a settlement of the issue but the general problem remained.
chapter 24 the nation at war roosevelt was concerned about it and in 1904 when the dominican republic defaulted on its debts he was ready with a major announcement.
known as the roosevelt corollary of the monroe doctrine the policy warned latin american nations to keep their affairs in order or face american intervention.
applying the new policy immediately roosevelt in 1905 took charge of the dominican republics revenue system.
american officials collected customs and saw to the payment of debt.
within two years roosevelt also established protectorates in cuba and panama.
in 1912 the u s senate added the lodge corollary which warned foreign corporations not to purchase harbors and other sites of military significance in latin america.
continued by taft wilson and other presidents the roosevelt corollary guided american policy in latin america until the 1930s when franklin d roosevelts good neighbor policy replaced it.
ventures in the far east the open door policy toward china and possession of the philippine islands shaped american actions in the far east.
congress refused to arm the philippines and the islands were vulnerable to the growing power of japan.
roosevelt wanted to balance russian and japanese power and he was not unhappy at first when war broke out between them in 1904.
as japan won victory after victory however roosevelt grew worried.
acting on a request from japan he offered to mediate the conflict and both russia and japan accepted russia because it was losing and japan because it was financially drained.
in august 1905 roosevelt convened a peace conference at portsmouth new hampshire.
the conference ended the war but japan emerged as the dominant force in the far east.
adjusting policy roosevelt sent secretary of war taft to tokyo to negotiate the taft katsura agreement 1905 which recognized japans dominance over korea in return for its promise not to invade the philippines.
giving japan a free hand in korea violated the open door policy but roosevelt argued that he had little choice.
relations between japan and the united states were again strained in 1906 when the san francisco school board ordered the segregation of japanese chinese and korean children into a separate oriental school.
a year later the california legislature considered a bill limiting the immigration of japanese laborers into the state.
as resentment mounted in japan roosevelt intervened to persuade the school board to rescind its order while at the same time he obtained from japan the gentlemens agreement 1907 promising to stop the flow of japanese agricultural laborers into the united states.
in case japan viewed his policy as a sign of weakness roosevelt sent sixteen battleships of the new american fleet around the world including a stop in tokyo in october 1908.
critics at home predicted dire consequences and european naval experts felt certain japan would attack the fleet.
instead the japanese welcomed it even posting ads to sell the sailors mitsukoshi washing powder to rid yourselves of the seven blemishes on the way home for the moment japanese american relations improved and in 1908 the two nations in an exchange of diplomatic notes reached the comprehensive root takahira agreement in which they promised to maintain the status quo in the pacific uphold the open door and support chinese independence.
in later years tensions again grew in the far east.
anger mounted in japan in 1913 when the california legislature prohibited japanese residents from owning property in the state.
at the start of world war i japan seized some german colonies and in 1915 it issued the twenty one demands insisting on authority over china.
coveting an asian empire japan eyed american possessions in the pacific.
taft and dollar diplomacy in foreign as well as domestic affairs president taft tried to continue roosevelts policies.
for secretary of state he chose philander c knox roosevelts attorney general and together they pursued a policy of dollar diplomacy to promote american financial and business interests abroad.
the policy had profit seeking motives but it also aimed to substitute economic ties for military alliances with the idea of increasing american influence and bringing lasting peace.
intent like roosevelt on supremacy in the caribbean taft worked to replace european loans with american ones thereby reducing the danger of outside meddling.
in 1909 he asked american bankers to assume the honduran debt in order to fend off english bondholders.
a year later he persuaded them to take over the assets of the national bank of haiti and in 1911 he helped nicaragua secure a large loan in return for american control of nicaraguas national bank.
when nicaraguans revolted against the agreement taft sent marines to put them down.
a marine detachment was stationed in the country intermittently until the 1930s.
in the far east knox worked closely with willard straight an agent of american bankers who argued that dollar diplomacy was the financial arm of the open door.
straight had close ties to edward h harriman the railroad magnate who wanted to build railroads in manchuria in northern china.
roosevelt had tacitly promised japan he would keep american investors out of the area and knoxs plan reversed the policy.
trying to organize an international syndicate to loan china money to purchase the manchurian railroads knox approached england japan and russia.
in january 1910 all three turned him down.
the outcome was a blow to american policy and prestige in asia.
russia and japan found reasons to cooperate with each other and staked out spheres of influence in violation of the open door.
japan resented tafts initiatives in manchuria and chinas distrust of the united states deepened.
instead of cultivating friendship as roosevelt had envisioned taft had started an intense rivalry with japan for commercial advantage in china.
foreign policy under wilson what did woodrow wilson mean by moral diplomacy.
when he took office in 1913 woodrow wilson knew little about foreign policy.
as a princeton professor he had studied congress and the presidency but his books made only passing reference to foreign issues and during the 1912 campaign he mentioned foreign policy only when it affected domestic concerns.
it would be the irony of fate if my administration had to deal chiefly with foreign policy under wilson foreign affairs he said to a friend before becoming president.
and so it was.
during his two terms wilson faced crisis after crisis in foreign affairs including the outbreak of world war i.
the idealistic wilson believed in a principled ethical world in which militarism colonialism and war were brought under control.
he emphasized moral purposes over material interests and said during one crisis the force of america is the force of moral principle rejecting the policy of dollar diplomacy wilson initially chose a course of moral diplomacy designed to bring right to the world preserve peace and extend to other peoples the blessings of democracy.
investigation ended usually within one year.
the idea drew on the eras confidence in commissions and the sense that human reason given time for emotions to fade could settle problems without war.
bryan negotiated cooling off treaties with thirty nations including great britain france and italy.
germany refused to sign one.
based on a generous idea the treaties were naive and they did not work.
wilson and bryan promised a dramatic new approach in latin america concerned not with the pursuit of material interest but with human rights and national integrity signaling the change in 1913 they negotiated the treaty with colombia apologizing for roosevelts panamanian policy.
yet in the end wilson distracted by other problems and impatient with the results of his idealistic approach continued the roosevelt taft policies.
he defended the monroe doctrine gave unspoken support to the roosevelt corollary and intervened in latin america more than had either roosevelt or taft.
in 1914 wilson negotiated a treaty with nicaragua to grant the united states exclusive rights to build a canal and lease sites for naval bases.
this treaty made nicaragua an american satellite.
in 1915 he sent marines into haiti to quell a revolution they stayed until 1934.
in 1916 he occupied the dominican republic establishing a protectorate that lasted until 1924.
by 1917 american troops protected nicaragua haiti the dominican republic and cuba four nations that were u s dependencies in all but name.
conducting moral diplomacy william jennings bryan whom wilson appointed as secretary of state was also an amateur in foreign relations.
trusting in the common people bryan was skeptical of experts in the state department.
to key posts abroad he appointed deserving democrats believing they could do the job as well as career diplomats.
bryan was a fervent pacifist and like wilson he believed in the american duty to help less favored nations.
in 1913 and 1914 he embarked on an idealistic campaign to negotiate treaties of arbitration throughout the world.
known as cooling off treaties they provided for submitting all international disputes to permanent commissions of investigation.
neither party could declare war or increase armaments until the u s protectorates united states u s military expeditions columbus new mexico canal zone u s possessions labeled in red parral 500 miles b ah a gulf of mexico m as mexico 1.
villas raid march 9 1916 baha honda tampico 9.
leased 1903 1912 10.
u s occupation 1898 1902 1906 1909 1912 and 1917 haiti british honduras 5.
seized by u s navy april 1914 jamaica br.
u s occupation 1915 1934 13.
u s occupation 1916 1924 virgin islands caribbean sea el salvador puerto rico guatemala honduras 11.
u s naval base leased virgin islands br.
guantnamo bay 4.
american sailors arrested april 1914 8.
leased 1903 dominican republic cuba 3.
skirmish with carranzas troops april 12 1916 7.
u s occupation 1912 1925 1927 1933.
veracruz 500 kilometers havana 2.
pershings expedition 1916 1917 6.
u s occupation 1912 1919 1924 1925 b r nicaragua canal zone panama canal proposed canal costa rica venezuela panama 14.
purchased from denmark 1917 activities of the united states in the caribbean 1898 1930 colombia during the first three decades of the twentieth century the united states policed the caribbean claiming the right to take action when it judged latin american countries were doing a bad job of running their affairs.
chapter 24 the nation at war troubles across the border wilsons moral diplomacy encountered one of its greatest challenges across the border in mexico.
porfirio daz president of mexico for thirty seven years was overthrown in 1911.
daz had encouraged foreign investments in mexican mines railroads oil and land by 1913 americans had invested more than 1 billion.
but most mexicans remained poor and uneducated and dazs overthrow led to a decade of violence that tested wilsons policies and brought the united states close to war with mexico.
a liberal reformer francisco i madero followed daz as president in 1911.
but madero could not keep order in the troubled country and opponents of his reforms undermined him.
with support from wealthy landowners the army and the catholic church general victoriano huerta ousted madero in 1913 threw him in jail and arranged his murder.
most european nations immediately recognized huerta but wilson calling him a butcher refused to do so.
instead he announced a new policy toward revolutionary regimes in latin america.
to win american recognition they must not only exercise power but reflect a just government based upon law not upon arbitrary or irregular force on that basis wilson withheld recognition from huerta and maneuvered to oust him.
early in 1914 he stationed naval units off mexicos ports to cut off arms shipments to the huerta regime.
the action produced trouble.
on april 9 1914 several american sailors who had gone ashore in tampico to purchase supplies were arrested.
they were promptly released but the american admiral demanded an apology and a 21 gun salute to the american flag.
huerta agreed if the americans also saluted the mexican flag.
wilson asked congress for authority to use military force if needed then just as congress acted he learned that a german ship was landing arms at veracruz on mexicos eastern coast.
with wilsons approval american warships shelled the harbor and marines went ashore.
against heavy resistance they took the city.
outraged mexicans of all factions denounced the invasion and for a time the two countries hovered on the edge of war.
retreating hastily wilson explained that he desired only to help mexico.
argentina brazil and chile came to his aid with an offer to mediate the dispute and tensions eased.
in july 1914 weakened by an armed rebellion huerta resigned.
wilson recognized the new government headed by venustiano carranza an associate of madero.
early in 1916 francisco pancho villa one of carranzas generals revolted.
hoping to goad the united states into an action that would help him seize power he raided border towns injuring american civilians.
in january he removed seventeen americans from a train in mexico and murdered them.
two months later he invaded columbus new mexico killing sixteen americans and burning the town.
stationing militia along the border wilson ordered general john j pershing on a punitive expedition to seize villa in mexico.
pershing led six thousand troops deep into mexican territory.
at first carranza agreed to the drive but as the americans pushed farther and farther into his country he changed his mind.
as the wily villa eluded pershing carranza protested bitterly and wilson worried about events in europe ordered pershing home.
wilsons policy had laudable goals he wanted to help the mexicans achieve political and agrarian reform.
but his motives and methods were condescending.
wilson tried to impose gradual progressive reform on a society sharply divided along class and other lines.
with little forethought he interfered in the affairs of another country and in doing so he revealed the themes moralism combined with pragmatic self interest and a desire for peace that also shaped his policies in europe.
toward war what were the reasons behind and dangers of wilsons neutrality policy.
in may 1914 colonel edward m house wilsons close friend and adviser sailed to europe on a fact finding mission.
tensions there were rising.
the situation is extraordinary he reported to wilson.
it is jingoism extreme nationalism run stark mad.
there is too much hatred too many jealousies large armies dominated the european continent.
a web of alliances entangled nations maximizing the risk that a local conflict could produce a wider war.
in germany the ambitious kaiser wilhelm ii coveted a world empire to match those of britain and france.
germany had military treaties with turkey and austria hungary a sprawling central european country of many watch the video the outbreak of world war i franz ferdinand 1863 1914 was born in graz austria.
as the heir to the austro hungarian empire his assassination on june 28 1914 sparked the first world war.
toward war nationalities.
linked in another alliance england france and russia agreed to aid each other in case of attack.
on june 28 1914 a bosnian assassin linked to serbia murdered archduke franz ferdinand heir to the austro hungarian throne.
within weeks germany turkey and austria hungary the central powers were at war with england france and russia the allied powers.
americans were shocked at the events.
i had a feeling that the end of things had come one of wilsons cabinet members said.
i stopped in my tracks dazed and horrorstricken wilson immediately proclaimed neutrality and asked americans to remain impartial in thought as well as in action the war he said was one with which we have nothing to do whose causes cannot touch us in private wilson was stunned.
a man who loved peace he had long admired the british parliamentary system and he respected the leaders of the british liberal party who supported social programs akin to his own.
everything i love most in the world he said is at stake the neutrality policy in general americans accepted neutrality.
they saw no need to enter the conflict especially after the allies in september 1914 halted the first german drive toward paris.
america resisted involvement in other countries problems with the notable exception of latin america and had a tradition of freedom from foreign entanglements.
many of the nations large number of progressives saw additional reasons to resist.
war they thought violated the very spirit of progressive reform.
why demand safer factories in which people could work and then kill them by the millions in war.
to many progressives moreover england represented international finance an institution they detested.
germany on the other hand had pioneered some of their favorite social reforms.
furthermore progressives and others tended to put the blame for war on the greed of munition manufacturers stockbrokers and bond dealers eager for wartime profits.
do you want to know the cause of the war henry ford who was no progressive asked.
it is capitalism greed the dirty hunger for dollars above all progressives were sure that war would end reform.
it consumed money and attention it inflamed emotions.
as a result jane addams florence kelley frederic c howe lillian wald and other progressives fought to keep the united states out of war.
in late 1915 they formed the american union against militarism to throw they said a monkey wrench into the machinery of war.
throughout 1915 and 1916 la follettes magazine the voice of the progressive leader railed against the morgans rockefellers du ponts and the thirty eight corporations most benefited by war orders the wars outbreak also tugged at the emotions of millions of immigrant americans.
those who came from the british isles tended to support the allies those from ireland tended to support germany hoping britains wartime troubles might free their homeland from british domination.
the large population of german americans often sympathized with the central powers.
but many people thought that in a nation of immigrants a policy of neutrality would be wise from a domestic point of view as well as from the viewpoint of foreign policy.
at the deepest level a majority in the country bound by common language and institutions sympathized with the allies and blamed germany for the war.
like wilson many americans admired english literature customs and law they remembered lafayette and the times when france had helped the united states in its early years.
germany on the other hand seemed arrogant and militaristic.
when the war began it invaded belgium to strike at france and violated a treaty that the german chancellor called just a scrap of paper many americans resented the violation and they liked it even less when german troops executed belgian civilians who resisted.
both sides sought to sway american opinion and fierce propaganda campaigns flourished.
the german literary defense committee distributed more than a million pamphlets during the first year of the war.
german propaganda tended to emphasize strength and will allied propaganda called on historical ties and took advantage of german atrocities both real and alleged.
in the end the propaganda probably made little difference.
ties of heritage and the course of the war not propaganda decided the american position.
at the outset no matter which side they cheered for americans of all persuasions preferred simply to remain at peace.
freedom of the seas the demands of trade tested american neutrality and confronted wilson with difficult choices.
under international law neutral countries were permitted to trade in nonmilitary goods with all belligerent countries.
but great britain controlled the seas and it intended to cut off shipments of war materials to the central powers.
as soon as war broke out britain blockaded german ports and limited the goods americans could sell to germany.
american ships had to carry cargoes to neutral ports from which after examination they could be carried to germany.
as time passed britain stepped up the economic sanctions by forbidding the shipment to germany of all foodstuffs and most raw materials seizing and censoring mail and blacklisting american firms that dealt directly with the central powers.
british ships often stopped american ships and confiscated cargoes.
again and again wilson protested against such infringements on neutral rights.
sometimes britain complied sometimes not and wilson often grew angry.
but needing american support and supplies britain pursued a careful strategy to disrupt german american trade without disrupting anglo american relations.
after forbidding cotton shipments to germany in 1915 it agreed to buy enough cotton to make up for the losses.
when necessary it also promised to reimburse american businesses after the wars end.
other than the german u boats there were no constraints on trade with the allies and a flood of allied war orders fueled the american economy.
england and france bought huge amounts of arms grain cotton and clothing.
to finance the purchases the allies turned to american bankers for loans.
by 1917 loans to allied governments exceeded 2 billion loans to germany came to only 27 million.
in a development that influenced wilsons policy the war produced the greatest economic boom in the nations history.
loans and trade drew the united states ever closer to the allied cause.
and even though wilson often protested english maritime policy the chapter 24 the nation at war protests involved american goods and money whereas germanys submarine policy threatened american lives.
the u boat threat sent an ultimatum to germany stating that unless the germans immediately called off attacks on cargo and passenger ships the united states would sever relations.
the kaiser convinced he did not yet have enough submarines to risk war yielded.
in the sussex pledge of may 4 1916 he agreed to wilsons demands and promised to shoot on sight only ships of the enemys navy.
but he attached the condition that the united states compel the allies to end their blockade and comply with international law.
wilson accepted the pledge but turned down the condition.
the sussex pledge marked the beginning of a short period of friendly relations between germany and the united states.
the agreement applied not only to passenger liners but to all merchant ships belligerent or not.
there was one problem wilson had taken such a strong position that if germany renewed submarine warfare on merchant shipping war was likely.
most americans however viewed the agreement as a diplomatic stroke for peace by wilson and the issues of peace and preparedness dominated the presidential election of 1916.
a relatively new weapon the unterseeboot or submarine strained the guidelines of international law.
traditional law required a submarine to surface warn the target to stop send a boarding party to check papers and cargo then allow time for passengers and crew to board lifeboats before sinking the vessel.
flimsy and slow submarines could ill afford to surface while the prey radioed for help.
if they did surface they might be rammed or blown up by deck guns.
when germany announced the submarine campaign in february 1915 wilson protested sharply calling the sinking of merchant ships without checking cargo a wanton act the germans promised not to sink american ships an agreement that lasted until 1917 and thereafter the issue became the right of americans to sail on the ships of belligerent nations.
in march an american citizen aboard the british liner falaba perished when the ship was torpedoed off the irish coast.
bryan urged he kept us out of war wilson to forbid americans to travel in the war zones but the president determined to stand by the principles of international the preparedness issue pitted antiwar groups against those law refused.
who wanted to prepare for war.
bellicose as always teddy wilson reacted more harshly in may and august of 1915 when roosevelt led the preparedness campaign.
he called wilson u boats sank the lusitania and the arabic.
he demanded that the yellow for not pressing germany harder and scoffed at the germans protect passenger vessels and pay for american losses.
at popular song i didnt raise my boy to be a soldier which he odds with wilsons understanding of neutrality bryan resigned as secretary of state and was read the document adolf k g e von spiegel u boat 202 1919 replaced by robert lansing a lawyer and counselor in the state department.
lansing brought a very different spirit to the job.
he favored the allies and believed that democracy was threatened in a world dominated by germany.
he urged strong stands against german violations of american neutrality.
in februar y 1916 germany declared unrestricted submarine warfare against all armed ships.
lansing protested and told germany it would be held strictly accountable for american losses.
a month later a u boat torpedoed the unarmed french channel steamer sussex without warning injuring several americans.
arguing that the sinking violated the arabic pledge lansing urged wilson to break relations with germany.
wilson rejected the advice but on april 18 he adolf k g e.
von spiegel commanded a german u boat during world war i.
he published his memoirs in 1919.
toward war compared to singing i didnt raise my girl to be a mother defending the militarys state of readiness wilson refused to be stampeded just because some amongst us are nervous and excited in fact when government revenue dropped in 1915 he cut military appropriations.
wilsons position was attacked from both sides as preparedness advocates charged cowardice while pacifists denounced any attempt at military readiness.
the difficulty of his situation plus the growing u boat crisis soon changed wilsons mind.
in mid 1915 he asked the war department to increase military planning and he quietly notified congressional leaders of a switch in policy.
later that year wilson approved large increases in the army and navy a move that upset many peace minded progressives.
in january 1916 he toured the country to promote preparedness and in june with an american flag draped over his shoulder he marched in a giant preparedness parade in washington.
for their standard bearer in the presidential election of 1916 the republicans nominated charles evans hughes a moderate justice of the supreme court.
hughes seemed to have all the qualifications for victory.
a former reform governor of new york he could lure back the roosevelt progressives while at the same time appealing to the republican conservatives.
to woo the roosevelt wing hughes called for a tougher line against germany thus allowing the democrats to label him the war candidate.
even so roosevelt and others considered hughes a bearded iceberg a dull campaigner who wavered on important issues.
the democrats renominated wilson in a convention marked by spontaneous demonstrations for peace.
determined to outdo republican patriotism wilson himself had ordered the conventions theme to be americanism the delegates were to sing america and the star spangled banner and to cheer any mention of america and the flag.
they did it all dutifully but then broke into spontaneous applause at the mention of wilsons careful diplomatic moves.
as the keynote speaker reviewed them the delegates shouted what did we do.
what did we do the speaker shouted back we didnt go to war.
we didnt go to war picking up the theme perhaps with reservations wilson said in october i am not expecting this country to get into war the campaign slogan he kept us out of war was repeated again and again and just before the election the democrats took full page ads in leading newspapers and progressive vote.
women who were then allowed to vote in presidential elections in twelve states also voted heavily for wilson.
the final months of peace just before election day great britain further limited neutral trade and there were reports from germany of a renewal of unrestricted submarine warfare.
fresh from his victory wilson redoubled his efforts for peace.
aware that time was running out he hoped to start negotiations to end the bloodshed and create a peaceful postwar world.
in december 1916 he sent messages to both sides asking them to state their war aims.
should they do so he pledged the whole force of the united states to end the war.
the allies refused although they promised privately to negotiate if the german terms were reasonable.
the germans replied evasively and in january 1917 revealed their real objectives.
close to forcing russia out of the war germany sensed victory and wanted territory in eastern europe africa belgium and france.
on january 22 in an eloquent speech before the senate wilson called for a peace without victory outlining his own ambitious aims he urged respect for all nations freedom of the seas arms limitations and a league of nations to keep the peace.
only a peace between equals can last only a peace the very principle of which is equality and a common participation in a common benefit the speech made a great impression on many europeans but it was too late.
the germans had decided a few weeks before read the document president wilsons war message to congress 1917 you are working not fighting.
alive and happy not cannon fodder.
wilson and peace with honor.
or hughes with roosevelt and war.
on election night hughes had swept most of the east and wilson retired at 10 p m thinking he had lost.
during the night the results came in from california new mexico and north dakota all supported wilson california by a mere 3773 votes.
wilson won with 9 1 million votes against 8 5 million for hughes.
holding the democratic south he carried key states in the midwest and west and took large portions of the labor wilsons re election in 1916 owed a great deal to the campaign slogan he kept us out of war but the resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare by germany in 1917 significantly changed the international situation.
several u s merchant ships were sunk in march by german u boats.
that april wilson called congress into extraordinary session to ask for a declaration of war against germany.
chapter 24 the nation at war watch the video american entry into world war i merchant ships armed on his own authority.
three days later he announced the arming and on march 13 the navy instructed all vessels to fire on submarines.
between march 12 and march 21 u boats sank five american ships and wilson decided to wait no longer.
he called congress into special session and at 8 30 in the evening on april 2 1917 asked for a declaration of war.
it is a fearful thing to lead this great peaceful people into war into the most terrible and disastrous of all wars civilization itself seeming to be in the balance.
but the right is more precious than peace and we shall fight for the things which we have always carried nearest our hearts for democracy.
for the rights and liberties of small nations for a universal dominion of right by such a concert of free peoples as shall bring peace and safety to all nations and make the world itself at last free congressmen broke into applause and crowded the aisles to congratulate wilson.
my message today was a message of death for our young men he said afterward.
how strange it seems to applaud that pacifists in congress continued to hold out and for four days they managed to postpone action.
finally on april 6 the declaration of war passed with fifty members of the house and six senators voting against it.
even then the country was divided over entry into the war.
over there in 1914 europe explodes into war and woodrow wilson has to make a decision about what america is going to do.
and his decision is to ask the american public to remain neutral in word as well as deed.
to unleash the submarines and gamble on a quick end to the war.
even as wilson spoke u boats were in the atlantic west of ireland preparing to attack.
on january 31 the german ambassador in washington informed lansing that beginning february 1 u boats would sink on sight all ships passenger or merchant neutral or belligerent armed or unarmed in the waters around england and france.
staking everything on a last effort the germans calculated that if they could sink 600 000 tons of shipping a month they could defeat england in six months.
as he had pledged in 1916 wilson broke off relations with germany although he still hoped for peace.
on february 25 the british government privately gave wilson a telegram intercepted from arthur zimmermann the german foreign minister to the german ambassador in mexico.
a day later wilson asked congress for authority to arm merchant ships to deter u boat attacks.
when la follette and a handful of others threatened to filibuster wilson divulged the contents of the zimmermann telegram.
it proposed an alliance with mexico in case of war with the united states offering financial support and recovery of mexicos lost territory in new mexico texas and arizona.
spurred by a wave of public indignation toward the germans the house passed wilsons measure but la follette and others still blocked action in the senate.
on march 9 1917 wilson ordered how did the united states entry affect the course of world war i.
with a burst of patriotism the united states entered a war its new allies were in danger of losing.
that same month the germans sank 881 000 tons of allied shipping the highest amount for any one month during the war.
there were mutinies in the french army a costly british drive in flanders stalled.
in november the bolsheviks seized power in russia and led by v i lenin they soon signed a separate peace treaty with germany freeing german troops to fight in the west.
german and austrian forces routed the italian army on the southern flank and the allies braced for a spring 1918 offensive.
mobilization the united states was not prepared for war.
some americans hoped the declaration of war itself might daunt the germans there were those who thought that naval escorts of allied shipping would be enough.
others hoped money and arms supplied to the allies would be suffi cient to produce victory without sending troops.
bypassing older generals wilson named john j.
black jack pershing leader of the mexican campaign to head the american expeditionary force aef.
pershing inherited an army unready for war.
in april 1917 it had 200 000 officers and men equipped with 300 000 old rifles 1500 machine guns 55 out of date airplanes and 2 field radio sets.
its most recent battle experience had been chasing pancho villa around northern mexico.
it had not caught him.
over there listen to the audio file over there 500 miles norway 500 kilometers sweden moscow gr eat britain se a north sea lt i c ba denmark russia tannenberg aug 26 31 1914 london atlantic ocean berlin neth.
eastern front brestlitovsk german empire armistice line dec 1917 lux.
paris somme july 1 nov 18 1916 verdun feb 21 dec 18 1916 western front france austria hungary switz.
caporetto oct 24 25 1917 southern flank port.
spain corsica fr.
vienna romania italy mallorca sp.
sardinia it.
bulgaria rome montenegro allied powers ottoman empire alb.
greece mediterranean sea sp.
morocco central powers neutral nations gallipoli apr.
25 1915 jan 9 1916 sicily algeria fr.
tunisia fr.
crete european alliances and battlefronts 1914 1917 allied forces suffered early defeats on the eastern front tannenberg and in the dardanelles gallipoli.
in 1917 the allies were routed on the southern flank caporetto the western front then became the critical theater of the war.
u s losses to the german submarine campaign 1916 1918 tonnage of vessels sunk thousands american declaration of war april 1917 black sea serbia cyprus br.
complete the assignment measuring the mind on myhistorylab feature essay f rom 1870 to 1920 scientists and physicians explored new ideas about the mind.
in europe the viennese psychiatrist sigmund freud studied the unconscious which he thought shaped human behavior.
russias ivan pavlov tested the conditioned reflex in mental activity pavlovs dogs and in the united states william james the psychologist and philosopher examined emotions and linked psychology to everyday problems.
as one way of understanding the mind psychologists studied the mental processes of a great many minds a task to which the relatively new science of statistics lent a hand.
testing large samples of subjects they developed the concept of the normal and average helpful boundaries used to determine an individuals place in the population.
in 1890 the psychologist james mckeen cattell tested one hundred first year students at the university of pennsylvania for vision and hearing sensitivity to pain reaction time and memory.
he called these examinations by a new name mental tests and the idea spread.
in 1895 the american psychological association apa set up a special committee to promote the nationwide collection of mental statistics.
work was under way on both sides of the ocean and in 1905 alfred binet and theodore simon two french psychologists devised a metric intelligence scale.
seizing on the idea that intelligence increases with age until maturity they tested children to find an average level of performance for different ages.
once they had determined the average they could compare any childs test performance to measuring the mind it and thus distinguish between the childs mental age and chronological age.
in 1912 william stein a german psychologist introduced the intelligence quotient found by dividing a persons mental age by the chronological age.
in 1916 lewis m terman of stanford university improved binets test and the term iq became part of the american vocabulary.
employers and educators however remained skeptical of measuring intelligence.
thus when the united states entered world war i psychologists at once saw the opportunity to overcome the doubts and prove their theories.
huge numbers of men needed to be recruited classified and assigned to units quickly.
why not use the new mental tests.
apa leaders formed twelve committees including one on the psychological examination of recruits to explore the military uses of psychology.
preferring to issue promotions on the basis of seniority the army resisted the mental meddlers but the apa persuaded the war department to use the tests.
in early 1918 psychological examiners were posted at all training camps to administer the alpha test to literates and the beta test with instructions given in pantomime to illiterates and recruits who did not understand english.
at the start of each alpha test the examiners put the men at ease by explaining that the army was not looking for crazy people.
the aim is to help find out what we are best fitted to do on the beta test which was made up largely of pictures the examiners were reminded that beta men sometimes sulk and refuse to work on the basis of the tests the examiners classified recruits as superior questions from one portion of the u s army intelligence alpha test.
average or inferior from the superior category they selected men for officer training a helpful winnowing process in an army that expanded quickly from nine thousand officers to two hundred thousand.
they then distributed the remaining superior average and inferior men among each military unit.
in all the examiners tested 1 7 million men by far the largest testing program in human history to that time.
to some degree the tests served their purpose but they also seemed to raise questions about the education and mental ability of many american men.
for one thing there was the extent of illiteracy nearly one quarter of the draft age men in 1918 could neither read nor write.
one third incidentally were physically unfit for service.
there was also the limited schooling of the recruits most of whom had left school between the fifth and seventh grades.
more alarming according to the test results 47 percent of the white draftees and 89 percent of the black draftees had a mental age of twelve years or under which classified them as feebleminded did that mean half or more of the american population was feebleminded.
the tests also turned up racial and national distinctions or so some of the examiners concluded.
men of native backgrounds and old immigrant stock from northern europe and the british isles tended to score well and fell in the superior category new immigrants from central and southern europe tended to score less well and were ranked as inferior among russian polish and italian draftees more than half were classified as inferior such results came as no surprise to those who had long doubted the intelligence of the new immigrants nor did the fact that 80 percent of the african american men taking the alpha test scored in the inferior range.
some observers however wondered what the tests really measured.
the apa examiners claimed they measured native intelligence but questions about edgar allan poes poem the raven or the paintings of rosa bonheur a french artist of the mid nineteenth century required answers that native intelligence alone could not supply.
when blacks and whites scored comparably on the early beta test the examiners decided that something must be wrong with the test so they changed the questions until the scores showed the expected racial differences.
most of those taking the beta test had never taken a written test before many had probably never held a pencil.
still skeptical the army discontinued the tests the moment the war ended but what the army rejected the nation adopted.
businesses government and above all educational institutions found more and more uses for intelligence testing.
in 1926 the college entrance examination board ceeb administered the first scholastic aptitude test sat designed to test intelligence and predict performance in college.
in 1935 it established scoring ranges from 200 to 800 with the average score set at 500.
during world war ii sat tests were widely used.
in 1947 the ceeb became part of a new educational testing service that spurred an educational revolution by making intelligence instead of social or economic standing the main criterion of college admissions.
before long intelligence testing the measuring of minds touched every aspect of american life.
shaping lives and careers it pushed some people forward and held others back in the military industry the civil service and higher education.
intelligence tests.
an expert said in 1971 have more and more become societys instrument for the selection of human resources questions for discussion 1.
what arguments did advocates and opponents of intelligence testing use to support and attack these tests.
why were the intelligence tests the army administered during world war i so problematic.
what were the positive and negative results of intelligence tests.
chapter 24 the nation at war war in the trenches 30 miles world war i may have been the most terrible war of all time more terrible even than world netherlands war ii and its vast devastation.
after the early offensives the european armies dug themselves into trenches only hundreds of s r yards apart in places.
artillery e d an fl poison gas hand grenades and a.
lys dt r brussels ypres offensive schel new weapon rapid fire machine guns kept them pinned down.
belgium lys r.
r even in moments of respite u se so me armistice line the mud rats cold fear and disease m stabilized front nov 11 1918 m german e 1914 1917 r took a heavy toll.
deafening bomempire bardments shook the earth and there was a high incidence of shell amiens shock.
from time to time troops somme offensive went over the top of the trenches r lux.
lle ca ntigny in an effort to break through the e aisne marne os may 28 1918 aisne m offensive enemys lines but the costs were r.
r second battle france e enormous.
the german offensive of the marne is o verdun july 18 aug.
6 1918 at verdun in 1916 killed six hunfeb.
18 1918 meuse argonne dred thousand men the british lost belleau wood sept 26 nov.
11 1918 june 6 25 1918 twenty thousand on the first day of marn er.
ne r r an offensive on the somme.
sei st mihiel r sept 12 16 1918 a i n chteau thierry the first american soldiers may 31 june 4 1918 e reached france in june 1917.
by march of the following year three hundred thousand americans were german spring allied victories allied powers offensive 1918 there and by wars end two millimit of german deadlocked central powers lion men had crossed the atlantic.
advance 1918 battle no troop ships were sunk a credit u s troop neutral nations movements to the british and american navies.
in the summer of 1917 the western front u s.
participation 1918 the turning point of the war came in admiral william s sims a briljuly when the german advance was halted at the marne.
the yanks now a fighting force were thrown into the liant american strategist pushed breach.
they played a dramatic role in stemming the tide and mounting the counteroffensives that ended the war.
through a convoy plan that used allied destroyers to escort merchant vessels across the ocean.
at first resisted by english captains although some in congress preferred a voluntary army of the who liked to sail alone the plan soon cut shipping losses in half.
kind that had fought in the spanish american war wilson turned as expected on march 21 1918 the germans launched a masto conscription which he believed was both efficient and demosive assault in western europe.
troops from the russian front added to cratic.
in may 1917 congress passed the selective service act the force and by may they had driven allied forces back to the marne providing for the registration of all men between the ages of 21 and river just fifty miles from paris.
there the americans saw their 30 later changed to 18 and 45.
early in june 9 5 million men regfirst action.
the american forces blocked the germans at the town istered for the draft.
by the end of the war the act had registered of chteau thierry and four weeks later forced them out of belleau 24 2 million men about 2 8 million of whom were inducted into wood a crucial stronghold.
on july 15 the germans threw everythe army.
defending the draft wilson said it was not really a draft thing into a last drive for paris but they were halted at the marne and at all but a selection from a nation which has volunteered in mass in three days of battle they were finished.
on the 18th the german newly devised intelligence tests became part of the selection prochancellor said even the most optimistic among us knew that all was cess.
see the feature essay measuring the mind pp.
the history of the world was played out in three days the draft included black men as well as white and four african with the german drive stalled the allies counterattacked american regiments were among the first sent into action.
despite along the entire front.
on september 12 1918 a half million their contributions however no black soldiers were allowed to americans and a smaller contingent of french drove the germans march in the victory celebrations that eventually took place in from the st mihiel salient twelve miles south of verdun.
nor were they included in a french mural of the different weeks later 896 000 american soldiers attacked between the meuse races in the war even though black servicemen from english and river and the argonne forest.
focusing their efforts on a main french colonies were represented.
30 kilometers north sea ine rh r l a l s a c e over here railroad supply line for the german army in the west american troops broke through in early november cut the line and drove the germans back along the whole front.
the german high command knew that the war was lost.
on october 6 1918 germany appealed to wilson for an armistice and by the end of the month turkey bulgaria and austria hungary were out of the war.
at 4 a m on november 11 germany signed the armistice.
the aef lost 48 909 dead and 230 000 wounded losses to disease brought the total of dead to more than 112 000.
the american contribution although small in comparison to the enormous costs to european nations was vital.
fresh enthusiastic american troops raised allied morale they helped turn the tide at a crucial point in the war.
over here what programs and changes did world war i bring at home.
victory at the front depended on economic and emotional mobilization at home.
consolidating federal authority wilson moved quickly in 1917 and 1918 to organize war production and read the document distribution.
an idealist who knew how to sway public opinion he also recognized the need to enlist american emotions.
to him the war for peoples minds the conquest of their convictions was as vital as events on the battlefield.
the conquest of convictions a week after war was declared wilson formed the committee on public information cpi and asked george creel an outspoken progressive journalist to head it.
creel hired progressives such as ida tarbell and ray stannard baker and recruited thousands of people in the arts advertising and film industries to publicize the war.
he worked out a system of voluntary censorship with the press plastered walls with colorful posters and issued more than seventy five million pamphlets.
creel also enlisted seventy five thousand four minute men to give quick speeches at public gatherings and places of entertainment on why we are fighting and the meaning of america at first they were instructed to emphasize facts and stay away from emotions particularly hatred but by the beginning of 1918 the instructions shifted the germans were to be depicted as bloodthirsty huns bent on world conquest.
exploiting a new medium espionage act 1917 anti german sentiment spread in america during world war i escalating dramatically after the united states entered the war in april 1917.
a wave of verbal and physical attacks on german americans was accompanied by a campaign to repress german culture.
in this photograph from 1917 a group of children stand in front of an anti german sign posted in the edison park community of chicago illinois.
as the sign suggests some americans questioned the loyalty of their german american neighbors.
chapter 24 the nation at war the cpi promoted films such as the prussian cur and the kaiser the beast of berlin.
helped along by the propaganda campaign anti german sentiment spread rapidly.
many schools stopped offering instruction in the german language californias state education board called it a language of autocracy brutality and hatred sauerkraut became liberty cabbage saloonkeepers removed pretzels from the bar.
orchestral works by bach beethoven and brahms vanished from some symphonic programs and the new york philharmonic agreed not to perform the music of living german composers.
government agents harassed karl muck the german conductor of the boston symphony imprisoned him for more than a year and then after the war ended deported him.
german americans and antiwar figures were badgered beaten and in some cases killed.
vigilantism sparked often by superpatriotism of a ruthless sort flourished.
frequently it focused on radical antiwar figures such as frank little an official of the industrial workers of the world iww in butte montana who was taken from his boardinghouse in august 1917 tied to the rear of an automobile and dragged through the streets until his kneecaps were scraped off.
little was then hanged from a railroad trestle.
in april 1918 a missouri mob seized robert prager a young man whose sole crime was being born in germany.
they bound him with an american flag paraded him through town and then lynched him.
a jury acquitted the mobs members who wore red white and blue ribbons to court as one juror shouted well i guess nobody can say we arent loyal now rather than curbing the repression wilson encouraged it.
woe be to the man or group of men that seeks to stand in our way he told peace advocates soon after the war began.
at his request congress passed the espionage act of 1917 which imposed sentences of up to twenty years in prison for persons found guilty of aiding the enemy obstructing recruitment of soldiers or encouraging disloyalty.
it allowed the postmaster general to remove from the mails materials that incited treason or insurrection.
the trading with the enemy act of 1917 authorized the government to censor the foreign language press.
in 1918 congress passed the sedition act imposing harsh penalties on anyone using disloyal profane scurrilous or abusive language about the government flag or armed forces uniforms.
in all more than fifteen hundred persons were arrested under the new laws.
people indicted or imprisoned included a californian who laughed at rookies drilling at an army camp a woman who greeted a red cross solicitor in a hostile way and an editor who printed this sentence we must make the world safe for democracy even if we have to bean the goddess of liberty to do it the sedition laws clearly went beyond any clear or present danger.
there were to be sure german spies in the country germans who wanted to encourage strikes in american arms factories.
moreover the u s government and other national leaders were painfully aware of how divided americans had been about entering the war.
they set out to promote unity by force if necessary in order to convince germany that the nation was united behind the war.
but none of these matters warranted a nationwide program of repression.
conservatives took advantage of wartime feelings to try to stamp out american socialists who in fact were vulnerable because unlike their european counterparts they continued to oppose the war even after their country had entered it.
using the sedition laws conservatives harried the socialist party and another favorite target the industrial workers of the world.
in 1921 ill and facing imprisonment big bill haywood one of the iwws best known members fled to the soviet union where he died a few years later.
wilsons postmaster general banned from the mails more than a dozen socialist publications including the appeal to reason which went to more than half a million people weekly.
in 1918 eugene v debs the socialist party leader delivered a speech denouncing capitalism and the war.
he was convicted for violation of the espionage act and spent the war in a penitentiary in atlanta.
nominated as the socialist party candidate in the presidential election of 1920 debs prisoner 9653 won nearly a million votes but the socialist movement never fully recovered from the repression of the war.
in fostering hostility toward anything that smacked of dissent the war also gave rise to the great red scare that began in 1919.
pleased at first with the russian revolution americans in general turned quickly against it especially after lenin and the bolsheviks seized control late in 1917.
the americans feared lenins anticapitalist program and they denounced his decision in early 1918 to make peace with germany because it freed german troops to fight in france.
once again wilson himself played a prominent role in the development of anti bolshevik sentiment.
in the summer of 1918 he sent fifteen thousand american troops into the soviet union where they joined other allied soldiers.
ostensibly the troops were there to protect allied supplies from the germans and to rescue a large number of czechs who wanted to return home to fight germany.
but the underlying reason for their presence was that wilson and others hoped to bring down the fledgling bolshevik government fearful it would spread revolution around the world.
besides sending troops wilson joined in an economic blockade of russia sent weapons to anti bolshevik insurgents and refused to recognize lenins government.
he also blocked russian participation in the peace conference that ended the war.
american troops remained in russia until april 1920 and on the whole american willingness to interfere soured russian american relations for decades to come.
a bureaucratic war quick effective action was needed to win the war.
to meet the need wilson and congress set up an array of new federal agencies nearly five thousand in all.
staffed largely by businessmen the agencies drew on funds and powers of a hitherto unknown scope.
at night the secretary of the treasury sat in bed a yellow pad on his knees adding up the money needed to finance the war.
the noughts attached to the many millions were so boisterous and prolific he later said that at times they would run clear over the edge of the paper by the time the war was over the noughts had boisterously added up to 32 billion in direct war expense in an era when the entire federal budget rarely exceeded 1 billion.
to raise the money the administration sold about 23 billion in liberty bonds and using the new sixteenth amendment boosted taxes on corporations and personal incomes.
the taxes brought in another 10 billion to help pay for the war.
at first wilson tried to organize the wartime economy along decentralized lines almost in the fashion of his early new over here view the closer look mobilizing the home front many americans identified with the allies.
british propaganda bolstered those sympathies with exaggerated stories of german atrocities.
freedom thinking.
but that proved unworkable and he moved instead to a series of highly centralized planning boards each with broad authority over a specific area of the economy.
there were boards to control virtually every aspect of transportation agriculture and manufacturing.
though only a few of them were as effective as wilson had hoped they did coordinate the war effort to some degree.
the war industries board wib one of the most powerful of the new agencies oversaw the production of all american factories.
headed by millionaire bernard m baruch a wall street broker and speculator it determined priorities allocated raw materials and fixed prices.
it told manufacturers what they could and could not make.
the wib set the output of steel and regulated the number of stops on elevators.
working closely with business baruch for a time acted as the dictator of the american economy.
herbert hoover the hero of a campaign to feed starving belgians headed a new food administration and he set out with customary energy to supply food to the armies overseas.
appealing to the spirit of self sacrifice hoover convinced people to save food by observing meatless and wheatless days.
he fixed prices to boost production bought and distributed wheat and encouraged people to plant victory gardens behind homes churches and schools.
he sent a half million campaigners door to door to get housewives to sign cards pledging their cooperation.
one householder wilson set an example by grazing sheep on the white house lawn.
at another new agency the fuel administration harry a garfield the president of williams college introduced daylight saving time rationed coal and oil and imposed gasless days when motorists could not drive.
to save coal he shut down nonessential factories one day a week and in january 1918 he closed all factories east of the mississippi for four days to divert coal to munitions ships stranded in new york harbor.
a fourth agency the railroad administration dictated rail traffic over nearly four hundred thousand miles of track standardizing rates limiting passenger travel and speeding arms shipments.
the war shipping board coordinated shipping the emergency fleet corporation supervised shipbuilding and the war trade board oversaw foreign trade.
as never before the government intervened in american life.
when strikes threatened the telephone and telegraph companies the government simply seized and ran them.
businessmen paid a nominal dollar a year flocked to washington to run the new agencies and the partnership between government and business grew closer.
as government expanded business expanded as well responding to wartime contracts.
industries such as steel aluminum and cigarettes boomed and corporate profits increased threefold between 1914 and 1919.
labor in the war the war also brought organized labor into the partnership with government although the results were more limited than in the business government alliance.
samuel gompers president of the afl served on wilsons council of national defense an advisory group formed to unify business labor and government.
gompers hoped to trade labor peace for labor advances and he formed a war committee on labor to enlist workers support for the war.
with the blessing of the wilson administration membership in the afl and other unions grew from about 2 7 million in 1916 to more than 4 million in 1919.
hoping to encourage production and avoid strikes wilson adopted many of the objectives of the social justice reformers.
chapter 24 the nation at war he supported an eight hour day in war related industries and improved wages and working conditions.
in may 1918 he named felix frankfurter a brilliant young law professor to head a new war labor board wlb.
the agency standardized wages and hours and at wilsons direction it protected the right of labor to organize and bargain collectively.
although it did not forbid strikes it used various tactics to discourage them.
it enforced decisions in well publicized cases when the smith and wesson arms factory in massachusetts and the western union telegraph company disobeyed the wlbs union rules the agency took them over.
the wlb also ordered that women be paid equal wages for equal work in war industries.
in 1914 the flow of european immigrants suddenly stopped because of the war and in 1917 the draft began to take large numbers of american men.
the result was a labor shortage filled by women african americans and mexican americans.
one million women worked in war industries.
some of them took jobs previously held by men but for the most part they moved from one set of womens jobs into another.
from the beginning of the war to the end the number of women in the workforce held steady at about eight million and unlike the experience in world war ii large numbers of housewives did not leave the home for machine shops and arms plants.
still there were some new opportunities and in some cases higher pay.
in food airplane and electrical plants women made up one fifth or more of the workforce.
as their wages increased so did their expectations some became more militant and conflict grew between them and male co workers.
to set standards for female employment a womens bureau was established in the department of labor but the governments influence varied.
in the federally run railroad industry women often made wages equal to those of men in the federally run telephone industry they did not.
looking for more people to fill wartime jobs corporations found another major source among southern blacks.
beginning in 1916 northern labor agents traveled across the south promising jobs high wages and free transportation.
soon the word spread and the movement northward became a flood.
between 1916 and 1918 more than 450 000 african americans left the old south for the booming industrial cities of st louis chicago detroit and cleveland.
in the decade before 1920 detroits black population grew by more than 600 percent clevelands by more than 300 percent and chicagos by 150 percent.
most of the newcomers were young unmarried and skilled or semiskilled.
the men found jobs in factories railroad yards steel mills packinghouses and coal mines black women worked in textile factories department stores and restaurants.
in their new homes african americans found greater racial freedom but also different living conditions.
if the south was often hostile the north could be impersonal and lonely.
accustomed to the pace of the farm ruled by the seasons and the sun those blacks who were able to enter the industrial sector now worked for hourly wages in african american migration northward 1910 1920 the massive migration of african americans from the south to the north during world war i changed the dynamics of race relations in the united states.
canada maine washington north dakota montana vt n h minn new york oregon wis south dakota idaho mich new york detroit wyoming rhode island connecticut philadelphia penn.
nebraska chicago iowa baltimore ohio ind.
ill nevada kansas new jersey maryland w v.
colorado del.
washington d c utah california mass.
st louis virginia ky missouri n c tenn arizona oklahoma new mexico ark.
s c memphis atlanta birmingham ala pacific ocean texas la.
atlantic ocean georgia miss.
new orleans florida states with greatest increase in population states with greatest decrease in population mexico african american migration 400 miles 400 kilometers over here mass production industries where time clocks and line supervisors dictated the daily routine.
racial tensions increased resulting in part from growing competition for housing and jobs.
in mid 1917 a race war in east st louis illinois killed nine whites and about forty blacks.
in july 1919 the month president wilson returned from the peace conference in paris a race riot in washington d c killed six people.
riots in chicago that month killed thirtyeight fifteen whites and twenty three blacks and there were later outbreaks in new york city and omaha.
lynch mobs killed forty eight blacks in 1917 sixty three in 1918 and seventy eight in 1919.
ten of the victims in 1919 were war veterans several still in uniform.
blacks were more and more inclined to fight back.
two hundred thousand blacks served in france forty two thousand as combat troops.
returning home they expected better treatment.
im glad i went a black veteran said.
i done my part and im going to fight right here till uncle sam does his roscoe jameson claude mckay and other black poets wrote biting poetry some of it such as fenton johnsons the new day drawn from the war experience watch the video for we have been with thee in no mans land through lake of fire and down to hell itself and now we ask of thee our liberty our freedom in the land of stars and stripes.
lift evry voice and sing composed in 1900 became known as the negro national anthem parents bought black dolls for their children and w e b.
du bois spoke of a new negro proud and more militant we return.
we return from fighting.
we return fighting eager for cheap labor farmers and ranchers in the southwest persuaded the federal government to relax immigration restrictions and between 1917 and 1920 more than 100 000 mexicans migrated into texas arizona new mexico and california.
the mexican american population grew from 385 000 in 1910 to 740 000 in 1920.
tens of thousands of mexican americans moved to chicago st louis omaha and other northern cities to take wartime jobs.
often scorned and insecure they created urban barrios similar to the chinatowns and little italys around them.
like most wars world war i affected patterns at home as much as abroad.
business profits grew factories expanded and industries the great migration the great migration over a series of decades witnessed the relocation of approximately 1 5 million african americans from their southern homes to northern metropolises.
it took a long time for that many people to move.
but it was the single most dramatic most powerful example or evidence of an african american agency in the twentieth century because this was not an organized movement.
chapter 24 the nation at war the treaty of versailles divide up germanys colonies.
to try to place the war on a higher plane he appeared before congress on january 8 1918 and outlined terms for a far reaching nonpunitive settlement.
wilsons fourteen points were generous and farsighted but they failed to satisfy wartime emotions that sought vindication.
england and france distrusted wilsonian idealism as the basis for peace.
they wanted germany disarmed and crippled they wanted its colonies and they were skeptical of the principle of selfdetermination.
as the end of the war neared the allies who had in fact made secret commitments with one another balked at making the fourteen points the basis of peace.
when wilson threatened to negotiate a separate treaty with germany however they accepted.
wilson had won an important victory but difficulties lay ahead.
as georges clemenceau the 78 year old french premier said god gave us the ten commandments and we broke them.
wilson gives us the fourteen points.
we shall see what mistakes did wilson make in negotiating the treaty of versailles.
a peace at paris long before the fighting ended wilson began to formulate plans for the peace.
like many others he was disconcerted when the new bolshevik government in russia began revealing the terms of secret agreements among britain france and czarist russia to unfortunately wilson made a grave error just before the peace conference began.
he appealed to voters to elect a democratic congress in the november 1918 elections saying that any other result would be interpreted on the other side of the water as a repudiation turned out huge amounts of war goods.
government authority swelled and people came to expect different things of their government.
labor made some gains as did women and blacks.
society assimilated some of the shifts but social and economic tensions grew and when the war ended they spilled over in the strikes and violence of the red scare that followed.
the united states emerged from the war the strongest economic power in the world.
in 1914 it was a debtor nation and american citizens owed foreign investors about 3 billion.
five years later the united states had become a creditor nation.
foreign governments owed more than 10 billion and foreign citizens owed american investors nearly 3 billion.
the war marked a shift in economic power rarely equaled in history.
read the document president wilsons fourteen points on january 8 1918 u s president woodrow wilson speaking before a joint session of congress put forth his fourteen points proposal for ending the war.
in this speech he established the basis of a peace treaty and the foundation of a league of nations.
the treaty of versailles of my leadership many republicans were furious especially those who had supported the fourteen points wilsons problems deepened when the democrats went on to lose both the house and senate.
wilsons opponents immediately announced that voters had rejected his policies as he had suggested they could.
in fact the democratic losses stemmed largely from domestic problems such as the price of wheat and cotton.
but they hurt wilson who had alienated some important republican party leaders.
soon he would be negotiating with european leaders buoyed by rousing victories at their own polls.
two weeks after the elections wilson announced he would attend the peace conference.
this was a dramatic break from tradition and his personal involvement drew attacks from republicans.
they renewed criticism when he named the rest of the delegation secretary of state lansing colonel house general tasker h bliss a military expert and henry white a career diplomat.
wilson named no member of the senate and the only republican in the group was white.
in selecting the delegation wilson passed over henry cabot lodge the powerful republican senator from massachusetts who opposed the fourteen points and who would soon head the senate foreign relations committee.
he also decided not to appoint elihu root or ex president taft both of them enthusiastic internationalists.
never good at accepting criticism or delegating authority wilson wanted a delegation he could control an advantage at the peace table but not in any battle over the treaty at home.
upon his arrival wilson received a tumultuous welcome in england france and italy.
never before had such crowds acclaimed a democratic political figure.
in paris two million people lined the champs elyses threw flowers at him and shouted wilson le juste the just as his carriage drove by.
overwhelmed wilson was sure that the people of europe shared his goals and would force their leaders to accept his peace.
he was wrong.
like their leaders many people on the allied side hated germany and wanted victory unmistakably reflected in the peace.
opening in january 1919 the peace conference at paris continued until may.
although twenty seven nations were represented the big four dominated it wilson clemenceau of france tired and stubborn determined to end the german threat forever david lloyd george the crafty british prime minister who had pledged to squeeze germany until the pips squeak and the italian prime minister vittorio orlando.
a clever negotiator wilson traded various small concessions for his major goals national self determination a reduction in tensions and a league of nations to enforce the peace.
wilson had to surrender some important principles.
departing from the fourteen points by violating the principle of self determination the treaty created two new independent nations poland and czechoslovakia with large german speaking populations.
it divided up the german colonies in asia and africa.
instead of a peace without victory it made germany accept responsibility for the war and demanded enormous reparations which eventually totaled 33 billion.
it made no mention of disarmament free trade or freedom of the seas.
instead of an open covenant openly arrived at the treaty was drafted behind closed doors.
but wilson deflected some of the most extreme allied demands and he won his coveted point 14 a league of nations designed to achieve international peace and security the league included a general assembly a smaller council composed of the united states great britain france italy japan and four nations to be elected by the assembly and a court of international justice.
league members pledged to submit to arbitration every dispute threatening peace and to enjoin military and economic sanctions against nations resorting to war.
article x for wilson the heart of the league obliged members to look out for one anothers independence and territorial integrity.
woodrow wilsons fourteen points 1918 success and failure in implementation 1.
open covenants of peace openly arrived at absolute freedom of navigation on the seas in peace and war removal of all economic barriers to the equality of trade among nations reduction of armaments to the level needed only for domestic safety impartial adjustments of colonial claims evacuation of all russian territory russia to be welcomed into the society of free nations evacuation and restoration of belgium evacuation and restoration of all french lands return of alsace lorraine to france readjustment of italys frontiers along lines of italian nationality self determination for the former subjects of the austro hungarian empire evacuation of romania serbia and montenegro free access to the sea for serbia self determination for the former subjects of the ottoman empire secure sovereignty for turkish portion establishment of an independent poland with free and secure access to the sea establishment of a league of nations affording mutual guarantees of independence and territorial integrity not fulfilled not fulfilled not fulfilled not fulfilled not fulfilled not fulfilled fulfilled fulfilled compromised compromised compromised compromised fulfilled not fulfilled sources data from g m gathorne hardy the fourteen points and the treaty of versailles oxford pamphlets on world affairs no.
8 34 thomas g paterson et al american foreign policy a history since 1900 2nd ed vol.
chapter 24 the nation at war new and reconstituted nations finland norway sweden north sea estonia latvia denmark danzig free city great britain lithuania soviet union ger.
germany belg.
france poland cz ec ho s lux.
lovaki a austria switz.
hungary romania yugoslavia spain corsica fr.
mallorca sp.
italy bulgaria albania sardinia it.
greece mediterranean sea algeria fr.
tunisia fr.
sicily crete europe after the treaty of versailles 1919 the treaty changed the map of europe creating a number of new and reconstituted nations.
note the boundary changes from the map on p.
the draft treaty in hand wilson returned home in february 1919 to discuss it with congress and the people.
most americans the polls showed favored the league thirty three governors endorsed it.
but over dinner with the senate and house foreign relations committees wilson learned of the strength of congressional opposition to it.
on march 3 senator lodge produced a round robin signed by thirty seven senators declaring they would not vote for the treaty without amendment.
should the numbers hold lodge had enough votes to defeat it.
returning to paris wilson attacked his critics while he worked privately for changes to improve the chances of senate approval.
in return for major concessions the allies amended the league draft treaty agreeing that domestic affairs remained outside league jurisdiction exempting the monroe doctrine and allowing nations to withdraw after two years notice.
on june 28 1919 they signed the treaty in the hall of mirrors at versailles and wilson started home for his most difficult fight.
rejection in the senate there were ninety six senators in 1919 forty nine of them republicans.
fourteen republicans led by william e borah of idaho were the irreconcilables who opposed the league on any grounds.
if the savior of man borah said would revisit the earth and declare for a league of nations i would be opposed to it frank b kellogg of minnesota led a group of twelve mild reservationists who accepted the treaty but wanted to insert several reservations that would not greatly weaken it.
finally there were the lodge led strong reservationists twenty three of them in all who wanted major changes that the allies would have to approve.
with only four democratic senators opposed to the treaty the democrats and republicans willing to compromise had enough votes to ratify it once a few reservations were inserted.
bidding for time to allow public opposition to grow lodge scheduled lengthy hearings and spent two weeks reading the 268 page treaty aloud.
democratic leaders urged wilson to appeal to the republican mild reservationists but he refused anyone who opposes me in that ill crush fed up with lodges tactics wilson set out in early september to take the case directly to the people.
crossing the midwest his speeches aroused little emotion but on the pacific coast he won ovations which heartened him.
on his way back to washington he stopped in pueblo colorado where he delivered one of the most eloquent speeches of his career.
people wept as he talked of americans who died in battle and the hope that they would never fight again in foreign lands.
that night wilson felt ill returned to washington and on october 2 mrs wilson found him lying unconscious on the floor of the white house the victim of a stroke that paralyzed his left side.
after the stroke wilson could not work more than an hour or two at a time.
no one was allowed to see him except family members his secretary and his physician.
for more than seven months he did not meet with the cabinet.
secretary of state lansing convened cabinet meetings but when wilson learned of them he ordered lansing to stop and then cruelly forced lansing to resign.
focusing his remaining energy on the fight over the treaty wilson lost touch with other issues and critics charged that his wife edith bolling wilson ran the government.
on november 6 1919 while wilson convalesced lodge finally reported the treaty out of committee along with fourteen reservations one for each of wilsons points.
the most important reservation stipulated that implementation of article x wilsons key article required the action of congress before any american intervention abroad.
the next day the presidents floor leader in the senate told him that the democrats could not pass the treaty without reservations.
is it possible wilson asked sadly.
it might be wise to compromise the senator said.
let lodge compromise wilson replied.
when mrs wilson urged her husband to accept the lodge reservations he said better a thousand times to go down fighting than to dip your colors to dishonorable compromise on november 19 the treaty with the lodge reservations failed 39 to 55.
following wilsons instructions the democrats voted against it.
a motion to approve without the reservations lost 38 to 53 with only one republican voting in favor.
the defeat brought pleas for compromise but neither wilson nor lodge would back down.
when the treaty with reservations again came up for vote on march 19 1920 wilson ordered the democrats to hold firm against it.
although twenty one of them defied him enough obeyed his orders to defeat it 49 to 35 seven votes short of the necessary two thirds majority.
study resources to wilson walking now with the help of a cane one chance remained the presidential election of 1920.
for a time he thought of running for a third term himself but his party shunted him aside.
the democrats nominated governor james m cox of ohio along with the young and popular franklin d roosevelt assistant secretary of the navy for vice president.
wilson called for a great and solemn referendum on the treaty.
the democratic platform endorsed the treaty but agreed to accept reservations that clarified the american role in the league.
the election of 1920 candidate harding cox debs party republican democrat socialist popular vote 16 152 200 9 147 353 917 799 electoral vote on the republican side senator warren g harding of ohio who had nominated taft in 1912 won the presidential nomination.
harding waffled on the treaty but that issue made little difference.
voters wanted a change.
harding won in a landslide taking 61 percent of the vote and beating cox by seven million votes.
without a peace treaty the united states remained technically at war and it was not until july 1921 almost three years after the last shot was fired that congress passed a joint resolution ending the war.
conclusion postwar disillusionment after 1919 there was disillusionment.
world war i was feared before it started popular while it lasted and hated when it ended.
to a whole generation that followed it appeared futile killing without cause sacrificing without benefit.
books plays and movies hemingways a farewell to arms 1929 john dos passoss three soldiers 1921 laurence stallings and maxwell andersons what price glory.
1924 among others showed it as waste horror and death.
the war and its aftermath damaged the humanitarian progressive spirit of the early years of the century.
it killed something precious and perhaps irretrievable in the hearts of thinking men and women progressivism survived well into the 1920s and the new deal but it no longer had the old conviction and broad popular support.
bruising fights over the war and the league drained peoples energy and enthusiasm.
confined to bed woodrow wilson died in washington in 1924 three years after harding the new president promised not heroics but healing not nostrums but normalcy not revolution but restoration nonetheless the war to end all wars and the spirit of woodrow wilson left an indelible imprint on the country.
study y resources take the study plan for chapter 24 the nation at war on myhistorylab time line 1901 hay pauncefote treaty with great britain empowers united states to build isthmian canal 1904 theodore roosevelt introduces corollary to monroe doctrine 1904 1905 russo japanese war 1905 taft katsura agreement recognizes japanese power in korea 1908 root takahira agreement vows to maintain status quo in the pacific roosevelt sends the fleet around the world 1911 revolution begins in mexico 1913 1914 bryan negotiates cooling off treaties to end war 1914 world war i begins u s marines take veracruz panama canal completed 1915 japan issues twenty one demands to china january germany declares water around british isles a war zone february lusitania torpedoed may bryan resigns robert lansing becomes secretary of state june arabic pledge restricts submarine warfare september germany issues sussex pledge march general john j pershing leads unsuccessful punitive expedition into mexico to seize pancho villa april wilson wins reelection wilson calls for peace without victory january germany resumes unrestricted u boat warfare february united states enters world war i april congress passes selective service act may first american troops reach france june war industries board established july wilson outlines fourteen points for peace january germany asks for peace october armistice ends the war november peace negotiations in paris january treaty of versailles defeated in senate warren g harding elected president chapter 24 chapter review chapter review panama coln cristobal a gr ch panama canal zone gatun locks what were the main events that showed the united states was becoming a world power.
norway sweden moscow north sea russia tannenberg aug 26 31 1914 berlin neth.
eastern front brestlitovsk german empire armistice line dec 1917 lux.
gatun lake ris pedro miguel locks 5 miles panama pac oc 5 kilometers panama canal vienna austria hungary switz.
caporetto oct 24 25 1917 southern flank corsica fr.
sardinia it.
caribbean nicaragua panama canal zone costa rica locks rance romania pana balboa panama canal verdun feb 21 dec 18 1916 western front after winning the spanish american war american presidents began to exert more influence in the world.
roosevelt took extraordinary steps to build the panama canal.
he enlarged the countrys role in the western hemisphere and tried to deal with the growing power of japan.
taft focused on protecting american economic interests abroad.
p 564 miraflores locks l ti c ba denmark belg.
italy montenegro black sea serbia bulgaria rome ottoman empire alb.
greece editerranean sea gallipoli apr.
25 1915 jan 9 1916 sicily fr.
tunisia fr.
crete cyprus br.
what did woodrow wilson mean by moral diplomacy.
united states columbus new mexico parral gulf of mexico mexico 1.
villas raid march 9 1916 baha ho tampico 2.
pershings expedition 1916 1917 veracruz wilson hoped to focus on domestic affairs but was soon involved in crises abroad.
he first tried what he called moral diplomacy asking the united states and other countries to treat each other in a moral manner especially in europe and mexico.
in mexico he had praiseworthy aims but misjudged the country.
skirmish with carranzas troops april 12 1916 4.
american sailors arrested april 1914 british hondura 5.
seized by u s navy april 1914 6.
u s occupation 1912 1919 1924 1925 7.
u s occupation 1912 1925 1927 1933 8.
leased 1903 9.
leased 1903 1912 0.
u s occupation 1898 1902 1906 1909 1912 and 1917 guatemala hondura 11.
u s naval base leased 12.
u s occupation 1915 1934 13.
u s occupation 1916 1924 el salvador nicara proposed canal cos ri 14.
purchased from denmark 1917 what programs and changes did world war i bring at home.
american participation in world war i drew on many of the techniques of progressive reformers including using people with expertise and exploiting bureaucracy.
the war industries board oversaw the production of all american factories the food administration board looked after food for the armies overseas.
the government played a larger role in american life than ever before.
p 577 the treaty of versailles toward war what were the reasons behind and dangers of wilsons neutrality policy.
with the outbreak of war in europe in 1914 wilson proclaimed neutrality which was difficult to maintain.
neutrality he hoped would favor neither side and keep the united states out of war.
progressives knew that war would distract attention from reform.
submarine warfare offered new threats which wilson tried to control but could not.
on april 6 1917 the united states joined the war.
p 568 the united states entered the war at a crucial time for the allies.
american troops helped stop the last german offensive in 1918.
entry into the war gave the united states a stake in the peace treaty.
p 572 over here foreign policy under wilson how did the united states entry affect world war i.
a caribbean sea over there se a new world power what mistakes did wilson make in negotiating the treaty of versailles.
wilsons fourteen points sought to reduce armaments lower trade barriers provide for self determination and establish a league of nations to prevent further wars.
he was forced to compromise at versailles but the senate refused to ratify the peace treaty when he would not compromise on issues such as the league of nations.
p 582 key terms and definitions hay bunau varilla treaty this 1903 treaty with panama granted the united states control over a canal zone ten miles wide across the isthmus of panama.
p 565 roosevelt corollary a corollary to the monroe doctrine which asserted that the united states would intervene in latin american affairs if those countries could not keep their affairs in order.
p 566 dollar diplomacy the taft administrations policy in the early 1900s to promote u s financial and business interests abroad especially in latin america.
p 566 moral diplomacy policy of president woodrow wilson that rejected dollar diplomacy rather than focusing mainly on economic ties with other nations wilson sought to practice morality in international relations preserve peace and extend to other peoples the blessings of democracy.
p 567 selective service act this 1917 law required all american men between the ages of 21 and 30 to register for a military draft.
the age limits were later changed to 18 and 45 p 576 committee on public information cpi created in 1917 by president wilson and headed by progressive journalist george creel this organization rallied support for american involvement in world war i through art advertising and film.
creel worked out a system of voluntary censorship with the press and distributed posters and pamphlets.
p 577 espionage act of 1917 this law passed after the united states entered world war i imposed sentences of up to 20 years on anyone found guilty of aiding the enemy obstructing recruitment of soldiers or encouraging disloyalty.
it allowed the postmaster general to remove from the mail any materials that incited treason or insurrection.
p 578 sedition act a world war i law that imposed harsh penalties on anyone using disloyal profane scurrilous or abusive language about the u s government flag or armed forces p 578 war industries board wib this government agency oversaw the production of american factories during world war i p 579 food administration a government agency that encouraged americans to save food during world war i p 579 fourteen points in january 1918 president woodrow wilson presented these terms for a far reaching nonpunitive settlement of world war i and the establishment of a league of nations.
while generous and optimistic the points did not satisfy wartime hunger for revenge and were largely rejected by european nations.
p 582 study resources critical thinking questions 1.
what role did the united states becoming a world power play in shaping the foreign policy of roosevelt and wilson.
what events and influences led the united states toward entry into world war i.
what were the main events of americas involvement in the war in europe and how did these events affect the treaty ending the war.
how might wilson have handled the versailles treaty negotiations differently.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 24 on myhistorylab toward war over here watch the video read the document the outbreak of world war i p 568 read the document adolf k g e.
von spiegel u boat 202 1919 p 570 espionage act 1917 p 577 view the closer look mobilizing the home front p 579 read the document watch the video president wilsons war message to the great migration p 581 congress 1917 p 571 the treaty of versailles watch the video american entry into world war i p 572 listen to the audio file read the document president wilsons fourteen points p 582 over there over there p 573 complete the assignment measuring the mind p 574 indicates study plan media assignment transition to modern america contents and learning objectives the second industrial revolution pg.
589 politics of the 1920s pg.
603 what was new about the american economy in the 1920s.
feature essay marcus garvey racial redemption and black nationalism city life in the jazz age pg.
592 how did life in the cities change after world war i.
the rural counterattack pg.
598 how did conservatives resist the changes of the decade.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab how did the politics of the 1920s reflect changes in the economy and in american society.
law and society the scopes monkey trial contesting cultural differences.
chapter 26 franklin d roosevelt and the new deal the struggle against despair oscar heline never forgot the terrible waste of the great depression.
grain was being burned he told interviewer studs terkel.
it was cheaper than coal heline lived in iowa in the heart of the farm belt.
a county just east of here they burned corn in their courthouse all winter.
you couldnt hardly buy groceries for corn farmers desperate for higher prices resorted to destruction.
as heline recalled people were determined to withhold produce from the market livestock cream butter eggs what not.
if they would dump the produce they would force the market to a higher level.
the farmers would man the highways and cream cans were emptied in ditches and eggs dumped out.
they burned the trestle bridge so the trains wouldnt be able to haul grain film critic pauline kael recounted a different memory of the 1930s.
kael was a college student in california during the great depression and was struck by the number of students who were missing fathers.
they had wandered off in disgrace because they couldnt support their families.
other fathers had killed themselves so the family could have the insurance.
families had totally broken down kael and many of her classmates struggled to stay in school.
there were kids who didnt have a place to sleep huddling under bridges on the campus.
i had a scholarship but there were times when i didnt have any food.
the meals were often three candy bars howard worthington resorted to trickery after losing his job in chicago.
one easter sunday during the depression when his son was four years old worthington couldnt afford enough eggs for a proper egg hunt.
so he devised a plan.
i hid a couple in the piano and all around.
tommy got his little easter basket and as he would find the eggs id steal em out of the basket and rehide them.
he hunted easter eggs for three hours and he never knew the difference o american who lived through the great depression ever forgot the experience.
as the stories of heline kael and worthington show the individual memories were of hard times but also of determination adaptation and survival.
the depression decade had an equally profound effect on american institutions.
to cope with the problems of poverty and dislocation americans looked to government as never before and in doing so transformed american politics and public life.
the agent of the transformation the man america turned to in its moment of trial was franklin d roosevelt.
his answer to the countrys demands for action was an ambitious program of relief and reform called the new deal.
n the great depression what were the causes and effects of the great depression.
the depression of the 1930s came as a shock to americans who had grown used to the prosperity of the 1920s.
the consumer revolution of that earlier decade had fostered a general confidence that the american way of life would continue to improve.
but following the collapse of the stock market in late 1929 factories during the great depression market prices for produce were so low that farmers could scarcely afford to harvest their crops.
many resorted to destroying produce in an attempt to limit supplies and force prices higher such as these striking dairy farmers in illinois dumping cans of milk into the street.
closed machines fell silent and millions of americans walked the streets looking for jobs that didnt exist.
the great crash the consumer goods revolution contained the seeds of its own demise.
the productive capacity of the automobile and appliance industries grew faster than the effective demand.
each year after 1924 the rate of increase in the sale of cars and refrigerators and ranges slowed a natural consequence as more and more people already owned these durable goods.
production began to falter and in 1927 the nation underwent a mild recession.
the sale of durable goods declined and construction of houses and buildings fell slightly.
if corporate leaders had heeded these warning signs they might have responded by raising wages or lowering prices both effective ways to stimulate purchasing power and sustain the consumer goods revolution.
or if government officials had recognized the danger signals and forced a halt in installment buying and slowed bank loans the nation might have experienced a sharp but brief depression.
neither government nor business leaders were so farsighted.
the federal reserve board lowered the discount rate charging banks less for loans in an attempt to stimulate the economy.
much of this additional credit however went not into solid investment in factories and machinery but instead into the stock market touching off a new wave of speculation that obscured the growing economic slowdown and ensured a far greater crash to come.
individuals with excess cash began to invest heavily in the stock market betting the already impressive rise in security prices would bring them even greater windfall profits.
the market had advanced in spurts during the decade the value of all stocks listed on the new york stock exchange rose from 27 billion in 1925 to 67 billion in early 1929.
the strongest surge began in the spring of 1928 when investors ignored the declining production figures in chapter 26 franklin d roosevelt and the new deal view the map the great depression u s unemployment 1929 1942 millions new deal recovery stock market crash world war ii begins fdr inaugurated president recession 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 the belief they could make a killing in the market.
people bet their savings on speculative stocks.
corporations used their large cash reserves to supply money to brokers who in turn loaned it to investors on margin in 1929 for example the standard oil company of new jersey loaned out 69 million a day in this fashion.
investors could now play the market on credit buying stock listed at 100 a share with 10 down and 90 on margin the brokers loan for the balance.
if the stock advanced to 150 the investor could sell and reap a gain of 500 percent on the 10 investment.
and in the bull market climate of the 1920s everyone was sure the market would go up.
by 1929 it seemed the whole nation was engaged in speculation.
in city after city brokers opened branch offices each complete with a stock ticker and a huge board covered with the latest wall street quotations.
people crowded into the customers rooms in the offices filling the seats and greeting the latest advances of their favorite stocks with shouts of approval.
so great was the publics interest in the stock market that newspapers carried the stock averages on their front pages.
in reality though more people were spectators than speculators fewer than three million americans owned stocks in 1929 and only about a half million were active buyers and sellers.
but the bull market became a national obsession assuring everyone that the economy was healthy and preventing any serious analysis of its underlying flaws.
when the market soared to more than 80 billion in total value by mid summer the wall street journal discounted any possibility of a decline proclaiming the outlook for the fall months seems brighter than at any time and then things changed almost overnight.
on october 24 later known as black thursday the rise in stock prices faltered and when it did investors nervously began to sell.
such leading stocks as rca and westinghouse plunged losing nearly half their value in a single day.
speculators panicked as their creditors demanded new collateral and the panic caused prices to plummet still further.
within weeks the gains of the previous two years had vanished.
the great crash of the stock market soon spilled over into the larger economy.
banks and other financial institutions suffered heavy losses in the market and were forced to curtail lending for consumer purchases.
as consumers came up short factories cut back production laying off some workers and reducing hours for others.
the layoffs and cutbacks lowered purchasing power even further so fewer people bought cars and appliances.
more factory layoffs resulted and some plants closed entirely leading to u s enters world war ii the availability of even less money for the december 1941 purchase of consumer goods.
this downward economic spiral continued for four years.
by 1932 unemployment had swelled to 25 percent of the workforce.
steel production was down to 12 percent of capacity and the vast assembly lines in detroit 1941 1942 produced only a trickle of cars each day.
the gross national product fell to 67 percent of the 1929 level.
the bright promise of mass production had ended in a nightmare.
the basic explanation for the great depression lies in the fact that u s factories produced more goods than the american people could consume.
the problem was not that the market for such products was fully saturated.
in 1929 there were still millions of americans who did not own cars or radios or refrigerators but many of them could not afford the new products.
there were other contributing causes unstable economic conditions in europe the agricultural decline since 1919 corporate mismanagement and excessive speculation but it all came down to the fact that people did not have enough money to buy the consumer products coming off the assembly lines.
installment sales helped bridge the gap but by 1929 the burden of debt was just too great.
the new economic system had failed to distribute wealth more broadly.
too much money had gone into profits dividends and industrial expansion and not enough had gone into the hands of the workers who were also consumers.
factory productivity had increased 43 percent during the decade but the wages of industrial workers had gone up only 11 percent.
if the billions that went into stock market speculation had been used instead to increase wages which would then have increased consumer purchasing power production and consumption could have been brought into balance.
yet it is too much to expect that the prophets of the new era could have foreseen this flaw and corrected it.
they were pioneering a new industrial system and only out of the bitter experience of the great depression would they discover the full dynamics of the consumer goods economy.
effect of the depression it is difficult to measure the human cost of the great depression.
the material hardships were bad enough.
men and women lived in lean tos made of scrap wood and metal and families went without the great depression meat and fresh vegetables for months existing on a diet of soup and beans.
the psychological burden was even greater americans suffered through year after year of grinding poverty with no letup in sight.
the unemployed stood in line for hours waiting for relief checks veterans sold apples or pencils on street corners their manhood once prized so highly by the nation now in question.
people left the city for the countryside but found no salvation on the farm.
crops rotted in the fields because prices were too low to make harvesting worthwhile sheriffs fended off angry crowds as banks foreclosed long overdue mortgages on once prosperous farms.
few escaped the suffering.
african americans who had left the poverty of the rural south for factory jobs in the north were view the closer look among the first to be laid off.
mexican immigrants who had flowed in to replace european immigrants met with competition from angry citizens now willing to do stoop labor in the fields and work as track layers on the railroads.
immigration officials used technicalities to halt the flow across the rio grande and even to reverse it nearly a half million mexicans were deported in the 1930s including families with children born in the united states.
the poor black brown and white survived because they knew better than most americans how to exist in poverty.
they stayed in bed in cold weather both to keep warm and to avoid unnecessary burning up of calories they patched their shoes with pieces of rubber from discarded tires heated only homeless shantytown seattle 1937 urban shantytowns often called hoovervilles named after president herbert hoover were built by homeless men and women during the great depression.
these settlements were composed of shacks and tents and often constructed on empty urban land near soup kitchens.
chapter 26 franklin d roosevelt and the new deal read the document women on the breadlines the great depression devastated millions who lost their jobs and often then the means to provide food and shelter for themselves and their families.
overwhelmed local and private charities could not keep up with the demands for assistance and many looked to the federal government for direct relief from their suffering.
breadlines stretched as far as the eye could see as impoverished workers lined up in the hope of obtaining some meager rations for their hungry families.
the kitchens of their homes and ate scraps of food that others would reject.
the middle class which had always lived with high expectations was hit hard.
professionals and white collar workers refused to ask for charity even while their families went without food one new york dentist and his wife turned on the gas and left a note saying we want to get out of the way before we are forced to accept relief money people who fell behind in their mortgage payments lost their homes and then faced eviction when they could not pay the rent.
health care declined.
middle class people stopped going to doctors and dentists regularly unable to make the required cash payment in advance for services rendered.
even the well to do were affected giving up many of their former luxuries and weighed down with guilt as they watched former friends and business associates join the ranks of the impoverished.
my father lost everything in the depression became an all toofamiliar refrain among young people who dropped out of college.
many americans sought escape in movement.
men boys and some women rode the rails in search of jobs hopping freights to move south in the winter or west in the summer.
on the missouri pacific alone the number of vagrants increased from just over 13 000 in 1929 to nearly 200 000 in 1931.
one town in the southwest hired special police to keep vagrants from leaving the boxcars.
those who became tramps had to keep on the move but they did find a sense of community in the hobo jungles that sprang up along the major railroad routes.
here the unfortunate could find a place to eat and sleep and people with whom to share their misery.
louis banks a black veteran told interviewer studs terkel what these informal camps were like black and white it didnt make any difference who you were cause everybody was poor.
all friendly sleep in a jungle.
we used to take a big pot and cook food cabbage meat and beans all together.
we all set together we made a tent.
twenty five or thirty would be out on the side of the rail white and colored they didnt have no mothers or sisters they didnt have no home they were dirty they had overalls on they didnt have no food they didnt have anything.
fighting the depression fighting the depression how did franklin roosevelt fight the depression.
the great depression presented an enormous challenge for american political leadership.
the inability of the republicans to overcome the economic catastrophe provided the democrats with the chance to regain power.
although they failed to achieve full recovery before the outbreak of world war ii the democrats did succeed in alleviating some of the suffering and establishing political dominance.
reconstruction finance corporation rfc which congress established in early 1932.
the rfc loaned government money to financial institutions to save them from bankruptcy.
hoovers critics however pointed out that while he favored aid to business he still opposed measures such as direct relief and massive public works that would help the millions of unemployed.
by 1932 hoovers efforts to overcome the depression had clearly failed.
the democrats had gained control of the house of watch the video dorothea lange and migrant mother hoover and voluntarism herbert hoover was the great depressions most prominent victim.
when the economic downturn began in late 1929 he tried to rally the nation with bold forecasts of better days ahead.
his repeated assertion that prosperity was just around the corner bred cynicism and mistrust.
expressing complete faith in the american economic system hoover blamed the depression on foreign causes especially unstable european banks.
the president rejected proposals for bold government action and relied instead on voluntary cooperation within business to halt the slide.
he called the leaders of industry to the white house and secured their agreement to maintain prices and wages at high levels.
yet within a few months employers were reducing wages and cutting prices in a desperate effort to survive.
hoover also believed in voluntary efforts to relieve the human suffering brought about by the depression.
he called on private charities and local governments to help feed and clothe those in need.
but when these sources were exhausted he rejected all requests for direct federal relief asserting that such handouts would undermine the character of proud american citizens.
as the depression deepened hoover reluctantly began to move beyond voluntarism to undertake more sweeping government measures.
a new federal farm board loaned money to aid cooperatives and bought up surplus crops in the open market in a vain effort to raise farm prices.
at hoovers request congress cut taxes in an attempt to restore public confidence and adopted a few federal public works projects such as boulder hoover dam to provide jobs for idle men.
to help imperiled banks and insurance companies hoover proposed the dorothea lange was a documentary photographer whose work for the new deal agencies the resettlement administration ra and the farm security administration fsa highlighted and sympathized with the plight of poor and displaced sharecroppers farm families and migrant worker families above during the great depression.
chapter 26 franklin d roosevelt and the new deal bank failures 1929 1933 source data compiled from c d bremer american bank failures new york columbia university press 1935 p 42.
representatives in the 1930 elections and were pressing the president to take bolder action but hoover stubbornly resisted.
his public image suffered its sharpest blow in the summer of 1932 when he ordered general douglas macarthur to clear out the bonus army.
this ragged group of some twenty two thousand world war i veterans had come to washington in the summer of 1932 to lobby congress to pay immediately a bonus for military service that was due them in 1945.
after the senate rejected the bonus bill some of the veterans stayed in washington living in ramshackle huts in anacostia flats along the potomac.
mounted troops drove the bonus army out of the capital blinding the veterans with tear gas and burning their shacks.
meanwhile the nations banking structure approached collapse.
bank failures rose steadily in 1931 and 1932 as customers responded to rumors of bankruptcy by rushing in to withdraw their deposits.
the banking crisis completed the nations disenchantment with hoover people were ready for a new leader in the white house.
a winning smile and a buoyant confidence he could easily transmit to others.
some believed he was too vain and superficial as a young man but his bout with polio gave him both an understanding of human suffering and a broad political appeal as a man who had faced heavy odds and overcome them.
he understood the give and take of politics knew how to use flattery to win over doubters and was especially effective in exploiting the media whether in bantering with newspaper reporters or reaching out to the american people on the radio.
although his mind was quick and agile he had little patience with philosophical nuances he dealt with the appearance of issues not their deeper substance and he displayed a flexibility toward political principles that often dismayed even his warmest admirers.
roosevelt took advantage of the opportunity offered by the great depression.
with the republicans discredited he cultivated the two wings of the divided democrats appealing to both the traditionalists from the south and west and the new urban elements in the north.
after winning the partys nomination in 1932 he broke with tradition by flying to chicago and accepting in person telling the cheering delegates i pledge you i pledge myself to a new deal for the american people in the fall he defeated herbert hoover in a near landslide for the democrats.
roosevelt tallied 472 electoral votes as he swept the south and west and carried nearly all the large industrial states as well.
farmers and workers protestants and catholics immigrants and native born rallied behind the new leader who promised to restore prosperity.
roosevelt not only met the challenge of the depression but also solidified the shift to the democratic party and created an enduring coalition that would dominate american politics for a half century.
election of 1932 electoral vote by state the emergence of roosevelt the man who came forward to meet this national need was franklin d roosevelt.
born into the old dutch colonial aristocracy of new york fdr was a distant cousin of the republican teddy.
he grew up with all the advantages of wealth private tutors his own sailboat and pony frequent trips to europe and education at groton and harvard.
his strong willed mother smoothed all the obstacles in the path of her only child and gave him a priceless sense of inner security.
after graduation from harvard he briefly attended law school but left to plunge into politics.
he served in the new york legislature and then went to washington as assistant secretary of the navy under wilson a post he filled capably during world war i.
defeated as the democratic vice presidential candidate in 1920 roosevelt had just begun a banking career when he suffered an attack of polio in the summer of 1921.
refusing to give in he fought back bravely and though he never again walked unaided he reentered politics in the mid 1920s and was elected governor of new york in 1928.
roosevelts dominant trait was his ability to persuade and convince other people.
he possessed a marvelous voice deep and rich popular vote democratic franklin d roosevelt 22 821 857 republican herbert c hoover 15 761 841 1 153 306 minor parties 39 737 004 fighting the depression presidential voting in chicago by ethnic groups 1924 1932 percentage democratic czechoslovakians poles lithuanians yugoslavs italians germans jews source john m allswang a house for all peoples ethnic politics in chicago 1890 1936 lexington university of kentucky press 1971.
the hundred days people could safely put their money back into these institutions.
the next day march 13 the nations largest and strongest banks opened their doors at the end of the day customers had deposited more cash than they withdrew.
the crisis was over gradually other banks opened and the runs and failures ceased.
capitalism was saved in eight days boasted one of roosevelts advisers.
most surprising was the conservative nature of fdrs action.
instead of nationalizing the banks he had simply thrown the governments resources behind them and preserved private ownership.
though some other new deal measures would be more radical roosevelt set a tone in the banking crisis.
he was out to reform and restore the american economic system not change it drastically.
he drew on the progressive tradition and his experience with world war i mobilization to fashion a moderate program of government action.
for the next three months until it adjourned in june congress responded to a series of presidential initiatives.
during these hundred days roosevelt sent fifteen major requests to congress and received back fifteen pieces of legislation.
a few created agencies that have become a part of american life.
the tennessee valley authority tva was one of the most ambitious of roosevelts new deal measures.
this innovative effort at regional planning resulted in the building of a series of dams in seven states to control floods ease navigation and produce electricity.
when franklin roosevelt took the oath of office on march 4 1933 the nations economy was on the brink of collapse.
unemployment stood at nearly thirteen million one fourth of the labor force banks were closed in thirty eight states.
on inauguration morning the governors of new york and illinois closed the banks in the nations two largest cities thus bringing the countrys financial transactions to a halt.
speaking from the steps of the capitol fdr declared boldly watch the video fdrs inauguration first of all let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself nameless unreasoning unjustified terror then he announced he would call congress into special session and request broad executive power to wage a war against the emergency as great as the power that would be given to me if we were in fact invaded by a foreign foe within the next ten days roosevelt won his first great new deal victory by saving the nations banks.
on march 5 he issued a decree closing the banks and called congress back into session.
his aides drafted new banking legislation and presented it to congress on march 9 a few hours later both houses passed it and fdr signed the new legislation that evening.
the measure provided for government supervision and aid to the banks.
strong ones would be reopened with federal support weak ones closed and those in difficulty bolstered by government loans.
on march 12 fdr addressed the nation by radio in the first of his fireside chats.
in conversational tones he told the public what he had done.
some banks would begin to reopen the next day with franklin roosevelts presidential inaugural on march 4 1933 marked the beginning of a frenzied and the government standing behind them.
dramatic effort by the president and congress to save the nations economy and capitalism itself from other banks once they became solvent complete collapse.
president roosevelts inaugural speech offered a bold and optimistic confidence that would open later and the american americans would recover from their desperate economic woes.
chapter 26 franklin d roosevelt and the new deal view the map the tennessee valley authority ohio r west virginia ill kentucky paducah virginia bristol.
berland r cum nashville knoxville asheville tennessee tenne s muscle shoals see r north carolina chattanooga south carolina georgia alabama 100 miles 100 kilometers tennessee river watershed major tva dams the tennessee valley authority the tennessee valley authority tva served a seven state region in the southeast.
developing such a vast project required federal funding and management both of which were provided through a federally owned corporation.
although critics lamented the cost of the project and its impact on the environment and certain local communities it went far toward bringing one of the most underdeveloped parts of the country into the modern era.
other new deal agencies were temporary in nature designed to meet the specific economic problems of the depression.
none were completely successful the depression would continue for another six years immune even to roosevelts magic.
but psychologically the nation turned the corner in the spring of 1933.
under fdr the government seemed to be responding to the economic crisis enabling people for the first time since 1929 to look to the future with hope.
roosevelt and recovery two major new deal programs launched during the hundred days were aimed at industrial and agricultural recovery.
the first was the national recovery administration nra fdrs attempt to achieve economic advance through planning and cooperation among government business and labor.
in the midst of the depression business owners were intent on stabilizing production and raising prices for their goods.
labor leaders were equally determined to spread work through maximum hours and to put a floor under workers income with minimum wages.
the nra hoped to achieve both goals by permitting companies in each major industry to cooperate in writing codes of fair competition that would set realistic limits on production allocate percentages to individual producers and set firm guidelines for prices.
section 7a of the enabling act mandated protection for labor in all the codes by establishing maximum hours minimum wages and the guarantee of collective bargaining by unions.
no company could be compelled to join but the new deal sought complete participation by appealing to patriotism.
each firm that took part could display a blue eagle and stamp the symbol on its products.
with energetic hugh johnson in charge the nra quickly enrolled the nations leading companies and unions.
by the summer of 1933 more than five hundred industries had adopted codes that covered 2 5 million workers.
the nra quickly bogged down in a huge bureaucratic morass.
the codes proved to be too detailed to enforce easily.
written by the largest companies the rules favored big business at the expense of smaller competitors.
labor quickly became disenchanted with section 7a.
the minimum wages were often near starvation level while business avoided the requirement for collective bargaining by creating company unions that did not represent the real needs of workers.
after a brief upsurge in the spring of 1933 industrial production began to sag as disillusionment with the nra grew.
by 1934 more and more business owners were complaining about the new agency calling it the national run around when the supreme court finally invalidated the nra in 1935 on constitutional grounds few mourned its demise.
the idea of trying to overcome the depression by relying on voluntary cooperation between competing businesses and labor leaders had collapsed in the face of individual self interest and greed.
the new deals attempt at farm recovery fared a little better.
henry a wallace fdrs secretary of agriculture came up with an answer to the farmers old dilemma of overproduction.
the government would act as a clearinghouse for producers of major crops arranging for them to set production limits for wheat cotton corn and other leading crops.
the agricultural adjustment administration aaa created by congress in may 1933 would allocate acreage among individual farmers encouraging them to take land out of production by paying them subsidies raised by a tax on food processors.
unfortunately wallace preferred not to wait until the 1934 planting season to implement this program and so farmers were paid in 1933 to plow under crops they had already planted and to kill livestock they were raising.
faced with the problem of hunger in the midst of plenty the new deal seemed to respond by destroying the plenty.
the aaa program worked better in 1934 and 1935 as land removed from production led to smaller harvests and rising farm prices.
farm income rose for the first time since world war i increasing from 2 billion in 1933 to 5 billion by 1935.
severe weather especially dust bowl conditions on the great plains contributed to the crop limitation program but most of the gain in farm income came from the subsidy payments themselves rather than from higher market prices.
on the whole large farmers benefited most from the program.
possessing the capital to buy machinery and fertilizer they were able to farm more efficiently than before on fewer acres of land.
small farmers tenants and sharecroppers did not fare as well receiving very little of the government payments and often being driven off the land as owners took the acreage previously cultivated by tenants and sharecroppers out of production.
some three million people left the land in the 1930s crowding into the cities where they swelled the relief rolls.
in the long run the new deal reforms improved the efficiency of american agriculture but at a real human cost.
fighting the depression wyoming iowa nebraska denver topeka colorado mo kansas oklahoma santa fe ar oklahoma city new mexico la texas austin mexico areas of wind erosion 1935 1940 severe most severe the dust bowl drought and soil erosion brought on by overfarming turned the agricultural land of the great plains into a giant dust bowl during the 1930s.
especially hard hit were western kansas and oklahoma eastern colorado and the texas panhandle.
giant dust storms forced many farmers to abandon their land.
the supreme court eventually found the aaa unconstitutional in 1936 but congress reenacted it in modified form that year and again in 1938.
the system of allotments now financed directly by the government became a standard feature of the farm economy.
other new deal efforts to assist the rural poor notably the farm security administration fsa sought to loan money to tenants and sharecroppers so they could acquire land of their own but the sums appropriated by congress were too modest.
the fsa was able to extend loans to fewer than 2 percent of the nations tenant farmers.
obviously the fsa director informed roosevelt this.
program can be regarded as only an experimental approach to the farm tenancy problem the result of the new deal for american farming was to hasten its transformation into a business in which only the efficient and well capitalized would thrive.
roosevelt and relief the new deal was far more successful in meeting the most immediate problem of the 1930s relief for the millions of unemployed and destitute citizens.
roosevelt never shared hoovers distaste for direct federal support on may 12 1933 in response to fdrs march request congress authorized the rfc to distribute 500 million to the states to help individuals and families in need.
roosevelt brought in harry hopkins to direct the relief program.
a former social worker who seemed to live on black coffee and cigarettes hopkins set up a desk in the hallway of the rfc building and proceeded to spend more than 5 million in less than two hours.
by the end of 1933 hopkins had cut through red tape to distribute money to nearly one sixth of the american people.
the relief payments were modest in size but they enabled millions to avoid starvation and stay out of humiliating breadlines.
another more imaginative early effort was the civilian conservation corps ccc which was roosevelts own idea.
the ccc enrolled young males from city families on relief and sent them to work on the nations public lands cutting trails planting trees building bridges and paving roads.
ultimately more than two million young people served in the ccc contributing both to their families incomes and to the nations welfare.
hopkins realized the need to do more than just keep people alive and he soon became an advocate of work relief.
hopkins argued that the government should put the jobless to work not just to encourage self respect but also to enable them to earn enough to purchase consumer goods and thus stimulate the entire economy.
a public works administration pwa headed by secretary of the interior harold ickes had been authorized in 1933 but ickes intent on the quality of the projects rather than human needs failed to put many people to work.
in the fall of 1933 roosevelt created the civil works administration cwa and charged hopkins with getting people off the unemployment lines and relief rolls and back to work.
hopkins had more than four million men and women at work by january 1934 building roads schools playgrounds and athletic fields.
many of the workers were unskilled and some of the projects were shoddy but the cwa at least enabled people to work and earn enough money to survive the winter.
roosevelt appalled at the huge expenditures involved shut down the cwa in 1934 and forced hopkins to return to federal relief payments as the only source of aid to the jobless.
the final commitment to the idea of work relief came in 1935 when roosevelt established the works progress administration wpa to spend nearly 5 billion authorized by congress for emergency relief.
the wpa under hopkins put the unemployed on the federal payroll so they could earn enough to meet their basic needs and help stimulate the stagnant economy.
conservatives complained that the wpa amounted to nothing more than hiring the jobless to do make work tasks with no real value.
but hopkins cared less about what was accomplished than about helping those who had been unemployed for years to get off the dole and gain self respect by working again.
in addition to funding the usual construction and conservation projects the wpa tried to preserve the skills of american artists actors and writers.
the federal theatre project produced plays circuses and puppet shows that enabled entertainers to practice their crafts and to perform before people who often had never seen a professional production before.
similar projects for writers and artists led to a series of valuable state guidebooks and to murals that adorned public buildings across the land.
a separate national youth administration nya found part time jobs for young people still in school and developed projects ranging from automobile repairing in new york city to erecting tuberculosis isolation units in arizona for 2 5 million young adults.
the wpa helped ease the burden for the unemployed but it failed to overcome the depression.
rather than spending too much as his critics charged roosevelts greatest failure was not spending enough.
the wpa never employed at any one time more than three million of the ten million jobless.
the wages although larger than relief payments were still pitifully low averaging only 52 chapter 26 franklin d roosevelt and the new deal a month.
thus the wpa failed to prime the american economy by increasing consumer purchasing power.
factories remained closed and machinery idle because the american people still did not have the money either from relief or the wpa to buy cars radios appliances and the other consumer goods that had been the basis for the prosperity of the 1920s.
by responding to basic human needs roosevelt had made the depression bearable.
the new deals failure however to go beyond relief to achieve prosperity led to a growing frustration and the appearance of more radical alternatives that challenged the conservative nature of the new deal and forced fdr to shift to the left.
roosevelt and reform how did the new deal reform american life.
in 1935 the focus of the new deal shifted from relief and recovery to reform.
during his first two years in office fdr had concentrated on fighting the great depression by shoring up the sagging american economy.
only a few new agencies notably tva sought to make permanent changes in national life.
roosevelt was developing a broker state concept of government responding to pressures from organized elements such as corporations labor unions and farm groups while ignoring the needs and wants of the dispossessed who had no clear political voice.
the early new deal tried to assist bankers and industrialists large farmers and members of the labor unions but it did little to help unskilled workers and sharecroppers.
the continuing depression and high unemployment began to build pressure for more sweeping changes.
roosevelt faced the choice of either providing more radical programs ones designed to end historical inequities in american life or deferring to others who put forth solutions to the nations ills.
bolstered by an impressive democratic victory in the 1934 congressional elections roosevelt responded by embracing a reform program that marked the climax of the new deal.
challenges to fdr the signs of discontent were visible everywhere by 1935.
in the upper midwest progressives and agrarian radicals led by minnesota governor floyd olson were calling for government action to raise farm and labor income.
i am a radical in the sense that i want a definite change in the system olson declared.
i am not satisfied with patching upton sinclair the muckraking novelist nearly won the governorship of california in 1934 running on the slogan end poverty in california while in the east a violent strike in the textile industry shut down plants in twenty states.
the most serious challenge to roosevelts leadership however came from three demagogues who captured national attention in the mid 1930s.
the first was father charles coughlin a roman catholic priest from detroit who had originally supported fdr.
speaking to a rapt nationwide radio audience in his rich melodious voice coughlin appealed to the discontented with a strange mixture of crank monetary schemes and anti semitism.
he broke with the new deal in late 1934 denouncing it as the pagan deal and founded his own national union for social justice.
increasingly vitriolic he called for monetary inflation and the nationalization of the banking system in his weekly radio sermons to an audience of more than thirty million.
a more benign but equally threatening figure appeared in california.
francis townsend a 67 year old physician came forward in 1934 with a scheme to assist the elderly who were suffering greatly during the depression.
the townsend plan proposed giving everyone over the age of 60 a monthly pension of 200 with the proviso that it must be spent within thirty days.
although designed less as an old age pension plan than as a way to stimulate the economy the proposal understandably had its greatest appeal among the elderly.
they embraced it as a holy cause joining townsend clubs across the country.
despite the criticism from economists that the plan would transfer more than half the national income to less than 10 percent of the population more than ten million people signed petitions endorsing the townsend plan and few politicians dared oppose it.
the third new voice of protest was that of huey long the flamboyant senator from louisiana.
like coughlin an original supporter of the new deal long turned against fdr and by 1935 had become a major political threat to the president.
a shrewd ruthless yet witty man long had a remarkable ability to mock those in power.
the kingfish a nickname he borrowed from amos n andy announced a nationwide share the wealth movement in 1934.
he spoke grandly of taking from the rich to make every man a king guaranteeing each american a home worth 5 000 and an annual income of 2 500.
to finance the plan long advocated seizing all fortunes of more than 5 million and levying a tax of 100 percent on incomes greater than 1 million.
by 1935 long claimed to have founded twenty seven thousand share the wealth clubs and had a mailing list of more than seven million people including workers farmers college professors and even bank presidents.
threatening to run as a thirdparty candidate in 1936 long generated fear among democratic leaders that he might attract three to four million votes possibly enough to swing the election to the republicans.
although an assassin killed huey long in louisiana in late 1935 his popularity showed the need for the new deal to do more to help those still in distress.
social security when the new congress met in january 1935 roosevelt was ready to support a series of reform measures designed to take the edge off national dissent.
the recent elections had increased democratic congressional strength significantly with the republicans losing thirteen seats in the house and retaining less than one third of the senate.
many of the democrats were to the left of roosevelt favoring increased spending and more sweeping federal programs.
boys this is our hour exulted harry hopkins.
we got to get everything we want.
now or never congress quickly appropriated 4 8 billion for the wpa and was prepared to enact virtually any proposal that roosevelt offered.
the most significant reform enacted in 1935 was the social security act.
the townsend movement had reminded americans that the united states alone among modern industrial nations had never developed a welfare system to aid the aged the disabled and the unemployed.
a cabinet committee began studying the roosevelt and reform federal work relief programs helped millions maintain their self respect.
workers in the ccc top received 30 a month for planting trees and building parks and trails.
as indicated on the map the pwa hired workers to build schools dig irrigation ditches construct sewage treatment plants and erect bridges across the country.
chapter 26 franklin d roosevelt and the new deal read the document huey long share our wealth 1935 townsends proposal for 200 monthly pensions and increases in unemployment benefits.
congress then passed the social security act by overwhelming margins.
critics began to point out its shortcomings as they have ever since.
the old age pensions were paltry.
designed to begin in 1942 they ranged from 10 to 85 a month.
not everyone was covered many of those who most needed protection in their old age such as farmers and domestic servants were not included.
and all participants regardless of income or economic status paid in at the same rate with no supplement from the general revenue.
the trust fund also took out of circulation money that was desperately needed to stimulate the economy in the 1930s.
other portions of the act were equally open to question.
the cumbersome unemployment system offered no aid to those currently read the document frances perkins and the social security act 1935 1960 this political cartoon published in the chicago tribune in 1935 illustrates that conservatives and other opponents of the new deal vehemently asserted that fdrs recovery and reform program represented a dangerous threat to americans economic liberties and the political freedoms secured by the constitution of the united states.
problem in 1934 and president roosevelt sent its recommendations to congress the following january.
the proposed legislation had three major parts.
first it provided for old age pensions financed equally by a tax on employers and workers without government contributions.
in addition it gave states federal matching funds to provide modest pensions for the destitute elderly.
second it set up a system of unemployment compensation on a federal state basis with employers paying a payroll tax and with each state setting benefit levels and administering the program locally.
finally it provided for direct federal grants to the states on a matching basis for welfare payments to the blind handicapped needy elderly and dependent children.
although there was criticism from conservatives who mourned the passing of traditional american reliance on self help and individualism the chief objections came from those who argued that the administrations measure did not go far enough.
democratic leaders however defeated efforts to incorporate despite the administrations boosterism many believed that social security could not fulfill its promises.
impact of the new deal out of work only to people who would lose their jobs in the future and the benefits depending on the state ranged from barely adequate to substandard.
the outright grants to the handicapped and dependent children were minute in terms of the need in new york city for example a blind person received only 5 a week in 1937.
the conservative nature of the legislation reflected roosevelts own fiscal orthodoxy but even more it was a product of his political realism.
despite the severity of the depression he realized that establishing a system of federal welfare went against deeply rooted american convictions.
he insisted on a tax on participants to give those involved in the pension plan a vested interest in social security.
he wanted them to feel they had earned their pensions and that in the future no one would dare take them away.
with those taxes in there he explained privately no damned politician can ever scrap my social security program above all fdr had succeeded in establishing the principle of government responsibility for the aged the handicapped and the unemployed.
whatever the defects of the legislation social security stood as a landmark of the new deal creating a system to provide for the welfare of individuals in a complex industrial society.
labor legislation the other major reform achievement in 1935 was passage of the national labor relations act or the wagner act as it became known.
senator robert wagner of new york introduced legislation in 1934 to outlaw company unions and other unfair labor practices in order to ensure collective bargaining for unions.
fdr who had little knowledge of labor management relations and apparently little interest in them opposed the bill.
in 1935 however wagner began to gather broad support for his measure which passed the senate in may with only twelve opposing votes and the president seeing passage as likely gave it his approval.
the bill moved quickly through the house and roosevelt signed it into law in july.
the wagner act created a national labor relations board to preside over labor management relations and enable unions to engage in collective bargaining with federal support.
the act outlawed a variety of union busting tactics and in its key provision decreed that whenever the majority of a companys workers voted for a union to represent them management would be compelled to negotiate with the union on all matters of wages hours and working conditions.
with this unprecedented government sanction labor unions could now recruit the large number of unorganized workers throughout the country.
the wagner act the most far reaching of all new deal measures led to the revitalization of the american labor movement and a permanent change in labor management relations.
three years later congress passed a second law that had a lasting impact on american workers the fair labor standards act.
a long sought goal of the new deal this measure aimed to establish both minimum wages and maximum hours of work per week.
since labor unions usually were able to negotiate adequate levels of pay and work for their members the act was aimed at unorganized workers and met with only grudging support from unions.
southern conservatives opposed it strongly both on ideological grounds it meant still greater government involvement in private enterprise and because it threatened the low southern wages that had attracted northern industry since reconstruction.
roosevelt finally succeeded in winning passage of the fair labor standards act in 1938 but only at the cost of exempting many key industries from its coverage.
the act provided for a minimum wage of 40 cents an hour by 1940 and a standard workweek of forty hours with time and a half for overtime.
despite its loopholes the legislation did lead to pay raises for the twelve million workers earning less than 40 cents an hour.
more important like social security it set up a system however inadequate that congress could build on in the future to reach more generous and humane levels.
other new deal reform measures met with a mixed reception in congress.
proposals to break up the huge public utility holding companies created by promoters in the 1920s and to levy a soak the rich tax on the wealthy stirred up bitter debate and these bills were passed only in greatly weakened form.
roosevelt was more successful in passing a banking act that made important reforms in the federal reserve system.
he also gained congressional approval of the rural electrification administration rea which helped bring electricity to the 90 percent of american farms that still did not have it in the 1930s.
all in all roosevelts record in reform was similar to that in relief and recovery modest success but no sweeping victory.
a cautious and pragmatic leader fdr moved far enough to the left to overcome the challenges of coughlin townsend and long without venturing too far from the mainstream.
his reforms improved the quality of life in america significantly but he made no effort to correct all the nations social and economic wrongs.
impact of the new deal what was the lasting impact of the new deal.
the new deal had a broad influence on the quality of life in the united states in the 1930s.
government programs reached into areas hitherto untouched.
many of them brought about long overdue improvements but others failed to make any significant dent in historic inequities.
the most important advances came with the dramatic growth of labor unions the conditions for working women and minorities in nonunionized industries showed no comparable advance.
rise of organized labor trade unions were weak at the onset of the great depression with a membership of fewer than three million workers.
most were in the american federation of labor afl composed of craft unions that served the needs of skilled workers.
the nations basic industries such as steel and automobiles were unorganized the great mass of unskilled workers thus fared poorly in terms of wages and working conditions.
section 7a of the nra had led to some growth in afl ranks but the unions conservative leaders eager to cooperate with business failed to take full advantage of the opportunity to organize the mass production industries.
john l lewis head of the united mine workers took the lead in forming the committee on industrial organization cio in 1935.
the son of a welsh coal miner lewis was a dynamic and ruthless man.
he had led the mine workers since 1919 and was determined to spread the benefits of unions throughout industry.
lewis first battled chapter 26 franklin d roosevelt and the new deal watch the video responding to the great depression whose new deal.
mary mcleod bethune was an african american educator and civil rights leader.
she was one of several african american executive department administrators for president franklin roosevelt.
mcleod was also a close friend of president roosevelts wife and confidant eleanor and a key political supporter of the president in the african american community.
with the leadership of the afl and then after being expelled he renamed his group the congress of industrial organizations and announced in 1936 that he would use the wagner act to extend collective bargaining to the nations auto and steel industries.
within five years lewis had scored a remarkable series of victories.
some came easily.
the big steel companies led by u s steel surrendered without a fight in 1937 management realized that federal support put the unions in a strong position.
there was greater resistance in the automobile industry.
when general motors the first target resisted the newly created united automobile workers uaw developed an effective strike technique.
in late december 1936 gm workers in flint michigan simply sat down in the factory refusing to leave until the company recognized their union and threatening to destroy the valuable tools and machines if they were removed forcibly.
when the michigan governor refused to call out the national guard to break the strike general motors conceded defeat and signed a contract with the uaw.
chrysler quickly followed suit but henry ford refused to give in and fought the uaw hiring strikebreakers and beating up organizers.
in 1941 however ford finally recognized the uaw.
smaller steel companies led by republic steel engaged in even more violent resistance in one incident in 1937 police shot ten strikers.
the companies eventually reached a settlement with the steelworkers union in 1941.
by the end of the 1930s the cio had some five million members slightly more than the afl.
the successes were remarkable in addition to the automaking and steel unions organizers for the cio and the afl had been successful in the textile rubber electrical and metal industries.
for the first time unskilled as well as skilled workers were unionized.
women and african americans benefited from the creation of the cio not because the union followed enlightened policies but simply because they made up a substantial proportion of the unskilled workforce that the cio organized.
yet despite these impressive gains only 28 percent of all americans excluding farmworkers belonged to unions by 1940.
millions in the restaurant retail and service trades remained unorganized working long hours for very low wages.
employer resistance and traditional hostility to unions blocked further progress as did the aloof attitude of president roosevelt who commented to labor and management a plague on both your houses during the steel strike.
the wagner act had helped open the way but labor leaders such as lewis philip murray of the steel workers organizing committee and walter reuther of the united automobile workers deserved most of the credit for union achievements.
the new deal record on help to minorities the roosevelt administrations attempts to aid the downtrodden were least effective with african americans and other racial minorities.
the great depression had hit blacks with special force.
share croppers and tenant farmers had seen the price of cotton drop from 18 to 6 cents a pound far below the level needed to sustain a family on the land.
in the cities the saying last hired first fired proved all too true by 1933 more than 50 percent of urban blacks were unemployed.
hard times sharpened racial prejudice.
no jobs for niggers until every white man has a job became a rallying cry for many whites in atlanta.
impact of the new deal the new deal helped african americans survive the depression but it never tried to confront squarely the racial injustice built into the federal relief programs.
although the programs served blacks as well as whites in the south the weekly payments blacks received were much smaller.
in the early days nra codes permitted lower wage scales for blacks while the aaa led to the eviction of thousands of negro tenants and sharecroppers.
african american leaders referred to the nra as standing for negro robbed again and dismissed the aaa as a continuation of the same old raw deal nor did later reform measures help very much.
neither the minimum wage nor social security covered those working as farmers or domestic servants categories that comprised 65 percent of all african american workers.
thus an naacp official commented that social security looks like a sieve with the holes just large enough for the majority of negroes to fall through despite this bleak record african americans rallied behind roosevelts leadership abandoning their historic ties to the republican party.
in 1936 more than 75 percent of those african americans who voted supported fdr.
in part this switch came in response to roosevelts appointment of a number of prominent african americans to high ranking government positions such as william h hastie in the interior department and mary mcleod bethune founder and president of bethune cookman college in the national youth administration.
eleanor roosevelt spoke out eloquently throughout the decade against racial discrimination most notably in 1939 when the daughters of the american revolution refused to let african american contralto marian anderson sing in constitution hall.
the first lady and interior secretary harold ickes arranged for the singer to perform at the lincoln memorial where seventy five thousand people gathered to hear her on easter sunday.
perhaps the most influential factor in the african americans political switch was the color blind policy of harry hopkins.
he had more than one million blacks working for the wpa by 1939 many of them in teaching and artistic positions as well as in construction jobs.
overall the new deal provided assistance to 40 percent of the nations blacks during the depression.
uneven as his record was roosevelt had still done more to aid this oppressed minority than any previous president since lincoln.
one african american newspaper commented that while relief and wpa are not ideal they are better than the hoover bread lines and theyll have to do until the real thing comes along the new deal did far less for mexican americans.
engaged primarily in agricultural labor these people found their wages in california fields dropping from 35 to 14 cents an hour by 1933.
the pool of unemployed migrant labor expanded rapidly with dust bowl conditions in the great plains and the subsequent flight of okies and arkies to the cotton fields of arizona and the truck farms of california.
the roosevelt administration cut off any further influx from mexico by barring entry of any immigrant likely to become a public charge local authorities rounded up migrants and shipped them back to mexico to reduce the welfare rolls.
the new deal relief program did aid many thousands of mexican americans in the southwest in the 1930s although migrant workers had difficulty meeting state requirements.
the wpa hired mexican americans for a variety of construction and cultural programs but after 1937 such employment was denied to aliens.
overall the pattern was one of great economic hardship and relatively little federal assistance for mexican americans.
native americans after decades of neglect fared slightly better under the new deal.
roosevelt appointed john collier a social worker who championed indian rights to serve as commissioner of indian affairs.
in 1934 congress passed the indian reorganization act a reform measure designed to emphasize tribal unity and autonomy instead of attempting as previous policy had done to transform indians into self sufficient farmers by granting them small plots of land.
collier employed more native americans in the indian bureau supported educational programs on the reservations and encouraged tribes to produce native handiwork such as blankets and jewelry.
despite modest gains however the nations one third million indians remained the most impoverished citizens in america.
women at work the decade witnessed no significant gain in the status of american women.
in the midst of the great depression there was little concern expressed for protecting or extending their rights.
the popular idea that women worked for pin money while men were the breadwinners for their families led employers to discriminate in favor of men when cutting the workforce.
working women are holding jobs that rightfully belong to the god intended providers of the household declared a chicago civic group.
more than three fourths of the nations school boards refused to hire married women and more than half of them fired women teachers who married.
federal regulations prohibited more than one member of a family from working in the civil service and almost always it was the wife who had to defer to her husband.
a gallup poll revealed that 82 percent of the people disapproved of working wives with 75 percent of the women polled agreeing.
many of the working women in the 1930s were either single or the sole supporters of an entire family.
yet their wages remained lower than those for men and their unemployment rate ran higher than 20 percent throughout the decade.
women over age 40 found it particularly hard to find or retain jobs during the depression.
the new deal offered little encouragement.
nra codes sanctioned lower wages for women permitting laundries for example to pay them as little as 14 cents an hour.
the minimum wage did help those women employed in industry but too many worked as maids and waitresses jobs not covered by the law for the new law to have much overall effect on womens income.
despite these hardships the number of married women and women between the ages of 25 and 40 in the labor force increased during the 1930s.
relatively few women worked in heavy industry where unemployment was greatest most were employed in the clerical and service sectors areas of traditional female employment in which jobs were more plentiful.
the one area of advance in the 1930s came in government.
eleanor roosevelt set an example that encouraged millions of american women.
not content to be mistress of the white house she traveled around the country eager to uncover wrongs bring them to the presidents attention and if possible rectify them.
see the feature essay eleanor roosevelt and the quest for social justice pp.
frances perkins the secretary of labor became the first woman cabinet member and fdr appointed women as ambassadors and federal judges for the first time.
chapter 26 franklin d roosevelt and the new deal women also were elected to office in larger numbers in the 1930s.
hattie w caraway of arkansas succeeded her husband in the senate winning a full term in 1934.
that same year voters elected six women to the house of representatives.
public service however was one of the few professions open to women.
the nations leading medical and law schools discouraged women from applying and the percentage of female faculty members in colleges and universities continued to decline in the 1930s.
in sum a decade that was grim for most americans was especially hard on american women.
end of the new deal republican majority that al smith had begun in 1928 carried urban areas by impressive margins winning 3 6 million more votes than his opponents in the nations twelve largest cities.
he held on to the traditional democratic votes in the south and west and added to them by appealing strongly to the diverse religious and ethnic groups in the northern cities catholics and jews italians and poles irish and slavs.
the strong support of labor together with three quarters of the black vote indicated that the nations new alignment followed economic as well as cultural lines.
the poor and the oppressed who in the depression years included many middle class americans became attached to the democratic party leaving the gop in a minority position limited to the well to do and to rural and smalltown americans of native stock.
how and why did the new deal end.
the new deal reached its high point in 1936 when roosevelt was overwhelmingly reelected and the democratic party strengthened its hold on congress.
this political triumph was deceptive.
in the next two years roosevelt met with a series of defeats in congress.
yet despite the setbacks he remained a popular political leader who had restored american self confidence as he strove to meet the challenges of the great depression.
the election of 1936 franklin roosevelt enjoyed his finest political hour in 1936.
a man who loved the give and take of politics fdr faced challenges from both the left and the right as he sought reelection.
father coughlin and gerald l k smith who inherited huey longs following after the senators assassination in 1935 organized a union party with north dakota progressive congressman william lemke heading the ticket.
at the other extreme a group of wealthy industrialists formed the liberty league to fight what they saw as the new deals assault on property rights.
the liberty league attracted prominent democrats including al smith but in 1936 it endorsed the republican presidential candidate governor alfred m landon of kansas.
a moderate colorless figure landon disappointed his backers by refusing to campaign for repeal of the popular new deal reforms.
roosevelt ignored lemke and the union party focusing attention instead on the assault from the right.
democratic spokesmen condemned the liberty league as a millionaires union and reminded the american people of how much roosevelt had done for them in fighting unemployment and providing relief.
in his speeches fdr condemned the economic royalists who were unanimous in their hatred for me i welcome their hatred he declared and promised that in his second term these forces would meet their master this frank appeal to class sympathies proved enormously successful.
roosevelt won easily receiving five million more votes than he had in 1932 and outscoring landon in the electoral college by 523 to 8.
the democrats did almost as well in congress piling up margins of 331 to 89 in the house and 76 to 16 in the senate with 4 not aligned with either major party.
equally important the election marked the stunning success of a new political coalition that would dominate american politics for the next three decades.
fdr building on the inroads into the the election of 1936 candidate roosevelt landon party democratic republican popular vote 27 751 597 16 679 583 electoral vote the supreme court fight fdr proved to be far more adept at winning electoral victories than in achieving his goals in congress.
in 1937 he attempted to use his recent success to overcome the one obstacle remaining in his path the supreme court.
during his first term the court had ruled several new deal programs unconstitutional most notably the nra and the aaa.
only three of the nine justices were sympathetic to the need for emergency measures in the midst of the depression.
two others were unpredictable sometimes approving new deal measures and sometimes opposing them.
four justices were bent on using the constitution to block roosevelts proposals.
all were elderly men and one willis van devanter had planned to retire in 1932 but remained on the court because he believed roosevelt to be unfitted and unsafe for the presidency when congress convened in 1937 the president offered a startling proposal to overcome the courts threat to the new deal.
instead of seeking a constitutional amendment either to limit the courts power or to clarify the constitutional issues fdr chose an oblique attack.
declaring the court was falling behind schedule because of the age of its members he asked congress to appoint a new justice for each member of the court over the age of 70 up to a maximum of six.
although this court packing scheme as critics quickly dubbed it was perfectly legal it outraged not only conservatives but liberals as well who realized it could set a dangerous precedent for the future.
republicans wisely kept silent letting prominent democrats such as senator burton wheeler of montana lead the fight against roosevelts plan.
despite all out pressure from the white house resistance in the senate blocked early action on the proposal.
the court defended itself well.
chief justice charles evans hughes testified tellingly to the senate judiciary committee pointing out that in fact the court was up to date and not behind schedule as roosevelt charged.
the court then surprised observers with conclusion the new deal and american life a series of rulings approving such controversial new deal measures as the wagner act and social security.
in the midst of the struggle justice van devanter resigned enabling fdr to make his first appointment to the court since taking office in 1933.
believing he had proved his point the president allowed his court packing plan to die in the senate.
during the next few years four more vacancies occurred and roosevelt was able to appoint such distinguished jurists as hugo black william o douglas and felix frankfurter to the supreme court.
yet the price was high.
the court fight had badly weakened the presidents relations with congress opening deep rifts with members of his own party.
many senators and representatives who had voted reluctantly for roosevelts measures during the depths of the great depression now felt free to oppose any further new deal reforms.
the new deal in decline the legislative record during roosevelts second term was meager.
aside from the minimum wage and a maximum hour law passed in 1938 congress did not extend the new deal into any new areas.
attempts to institute national health insurance met with stubborn resistance as did efforts by civil rights advocates to pass antilynching legislation.
disturbed by the growing congressional resistance roosevelt set out in the spring of 1938 to defeat a number of conservative democratic congressmen and senators primarily in the south.
his targets gleefully charged the president with interference in local politics only one of the men he sought to defeat lost in the primaries.
the failure of this attempted purge further undermined roosevelts strained relations with congress.
the worst blow came in the economic sector.
the slow but steady improvement in the economy suddenly gave way to a sharp recession in the late summer of 1937.
in the following ten months industrial production fell by one third and nearly four million workers lost their jobs.
critics of the new deal quickly labeled the downturn the roosevelt recession and business executives claimed that it reflected a lack of confidence in fdrs leadership.
the criticism was overblown but not without basis.
in an effort to reduce expanding budget deficits roosevelt had cut back sharply on wpa and other government programs after the election.
federal contributions to consumer purchasing power fell from 4 1 billion in 1936 to less than 1 billion in 1937.
for several months roosevelt refused to heed calls from economists to restore heavy government spending.
finally in april 1938 roosevelt asked congress for a 3 75 billion relief appropriation and the economy began to revive.
but fdrs premature attempt to balance the budget had meant two more years of hard times and had marred his reputation as the energetic foe of the depression.
the political result of the attempted purge and the recession was a strong republican upsurge in the elections of 1938.
the gop won an impressive 81 seats in the house and 8 more in the senate as well as 13 governorships.
the party many thought dead suddenly had new life.
the democrats still held a sizable majority in congress but their margin in the house was particularly deceptive.
there were 262 democratic representatives to 169 republicans but 93 southern democrats held the balance of power.
more and more often after 1938 anti new deal southerners voted with republican conservatives to block social and economic reform measures.
thus not only was the new deal over by the end of 1938 but a new bipartisan conservative coalition that would prevail for a quarter century had formed in congress.
conclusion the new deal and american life the new deal lasted a brief five years and most of its measures came in two legislative bursts in the spring of 1933 and the summer of 1935.
yet its impact on american life was enduring.
nearly every aspect of economic social and political development in the decades that followed bore the imprint of roosevelts leadership.
the least impressive achievement of the new deal came in the economic realm.
whatever credit roosevelt is given for relieving human suffering in the depths of the great depression must be balanced against his failure to achieve recovery in the 1930s.
the moderate nature of his programs especially the unwieldy nra led to slow and halting industrial recovery.
although much of the improvement that was made came as a result of government spending fdr never embraced the concept of planned deficits striving instead for a balanced budget.
as a result the nation had barely reached the 1929 level of production a decade later and there were still nearly ten million men and women unemployed.
equally important roosevelt refused to make any sweeping changes in the american economic system.
aside from the tva there were no broad experiments in regional planning and no attempts to alter free enterprise beyond imposing some limited forms of government regulation.
the new deal did nothing to alter the basic distribution of wealth and power in the nation.
the outcome was the preservation of the traditional capitalist system with a thin overlay of federal control.
more significant change occurred in american society.
with the adoption of social security the government acknowledged for the first time its responsibility to provide for the welfare of those unable to care for themselves in an industrial society.
the wagner act helped stimulate the growth of labor unions to balance corporate power and the minimum wage law provided a much needed floor for many workers.
yet the new deal tended to help only the more vocal and organized groups such as union members and commercial farmers.
those without effective voices or political clout african americans mexican americans women sharecroppers restaurant and laundry workers received little help from the new deal.
for all the appealing rhetoric about the forgotten man roosevelt did little more than hoover in responding to the long term needs of the dispossessed.
the most lasting impact of the roosevelt leadership came in politics.
taking advantage of the emerging power of ethnic voters and capitalizing on the frustration growing out of the depression fdr proved to be a genius at forging a new coalition.
overcoming the friction between rural and urban democrats that had prolonged republican supremacy in the 1920s he attracted new groups to the democratic party principally african americans complete the assignment eleanor roosevelt and the quest for social justice on myhistorylab feature essay eleanor roosevelt and the quest for social justice during the great depression eleanor roosevelt traveled thousands of miles each year to learn about conditions throughout the country.
she is shown here in des moines iowa in 1936 inspecting a wpa project to convert a city dump into a waterfront park.
i n august 1933 eleanor roosevelt journeyed to scotts run a poor mining community in west virginia to observe life in one of the nations poorest and most desolate areas.
the first lady toured the dilapidated homes and listened to the problems of the unemployed miners some of whom had not worked in eight years.
she also met with their wives and children and visited with local african americans.
it was an experience few would forget some of the negroes wrote a local newspaper editor to eleanors husband president franklin delano roosevelt think she is god millions of americans held her in similar esteem.
at the height of the great depression ers willingness to listen to and act on behalf of those whose voices often went unheard made her one of the nations leading symbols of hope and compassion.
eleanor roosevelt entered public life as a reformer long before she became first lady.
growing up shy and insecure in a prominent new york family she was the niece of theodore roosevelt she sought personal fulfillment through voluntary social work.
like many reformers of her day she found her sense of social justice upset by the existence of poverty and inequality.
avoiding politics which she then considered a sinister affair she limited her activities to nonpartisan reform and relief organizations such as settlement houses and the consumers league.
she curtailed her social work after her 1905 marriage to franklin roosevelt placing her responsibilities as wife and mother first as she believed a woman should.
fdr as a new york state senator and later as assistant secretary of the navy carried the political torch for the family.
however her role changed in 1921 when franklin was stricken with polio.
eleanor was determined to return him as soon as possible to political life which she believed was the best antidote to his pain and depression.
while working tirelessly to speed his recovery she also struck out on her own to keep the roosevelt name alive in new york politics making speeches writing magazine articles and chairing the womens platform committee at the democratic national convention in 1924.
in the newly formed league of women voters and other activist organizations she brought her reformers impulse to politics by advocating measures such as a maximum hours law for working women.
through these efforts she also formed the nucleus of a womans network that she would employ extensively during the new deal years.
focusing on those whose needs were greatest eleanor became the administrations champion for the dispossessed.
while her husband appealed to the forgotten man she concerned herself with the forgotten woman she worked with harry hopkins to achieve equity for women on relief and to create more jobs for women under the auspices of the cwa and the wpa.
with frances perkins she helped establish camps for unemployed girls patterned after the ccc and worked with the womens trade union league to guarantee women equal pay for equal work on federal projects.
she saw to it that whenever possible women administrators were hired to supervise projects for women and in her syndicated newspaper column my day she often dealt with the problems faced by women during the great depression.
her 1933 book its up to the women urged american women to join her in a crusade for decency and fairness.
for more than a century wrote one reviewer the great white father in the white house has been instructing his people in right conduct.
but now the great white mother emerges as a personality in her own right and starts an independent course of instruction on her own account eleanor worked hard for african americans whose position at the bottom of american society deeply offended her sense of fairness and decency in the late 1930s threequarters of adult blacks in america had not finished high school and almost 90 percent lived below the federal poverty standard.
the first lady spoke out eloquently in favor of equal opportunity for blacks and sought their inclusion in new deal programs.
she worked with hopkins to employ more african americans in federal projects and lobbied within the administration for the appointment of black men and women to administer programs designed specifically for them.
publicly she endeavored to set an example by addressing black audiences throughout the country presiding over a more egalitarian white house and resigning her membership in the daughters of the american revolution over the marian anderson incident see p 629.
her struggle against racial discrimination sometimes put mrs roosevelt in conflict with her husbands efforts to keep the democratic party intact.
conservative southern democrats castigated her as a radical her more extreme critics called her a communist.
rumors of eleanor clubs said to be secret associations of black maids pledged to boycott white households circulated in every southern state.
the fbi investigated the rumors and found no factual basis for them.
hate mail emphasized the criticism.
the attacks didnt deter eleanor but they caused franklin roosevelt to temporize on bills to ban lynching and abolish the poll tax his wifes support of these measures however put the roosevelt name behind them without the same damaging political consequences.
in her efforts to advance the cause of civil rights eleanor arranged for white house meetings between fdr and african american leaders supported interracial projects and spoke out forcefully against racial discrimination.
to er such change did not help just one element of society but brought benefits to the entire country.
to deny any part of a population the opportunities for more enjoyment in life for higher aspirations she declared is a menace to the nation as a whole like other first ladies eleanor roosevelt had to strike a balance between capitalizing on her unique access to the president and intruding illegitimately into the affairs of the nations elected officials.
her position was complicated as well by her own ambivalence on certain issues.
although she advocated greater rights for women for example she did not believe in full equality between men and women.
she thought that women required protective legislation on account of their special roles as wives and mothers.
while mrs roosevelt was instrumental in the few gains made by women and african americans in the 1930s her advocacy could not overcome the sexual and racial stereotypes that continued to limit their role in the workplace and society.
thus despite her efforts the plight of these groups during the depression was only slightly relieved.
however this is not to minimize her achievements.
as the self appointed conscience of the roosevelt administration she exposed the areas where the new deal had not been realized.
her courage and vitality in the pursuit of human rights and equality made her the embodiment of reform and social justice in the new deal.
eleanor roosevelts goal was a simple one concluded one biographer a life of dignity and decency for all questions for discussion 1.
why did eleanor roosevelts work with minorities upset some people.
what did eleanor roosevelts advocacy for more rights for women blacks and other minorities actually accomplish.
chapter 26 franklin d roosevelt and the new deal major new deal legislation and agencies year created act or agency agricultural adjustment administration aaa banking act of 1933 glasssteagall act civilian conservation corps ccc civil works administration cwa federal deposit insurance corporation fdic federal emergency relief administration fera national recovery administration nra public works administration pwa tennessee valley authority tva federal communications commission fcc federal housing administration fha securities and exchange commission sec national labor relations board nlrb established by wagner act social security act provisions attempted to regulate agricultural production through farm subsidies reworked after the supreme court ruled its key regulatory provisions unconstitutional in 1936 coordinated agricultural production during world war ii after which it was disbanded.
prohibited commercial banks from selling stock or financing corporations created fdic.
young men between the ages of 18 and 25 volunteered to be placed in camps to work on regional environmental projects mainly west of the mississippi they received 30 a month of which 25 was sent home disbanded during world war ii.
emergency work relief program put more than four million people to work during the extremely cold winter of 1933 1934 after which it was disbanded.
a federal guarantee of savings bank deposits initially of up to 2 500 raised to 5 000 in 1934 and frequently thereafter continues today with a limit of 100 000.
combined cash relief to needy families with work relief superseded in early 1935 by the extensive work relief projects of the wpa and unemployment insurance established by social security.
attempted to combat the great depression through national economic planning by establishing and administering a system of industrial codes to control production prices labor relations and trade practices among leading business interests ruled unconstitutional by the supreme court in 1935.
financed more than 34 000 federal and nonfederal construction projects at a cost of more than 6 billion initiated the first federal public housing program made the federal government the nations leading producer of power and advanced conservation of the nations natural resources discontinued in 1939 due to its effectiveness at reducing unemployment and promoting private investment.
an attempt at regional planning.
included provisions for environment and recreational design architectural educational and health projects and controversial public power projects continues today to meet the tennessee valleys energy and flood control needs.
regulatory agency with wide discretionary powers established to oversee wired and wireless communication reflected growing importance of radio in everyday lives of americans during the great depression continues to regulate television as well as radio.
expanded private home ownership among moderate income families through federal guarantees of private mortgages the reduction of down payments from 30 to 10 percent and the extension of repayment from 20 to 30 years continues to function today.
continues today to regulate trading practices in stocks and bonds according to federal laws.
greatly enhanced power of american labor by overseeing collective bargaining continues to arbitrate labor management disputes today.
guaranteed retirement payments for enrolled workers beginning at age 65 set up federal state system of unemployment insurance and care for dependent mothers and children the handicapped and public health continues today.
study resources year created act or agency national youth administration nya works progress administration wpa farm security administration fsa rural electrification administration rea fair labor standards act provisions established by the wpa to reduce competition for jobs by supporting education and training of youth paid grants to more than 2 million high school and college students in return for work performed in their schools also trained another 2 6 million out of school youths as skilled labor to prepare them for later employment in the private sector disbanded during world war ii.
massive work relief program funded projects ranging from construction to acting disbanded by fdr during world war ii.
granted loans to small farmers and tenants for rehabilitation and purchase of small sized farms congress slashed its appropriations during world war ii when many poor farmers entered the armed forces or migrated to urban areas.
transformed american rural life by making electricity available at low rates to american farm families in areas that private power companies refused to service closed the cultural gap between rural and urban everyday life by making modern amenities such as radio available in rural areas.
established a minimum wage of 40 cents an hour and a maximum workweek of 40 hours for businesses engaged in interstate commerce.
and organized labor.
his political success led to a major realignment that lasted long after he left the scene.
his political achievement also reveals the true nature of roosevelts success.
he was a brilliant politician who recognized the essence of leadership in a democracy appealing directly to the people and giving them a sense of purpose.
he succeeded in infusing them with the same indomitable courage and jaunty optimism that had marked his own battle with polio.
thus despite his limitations as a reformer roosevelt proved to be the leader the american people needed in the 1930s a president who provided the psychological lift that helped them endure and survive the great depression.
study y resources take the study plan for chapter 26 franklin d roosevelt and the new deal on myhistorylab time line 1932 franklin d roosevelt elected president 1933 emergency banking relief act passed in one day march twenty first amendment repeals prohibition december securities and exchange commission authorized june works progress administration wpa hires unemployed april wagner act grants workers collective bargaining july congress passes social security act august 1936 fdr wins second term as president 1937 united automobile workers sit down strike forces general motors contract february fdr loses court packing battle july roosevelt recession begins august congress sets minimum wage at 40 cents an hour june chapter 26 chapter review chapter review the great depression what were the causes and effects of the great depression.
the great depression resulted from imbalances in the american economy that developed during the 1920s.
wealth was unequally distributed depriving millions of the purchasing power necessary to keep americas factories and farms operating at full capacity.
the depression threw millions out of work out of their homes and into despair.
p 614 the impact of the new deal what was the lasting impact of the new deal.
the new deal encouraged the emergence of organized labor as a major force in american economic life.
it modestly improved the lot of african americans although it failed to tackle the racial prejudice that was at the heart of much black poverty.
it did little for mexican americans and only a bit more for native americans.
p 627 end of the new deal fighting the depression how and why did the new deal end.
how did franklin roosevelt fight the depression.
roosevelt persuaded congress to pass relief recovery and reform measures known collectively as the new deal.
begun during the hundred days the new deal stabilized the banks reorganized american industry assisted american agriculture and put americans to work conserving and restoring the nations resources.
p 619 after a high point in 1936 the new deal declined as a result of roosevelts overreaching in the court packing effort growing resistance from conservatives and a recession in 1937 that reminded the country that the new deal had not ended the great depression.
p 630 roosevelt and reform how did the new deal reform american life.
in responses to the challenges of charles coughlin francis townsend and huey long roosevelt persuaded congress to approve sweeping measures to reform american life.
the social security act established old age and disability pensions to alleviate poverty among the elderly and those unable to work.
p 624 key terms and definitions new deal president franklin delano roosevelts program to combat the great depression.
p 614 works progress administration wpa new deal agency to provide work relief for the unemployed.
p 623 bonus army in june 1932 a group of 20 000 world war i veterans marched on washington d c to demand immediate payment of their adjusted compensation bonuses voted by congress in 1924.
congress rejected their demands and president herbert hoover had the bonus army forcibly dispersed.
p 620 national recovery administration nra this new deal agency was created in 1933 to promote economic recovery and revive industry during the great depression.
it permitted manufacturers to establish industry wide codes of fair business practices setting prices and production levels.
it also provided for minimum wages and maximum working hours for labor and guaranteed labor the right to organize and bargain collectively section 7a.
the supreme court declared it unconstitutional in 1935 p 622 fireside chats radio addresses by president franklin d roosevelt from 1933 to 1944 in which he spoke to the american people about such issues as the banking crisis social security and world war ii.
the chats enhanced roosevelts popularity among ordinary americans.
p 621 tennessee valley authority a new deal effort created in 1933 to build dams and power plants on the tennessee river.
its programs helped raise the standard of living for millions in the tennessee river valley.
p 621 civilian conservation corps ccc one of the most popular new deal programs the ccc provided 300 000 young men between the ages of 18 and 25 with government jobs in reforestation and other conservation projects.
p 623 agricultural adjustment administration aaa created by congress in 1933 as part of the new deal this agency attempted to restrict agricultural production by paying farmers subsidies to take land out of production.
the object was to raise farm prices and it did but the act did nothing for tenant farmers and sharecroppers.
the supreme court declared it unconstitutional in 1936 p 622 social security act the 1935 social security act established a system of old age unemployment and survivors insurance funded by wage and payroll taxes.
p 624 study resources wagner act the 1935 wagner act formally known as the national labor relations act created the national labor relations board to supervise union elections and designate winning unions as official bargaining agents.
the board could also issue cease and desist orders to employers who dealt unfairly with their workers.
p 627 court packing scheme concerned that the conservative supreme court might declare all his new deal programs unconstitutional president franklin d roosevelt asked congress to allow him to appoint additional justices to the court.
both congress and the public rejected this courtpacking scheme.
p 630 critical thinking questions 1.
could the great depression have been averted.
what steps might the government have taken to prevent it.
why did minorities not fully share the benefits of new deal reforms.
why did americans respond so positively to franklin roosevelt.
why was roosevelts court packing scheme so unpopular.
how was the popularity of francis townsend and huey long like the popularity of roosevelt.
how was it different.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 26 on myhistorylab the great depression view the map roosevelt and reform read the document 1935 p 626 the great depression p 616 view the closer look 1937 p 617 read the document huey long share our wealth homeless shantytown seattle women on the breadlines p 618 read the document frances perkins and the social security act 1935 1960 p 626 the impact of the new deal fighting the depression watch the video mother p 619 watch the video view the map watch the video responding to the great depression whose new deal.
p 628 dorothea lange and migrant end of the new deal fdrs inauguration p 621 the tennessee valley authority p 622 complete the assignment eleanor roosevelt and the quest for social justice p 632 indicates study plan media assignment america and the world 1921 1945 contents and learning objectives retreat reversal and rivalry pg.
639 turning the tide against the axis pg.
647 why were the united states and japan on a collision course in the years following world war i.
how did america and its allies halt the advances of germany and japan.
isolationism pg.
641 the home front pg.
649 what was isolationism and why was it so appealing to americans in the 1920s and 1930s.
how did american domestic life change during world war ii.
the road to war pg.
644 how did the war end and what were its consequences.
victory pg.
654 how did the united states go from neutrality in the 1930s to war in 1941.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab feature essay the face of the holocaust.
chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 a pact without power on august 27 1928 u s secretary of state frank b kellogg french foreign minister aristide briand and representatives of twelve other nations met in paris to sign a treaty outlawing war.
several hundred spectators crowded into the ornate clock room of the quai dorsay to watch the historic ceremony.
six huge klieg lights illuminated the scene so photographers could record the moment for a world eager for peace.
briand opened the ceremony with a speech in which he declared peace is proclaimed and then kellogg signed the document with a foot long gold pen given to him by the citizens of le havre as a token of francoamerican friendship.
in the united states a senator called the kellogg briand pact the most telling action ever taken in human history to abolish war in reality the pact of paris was the result of a determined american effort to avoid involvement in the european alliance system.
in june 1927 briand had sent a message to the american people inviting the united states to join with france in signing a treaty to outlaw war between the two nations.
the invitation struck a sympathetic response especially among pacifists who had advocated the outlawing of war throughout the 1920s but the state department feared correctly that briands true intention was to establish a close tie between france and the united states.
the french had already created a network of alliances with the smaller countries of eastern europe an antiwar treaty with the united states would at least ensure american sympathy if not involvement in case of another european war.
kellogg delayed several months and then outmaneuvered briand by proposing the pledge against war not be confined just to france and the united states but instead be extended to all nations.
an unhappy briand who had wanted a bilateral treaty with the united states had no choice but to agree and so the diplomatic charade finally culminated in the elaborate signing ceremony in paris.
eventually the signers of the kellogg briand pact included nearly every nation in the world but the effect was negligible.
all promised to renounce war as an instrument of national policy except of course as the british made clear in a reservation in matters of self defense.
enforcement of the treaty relied solely on the moral force of world opinion.
the pact of paris was as one senator shrewdly commented only an international kiss nfortunately the kellogg briand pact was symbolic of american foreign policy in the years immediately following world war i.
instead of asserting the role of world leadership its resources and power commanded the united states retreated from involvement with other nations.
america went its own way extending trade and economic dominance but refusing to take the lead in maintaining world order.
this retreat from responsibility seemed unimportant in the 1920s when exhaustion from world war i ensured relative peace u representatives of the united states france and twelve other nations gathered in paris france in june 1927 to sign the kellogg briand pact.
the signatories promised to renounce war as a tool of national policy except in matters of self defense.
and tranquility.
but in the 1930s when threats to world order arose in europe and asia the american people retreated even deeper searching for an isolationist policy that would spare them the agony of another great war.
there was no place to hide in the modern world.
the nazi onslaught in europe and the japanese expansion in asia finally convinced america to reverse its isolationist stance and become involved in world war ii in late 1941 at a time when the chances for an allied victory seemed most remote.
with incredible swiftness the nation mobilized its military and industrial strength.
american armies were soon fighting on three continents the u s navy controlled the worlds oceans and the nations factories were sending a vast stream of war supplies to more than twenty allied countries.
when the allied victory came in 1945 the united states was by far the most powerful nation in the world.
but instead of the enduring peace that might have permitted a return to a less active foreign policy the onset of the cold war with the soviet union brought on a new era of tension and rivalry.
this time the united states could not retreat from responsibility.
world war ii was a coming of age for american foreign policy.
retreat reversal and rivalry why were the united states and japan on a collision course in the years following world war i.
the day of the armistice america stood on the hilltops of glory proud in her strength invincible in her ideals acclaimed and loved by a world free of an ancient fear at last wrote journalist george creel in 1920.
today we writhe in a pit of our own chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 digging despising ourselves and despised by the betrayed peoples of earth the bitter disillusionment creel described ran through every aspect of american foreign policy in the 1920s.
in contrast to diplomatic actions under wilsonian idealism american diplomats in the 1920s made loans negotiated treaties and agreements and pledged the nations good faith but they were careful not to make any binding commitments on behalf of world order.
the result was neither isolation nor involvement but rather a cautious middle course that managed to alienate friends and encourage foes.
recognition to the bolshevik regime that had come to power in the russian revolution of 1917.
in 1933 franklin roosevelt finally ended the long estrangement by signing an agreement opening up diplomatic relations between the two countries.
the soviets soon went back on promises to stop all subversive activity in the united states and to settle prerevolutionary debts but even if they rarely understood one another at least the two nations had opened a channel of communication.
cooperation in latin america retreat in europe the united states emerged from world war i as the richest nation on earth displacing england from its prewar position of economic primacy.
the allied governments owed the united states a staggering 10 billion in war debts money they had borrowed during and immediately after the conflict.
each year of the 1920s saw the nation increase its economic lead as the balance of trade tipped heavily in americas favor.
the war ravaged countries of europe borrowed enormous amounts from american bankers to rebuild their economies germany alone absorbed more than 3 billion in american investments during the decade.
by 1929 american exports totaled more than 7 billion a year three times the prewar level and american overseas investment had risen to 17 2 billion.
the european nations could no longer compete on equal terms.
the high american tariff first imposed in 1922 was raised again with enactment of the hawley smoot tariff in 1930.
the high tariff frustrated attempts by england france and a defeated germany to earn the dollars necessary to meet their american financial obligations.
the allied partners in world war i asked washington to cancel the 10 billion in war debts particularly after they were forced to scale down their demands for german reparations payments.
american leaders from wilson to hoover refused the request claiming the ungrateful allies were trying to repudiate their obligations.
only a continuing flow of private american capital to germany allowed the payment of reparations to the allies and the partial repayment of the allies war debts in the 1920s.
the financial crash of 1929 halted the flow of american dollars across the atlantic and led to subsequent default on the debt payments with accompanying bitterness on both sides of the ocean.
political relations fared little better.
the united states never joined the league of nations nor did it take part in the attempts by england and france to negotiate european security treaties.
american observers attended league sessions and occasionally took part in economic and cultural missions in geneva.
but the republican administrations of the 1920s refused to compromise american freedom of action by embracing collective security the principle on which the league was founded.
and fdr always realistic made no effort to renew wilsons futile quest.
thus the united states remained aloof from the european balance of power and refused to stand behind the increasingly shaky versailles settlement.
the u s government ignored the soviet union throughout the 1920s.
american businesses however exported large quantities of heavy machinery to russia as part of its rapid industrialization.
when that trade began to slump after 1930 business leaders hoped to revive it by calling on washington to extend diplomatic u s policy was both more active and more enlightened in the western hemisphere than in europe.
the state department sought new ways in the 1920s to pursue traditional goals of political dominance and economic advantage in latin america.
the outcome of world war i lessened any fears of european threats to the area and thus enabled the united states to dismantle the interventions in the caribbean carried out by roosevelt taft and wilson.
at the same time both republican and democratic administrations worked hard to extend american trade and investment in the nations to the south.
under harding coolidge and hoover american marines were withdrawn from haiti and the dominican republic and in 1924 the last detachment left nicaragua ending a twelve year occupation.
renewed unrest there the next year however led to a second intervention in nicaragua which did not end until the early 1930s.
showing a new sensitivity the state department released the clark memorandum in 1930 a policy statement repudiating the controversial roosevelt corollary to the monroe doctrine.
under the monroe doctrine the united states had no right to intervene in neighboring states declared undersecretary of state j reuben clark although he asserted a traditional claim to protect american lives and property under international law.
when fdr took office in 1933 relations with latin america were far better than they had been under wilson but american trade in the hemisphere had fallen drastically as the depression worsened.
roosevelt moved quickly to solidify the improved relations and gain economic benefits.
with his usual flair for the dramatic he proclaimed a good neighbor policy and then proceeded to win goodwill by renouncing the imperialism of the past.
in 1933 secretary of state cordell hull signed a conditional pledge of nonintervention at the pan american conference in montevideo uruguay.
a year later the united states renounced the right to intervene in cuban affairs it had asserted under the platt amendment and loosened its grip on panama.
by 1936 american troops were no longer occupying any latin american nation.
fdr personally cemented the new policy by traveling to buenos aires to sign an agreement that forbade intervention directly or indirectly and for whatever reason in the internal affairs of a central or south american state.
the united states had not changed its basic goal of political and economic dominance in the hemisphere rather the new policy of benevolence reflected roosevelts belief that cooperation and friendship were more effective tactics than threats and armed intervention.
mexico tried his patience in 1938 by nationalizing its oil resources with admirable restraint the president finally negotiated a settlement in 1941 on terms favorable to mexico.
yet this isolationism economic loss was more than offset by the new trade opportunities opened up by the good neighbor policy.
american commerce with latin america increased fourfold in the 1930s and investment rose substantially from its great depression low.
most important fdr succeeded in forging a new policy of regional collective security.
as the ominous events leading to world war ii unfolded in europe and asia the nations of the western hemisphere looked to the united states for protection against external danger.
rivalry in asia in the years following world war i the united states and japan were on a collision course in the pacific.
the japanese lacking the raw materials to sustain their developing industrial economy were determined to expand onto the asian mainland.
they had taken korea by 1905 and during world war i had extended their control over the mines harbors and railroads of manchuria the industrial region of northeast china.
the american open door policy remained the primary obstacle to complete japanese dominion over china.
the united states thus faced the clear cut choice of either abandoning china or forcefully opposing japans expansion.
american efforts to avoid making this painful decision postponed the eventual showdown but not the growing rivalry.
the first attempt at a solution came in 1921 when the united states convened the washington disarmament conference which included delegates from the united states japan great britain and six other nations.
the major objective was a political settlement of the tense asian situation but the most pressing issue was a dangerous naval race between japan and the united states.
both nations were engaged in extensive shipbuilding programs begun during the war.
great britain was forced to compete in order to preserve its traditional control of the sea even so projected construction indicated that both the united states and japan would overtake the british navy by the end of the decade.
japan spending nearly one third of its total budget on naval construction was eager for an agreement in the united states growing congressional concern over appropriations suggested the need for slowing the naval buildup.
in his welcoming address at the washington conference secretary of state charles evans hughes outlined a specific plan for naval disarmament calling for the scrapping of sixty six battleships thirty american nineteen british and seventeen japanese.
three months later delegates signed the five power treaty embodying the main elements of hughes proposal limitation of capital ships battleships and aircraft carriers in a ratio of 5 5 3 for the united states britain and japan respectively and 1 67 1 67 for france and italy.
england reluctantly accepted equality with the united states while japan agreed to the lower ratio only in return for an american pledge not to fortify pacific bases such as the philippines and guam.
the treaty cooled off the naval race even though it did not include cruisers destroyers or submarines.
the washington conference produced two other major agreements the nine power treaty and the four power treaty.
the first simply pledged all the countries involved to uphold the open door policy while the other compact replaced the old anglo japanese alliance with a new pacific security pact signed by the united states great britain japan and france.
neither document contained any enforcement provision beyond a promise to consult in case of a violation.
in essence the washington treaties formed a parchment peace a pious set of pledges that attempted to freeze the status quo in the pacific.
this compromise lasted less than a decade.
in september 1931 japanese forces violated the nine power treaty and the kellogg briand pact by overrunning manchuria in a brutal act of aggression.
the united states paralyzed by the depression responded feebly.
secretary of state henry l stimson sent an observer to geneva to assure cooperation with the league of nations which was content to investigate the incident in january 1932 stimson fell back on moral force issuing notes vowing the united states would not recognize the legality of the japanese seizure of manchuria.
despite concurrence by the league on nonrecognition the japanese ignored the american moral sanction and incorporated the former chinese province now renamed manchukuo into their rapidly expanding empire.
aside from the good neighbor approach in the western hemisphere american foreign policy faithfully reflected the prevailing disillusionment with world power that gripped the country after world war i.
the united states avoided taking any constructive steps toward preserving world order preferring instead the empty symbolism of the washington treaties and the kellogg briand pact.
isolationism what was isolationism and why was it so appealing to americans in the 1920s and 1930s.
the retreat from an active world policy in the 1920s turned into a headlong flight back to isolationism in the 1930s.
two factors were responsible.
first the depression made foreign policy seem remote and unimportant to most americans.
as unemployment increased and the economic crisis intensified after 1929 many people grew apathetic about events abroad.
second the danger of war abroad when it did finally penetrate the american consciousness served only to strengthen the desire to escape involvement.
three powerful and discontented nations were on the march in the 1930s germany italy and japan.
in germany adolf hitler came to power in 1933 as the head of a national socialist or nazi movement.
a shrewd and charismatic leader hitler capitalized on both domestic discontent and bitterness over world war i blaming the jews for all of germanys ills and asserting the supremacy of the aryan race of blond blue eyed germans he quickly imposed a totalitarian dictatorship in which the nazi party ruled and the fhrer was supreme.
at first his foreign policy seemed harmless but as he consolidated his power the ultimate threat to world peace became clearer.
hitler took germany out of the league of nations reoccupied the rhineland and formally denounced the treaty of versailles.
his boasts of uniting all germans into a greater third reich that would last a thousand years filled his european opponents with terror blocking any effective challenge to his regime.
in italy another dictator benito mussolini had come to power in 1922.
emboldened by hitlers success he embarked on an aggressive foreign policy in 1935.
his invasion of the independent african nation of ethiopia led its emperor haile selassie to call on the chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 league of nations for support.
with england and france far more concerned about hitler the leagues halfhearted measures utterly failed to halt mussolinis conquest.
fifty two nations had combined to resist aggression commented historian a j p taylor all they accomplished was that haile selassie lost all his country instead of only half collective security had failed its most important test.
japan formed the third element in the threat to world peace.
militarists began to dominate the government in tokyo by the mid 1930s using tactics of fear and even assassination against their liberal opponents.
by 1936 japan had left the league of nations and had repudiated the washington treaties.
a year later its armies began an invasion of china that marked the beginning of the pacific phase of world war ii.
the resurgence of militarism in germany italy and japan undermined the versailles settlement and threatened to destroy the existing balance of power.
england and france in europe proved as powerless as china in asia to stop the tide of aggression.
in 1937 the three totalitarian nations signed an anti comintern pact completing a berlin rome tokyo axis.
the alliance of the axis powers ostensibly was aimed at the soviet union but in fact it threatened the entire world.
only a determined american response could unite the other nations against the axis threat.
unfortunately the united states deliberately abstained from assuming this role of leadership until it was nearly too late.
the lure of pacifism and neutrality the growing danger of war abroad led to a rising american desire for peace and noninvolvement.
memories of world war i contributed heavily.
erich maria remarques novel all quiet on the western front as well as the movie based on it reminded people of the brutality of war.
historians began to treat the great war as a mistake criticizing wilson for failing to preserve american neutrality and claiming the clever british had duped the united states into entering the war.
walter millis advanced this thesis in americas road to war 1914 1917 published in 1935.
it was hailed as a vivid description of the process by which a peace loving democracy muddled but excited misinformed and whipped to a frenzy embarked upon its greatest foreign war american youth made clear their determination not to repeat the mistakes of their elders.
pacifism swept across college campuses.
a brown university poll indicated 72 percent of the students opposed military service in wartime.
at princeton undergraduates formed the veterans of future wars a parody on veterans groups to demand a bonus of 1 000 apiece before they marched off to a foreign war.
in april 1934 students and professors alike walked out of class to attend massive antiwar rallies which became an annual rite of spring in the 1930s.
demonstrators carried signs reading abolish the r o t c and build schools not battleships and pacifist orators urged students to sign a pledge not to support their country in any war it might conduct the pacifist movement found a scapegoat in the munitions industry.
the publication of several books exposing the unsavory business tactics of large arms dealers such as krupp in germany and vickers in britain led to a demand to curb these merchants of death senator gerald nye of north dakota headed a special senate committee that spent two years investigating american munitions dealers.
the committee revealed the enormous profits firms such as du pont reaped from world war i but nye went further charging that bankers and munitions makers were responsible for american intervention in 1917.
no proof was forthcoming but the public prepared to believe the worst of businessmen during the great depression accepted the merchants of death thesis.
the nye committees revelations culminated in neutrality legislation.
in 1935 senator nye and another senate colleague introduced measures to ban arms sales and loans to belligerents and to prevent americans from traveling on belligerent ships.
by outlawing the activities that led to world war i they hoped the united states could avoid involvement in the new conflict.
this never again philosophy proved irresistible.
in august 1935 congress passed the first of three neutrality acts.
the 1935 law banned the sale of arms to nations at war and warned american citizens not to sail on belligerent ships.
in 1936 a second act added a ban on loans and in 1937 a third neutrality act made these prohibitions permanent and required on a two year trial basis that all trade other than munitions be conducted on a cash and carry basis.
president roosevelt played a passive role in the adoption of the neutrality legislation.
at first opposed to the arms embargo he finally approved it for six months in 1935 in a compromise designed to save important new deal legislation in congress.
yet he also appeared to share the isolationist assumption that a european war would have no impact on vital national interests.
he termed the first neutrality act entirely satisfactory when he signed it.
others in the administration criticized the mandatory nature of the new law pointing out that it prevented the united states from distinguishing between aggressors and their victims.
privately roosevelt expressed some of the same reservations but publicly he bowed to the prevailing isolationism.
he signed the subsequent neutrality acts without protest and during the 1936 election he delivered an impassioned denunciation of war.
i hate war he told an audience in chautauqua new york.
i have passed unnumbered hours i shall pass unnumbered hours thinking and planning how war may be kept from this nation yet fdr did take a few steps to try to limit the nations retreat into isolationism.
his failure to invoke the neutrality act after the japanese invasion of china in 1937 enabled the hard pressed chinese to continue buying arms from the united states.
in january 1938 he used his influence to block a proposal by indiana congressman louis ludlow to require a nationwide referendum before congress could declare war.
fdrs strongest public statement came earlier in chicago in october 1937 when he denounced the epidemic of world lawlessness and called for an international effort to quarantine the disease.
when reporters asked him if his call for positive efforts to preserve peace signaled a repeal of the neutrality acts however roosevelt quickly reaffirmed this isolationist legislation.
whatever his private yearning for cooperation against aggressors the president had no intention of challenging the prevailing public mood of the 1930s.
war in europe the neutrality legislation played directly into the hands of adolf hitler.
bent on the conquest of europe he could now proceed without worrying about american interference.
in march 1938 he seized austria in a bloodless coup.
six months later he was demanding the sudetenland a province of czechoslovakia with isolationism a large german population.
when the british and french leaders agreed to meet with hitler at munich fdr voiced his approval.
roosevelt carefully kept the united states aloof from the decision to surrender the sudetenland in the hopes of appeasing hitlers demand for land.
at the same time the president gave his tacit approval of the policy of appeasement by telling the british prime minister that he shared his hope and belief that there exists today the greatest opportunity in years for the establishment of a new order based on justice and on law six months after the meeting at munich hitler violated his promises by seizing nearly all of czechoslovakia.
in the united states roosevelt permitted the state department to press for neutrality revision.
the administration proposal to repeal the arms embargo and place all trade with belligerents including munitions on a cash and carry basis soon met stubborn resistance from isolationists.
they argued that cash and carry would favor england and france who controlled the sea.
the house rejected the measure by a narrow margin and the senates foreign relations committee voted 12 to 11 to postpone any action on neutrality revision.
in july 1939 roosevelt finally abandoned his aloof position and met with senate leaders to plead for reconsideration.
warnings of the imminence of war in europe by both the president and the secretary of state failed to impress the isolationists.
view the map senator william borah who had led the fight against the league of nations in 1919 responded that he believed the chances for war in europe were remote.
after canvassing the senators present vice president john nance garner bluntly told fdr that the neutrality revision was dead.
you havent got the votes garner commented and thats all there is to it on september 1 1939 hitler began world war ii by invading poland.
england and france responded two days later by declaring war although there was no way they could prevent the german conquest of poland.
russia had played a key role refusing western overtures for a common front against germany and finally signing a nonaggression treaty with hitler in late august.
the nazi soviet pact enabled germany to avoid a two front war the russians were rewarded with a generous slice of eastern poland.
president roosevelt reacted to the outbreak of war by proclaiming american neutrality but the successful aggression by nazi germany brought into question the isolationist assumption that american well being did not depend on the european balance of power.
strategic as well as ideological considerations began to undermine the earlier belief that the united states could safely pursue a policy of neutrality and noninvolvement.
the long retreat from responsibility was about to end as americans came to realize that their own democracy and security were at stake in the european war.
world war ii in europe hitler sent his armies into poland with tremendous force and firepower devastating the country.
here german troops observe as the german luftwaffe bombs warsaw in september 1939 destroying the city and forcing its inhabitants to surrender.
chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 the road to war how did the united states go from neutrality in the 1930s to war in 1941.
for two years the united states tried to remain at peace while war raged in europe and asia.
in contrast to the climate of the country while wilson attempted to be impartial during most of world war i however the american people displayed an overwhelming sympathy for the allies and total distaste for germany and japan.
roosevelt made no secret of his preference for an allied victory but a fear of isolationist criticism compelled him to move slowly and often deviously in adopting a policy of aid for england and france.
from neutrality to undeclared war two weeks after the outbreak of war in europe roosevelt called congress into special session to revise the neutrality legislation.
he wanted to repeal the arms embargo in order to supply weapons to england and france but he refused to state this aim openly.
instead he asked congress to replace the arms embargo with cashand carry regulations.
belligerents would be able to purchase war supplies in the united states but they would have to pay cash and transport the goods in their own ships.
public opinion strongly supported the president and congress passed the revised neutrality policy by heavy margins in early november 1939.
a series of dramatic german victories had a profound impact on american opinion.
quiet during the winter of 1939 1940 the germans struck with lightning speed and devastating effect in the spring.
in april they seized denmark and norway and on may 10 1940 they unleashed the blitzkrieg lightning war on the western front.
using tanks armored columns and dive bombers in close coordination the german army cut deep into the allied lines dividing the british and french forces.
within three weeks the british were driven off the continent.
in another three weeks france fell to hitlers victorious armies.
americans were stunned.
hitler had taken only six weeks to achieve what germany had failed to do in four years of fighting in world war i.
suddenly they realized they did have a stake in the outcome if england fell hitler might well gain control of the british navy.
the atlantic would no longer be a barrier instead it would be a highway for german penetration of the new world.
roosevelt responded by invoking a policy of all out aid to the allies short of war.
in a speech at charlottesville virginia in june just after italy entered the war by invading france he denounced germany and italy as representing the gods of force and hate and vowed the whole of our sympathies lies with those nations that are giving their life blood in combat against these forces it was too late to help france but in early september fdr announced the transfer of fifty old destroyers to england in exchange for rights to build air and naval bases on eight british possessions in the western hemisphere.
giving warships to a belligerent nation was clearly a breach of neutrality but roosevelt emphasized the importance of guarding the atlantic approaches calling the destroyers for bases deal the most important action in the reinforcement of our national defense that has been taken since the louisiana purchase isolationists cried out against this departure from neutrality.
a bold headline in the st louis post dispatch read dictator roosevelt commits act of war a group of roosevelts opponents in the midwest formed the america first committee to protest the drift toward war.
such diverse individuals as aviator hero charles lindbergh conservative senator robert a taft of ohio socialist leader norman thomas and liberal educator robert m hutchins condemned fdr for involving the united states in a foreign conflict.
voicing belief in a fortress america they denied that hitler threatened american security and claimed that the nation had the strength to defend itself regardless of what happened in europe.
to support the administrations policies opponents of the isolationists organized the committee to defend america by aiding the allies.
eastern anglophiles moderate new dealers and liberal republicans made up the bulk of the membership with kansas newspaper editor william allen white serving as chairman.
the white committee as it became known advocated unlimited assistance to england short of war although some of its members privately favored entry into the conflict.
above all the interventionists challenged the isolationist premise that events in europe did not affect american security.
the future of western civilization is being decided upon the battlefield of europe white declared.
in the ensuing debate the american people gradually came to agree with the interventionists.
the battle of britain helped.
every time hitler bombed london we got a couple of votes noted one interventionist.
frightened by the events in europe congress approved large sums for preparedness increasing the defense budget from 2 billion to 10 billion during 1940.
roosevelt courageously asked for a peacetime draft the first in american history to build up the army in september congress agreed.
the sense of crisis affected domestic politics.
roosevelt ran for an unprecedented third term in 1940 because of the european war the republicans nominated wendell willkie a former democratic businessman who shared fdrs commitment to aid for england.
both candidates made appeals to peace sentiment during the campaign but roosevelts decisive victory made it clear that the nation supported his increasing departure from neutrality.
after the election fdr took his boldest step.
responding to british prime minister winston churchills warning that england was running out of money the president asked congress to approve a new program to lend and lease goods and weapons to countries fighting against aggressors.
roosevelts call for america to become the great arsenal of democracy seemed straightforward enough but he acted somewhat deviously by naming the program lend lease and by comparing it to loaning a neighbor a garden hose to put out a fire.
isolationists angrily denounced lend lease as both unnecessary and untruthful.
lending war equipment is a good deal like lending chewing gum commented senator taft.
you dont want it back in march 1941 however congress voted by substantial margins to authorize the president to sell transfer title to exchange lease lend or otherwise dispose of war supplies to any country the president deems vital to the defense of the united states the accompanying 7 billion appropriation ended the cash part of cash and carry and ensured britain full access to american war supplies.
the carry problem still remained.
german submarines were sinking more than 500 000 tons of shipping a month.
england desperately needed the help of the american navy in escorting the road to war read the document charles lindbergh radio weeks or months at most until repeated sinkings would lead to a formal declaration of war against germany.
address 1941 the election of 1940 candidate roosevelt willkie party democratic republican popular vote 27 244 160 22 305 198 electoral vote in leading the nation to the brink of war in europe roosevelt opened himself to criticism from both sides in the domestic debate.
interventionists believed he had been too cautious in dealing with the danger to the nation from nazi germany.
isolationists were equally critical of the president claiming he had misled the american people by professing peace while plotting for war.
roosevelt was certainly less than candid relying on executive discretion to engage in highly provocative acts in the north atlantic.
he agreed with the interventionists that in the long run a german victory in europe would threaten american security.
but he also was aware that a poll taken in september 1941 showed nearly 80 percent of the american people wanted to stay out of world war ii.
realizing that leading a divided nation into war would be disastrous fdr played for time inching the country toward war while waiting for the axis nations to make the ultimate move.
japan finally obliged at pearl harbor.
showdown in the pacific the famous american aviator hero charles lindbergh was one of several prominent isolationist americans who joined a public campaign in 1939 and between 1940 1941 to preserve american neutrality as the military conflict in europe began to rage.
convoys across the u boat infested waters of the north atlantic.
roosevelt fearful of isolationist reaction responded with naval patrols in the western half of the ocean.
hitler placed his submarine commanders under strict restraints to avoid drawing america into the european war.
nevertheless incidents were bound to occur.
in september 1941 after a u boat narrowly missed torpedoing an american destroyer tracking it roosevelt denounced the german submarines as the rattlesnakes of the atlantic and issued orders for the navy to convey british ships halfway across the ocean.
undeclared naval war quickly followed.
on october 17 1941 a german submarine damaged the u s destroyer kearney ten days later another u boat sank the reuben james killing more than one hundred american sailors.
fdr issued orders for the destroyers to shoot u boats on sight.
he also asked congress to repeal the carry section of the neutrality laws and permit american ships to deliver supplies to england.
in mid november congress approved these moves by slim margins.
now american merchant ships as well as destroyers would become targets for german attacks.
by december it seemed only a matter of japan had taken advantage of the war in europe to expand farther in asia.
although successful after 1937 in conquering the populous coastal areas of china the japanese had been unable to defeat chiang kai shek whose forces retreated into the vast interior of the country.
the german defeat of france and the netherlands in 1940 however left their colonial possessions in the east indies and indochina vulnerable and defenseless.
japan now set out to incorporate these territories rich in oil tin and rubber into a greater east asia co prosperity sphere.
the roosevelt administration countered with economic pressure.
japan depended heavily on the united states for petroleum and scrap metal.
in july 1940 president roosevelt signed an order setting up a licensing and quota system for the export of these crucial materials to japan and banned the sale of aviation gasoline altogether.
with britain fighting for survival and france and the netherlands occupied by germany the united states was now employing economic sanctions to defend southeast asia against japanese expansion.
tokyo appeared to be unimpressed.
in early september japanese troops occupied strategic bases in the northern part of french indochina.
later in the month japan signed the tripartite pact with germany and italy a defensive treaty that confronted the united states with a possible two ocean war.
the new axis alignment confirmed american suspicions that japan was part of a worldwide totalitarian threat.
roosevelt and his advisers however saw germany as the primary danger thus they pursued a policy of all out aid to england while hoping that economic measures alone would deter japan.
chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 view the closer look the japanese raid on pearl harbor december 7 1941 the early morning surprise japanese attack on pearl harbor in hawaii on december 7 1941 brought america directly into world war ii against the axis powers.
the attack devastated this major american naval base and resulted in the loss of twenty four hundred american sailors the sinking of eight battleships and severe damage to another twenty one u s naval ships.
the embargo on aviation gasoline extended to include scrap iron and steel in late september 1940 was a burden japan could bear but a possible ban on all oil shipments was a different matter.
japan lacked petroleum reserves of its own and was entirely dependent on imports from the united states and the dutch east indies.
in an attempt to ease the economic pressure through negotiation japan sent a new envoy to washington in the spring of 1941.
but the talks quickly broke down.
tokyo wanted nothing less than a free hand in china and an end to american sanctions while the united states insisted on an eventual japanese evacuation of all china.
in july 1941 japan invaded southern indochina beginning the chain of events that led to war.
washington knew of this aggression before it occurred.
naval intelligence experts had broken the japanese diplomatic code and were intercepting and reading all messages between tokyo and the japanese embassy in washington.
president roosevelt responded on july 25 1941 with an order freezing all japanese assets in the united states.
this step initially intended only as a temporary warning to japan soon became a permanent embargo due to positive public reaction and state department zeal.
trade with japan including the vital oil shipments came to a complete halt.
when the dutch government in exile took similar action japan faced a dilemma to have oil shipments resumed tokyo would have to end its aggression the alternative would be to seize the needed petroleum supplies in the dutch east indies an action that would mean war.
after one final diplomatic effort failed general hideki tojo an army militant became the new premier of japan.
to mask its war preparations tokyo sent yet another envoy to washington with new peace proposals.
code breaking enabled american diplomats to learn that the japanese terms were unacceptable even before they were formally presented.
army and navy leaders urged president roosevelt to seek at least a temporary settlement with japan to give them time to prepare american defenses in the pacific.
secretary of state cordell hull however refused to allow any concession on november 26 he sent a stiff ten point reply to tokyo that included a demand for japanese withdrawal from china.
the japanese response came two weeks later.
on the evening of december 6 1941 the first thirteen parts of the reply to hulls note arrived in washington with the fourteenth part to follow the turning the tide against the axis next morning.
naval intelligence actually decoded the message faster than the japanese embassy clerks.
a messenger delivered the text to president roosevelt late that night after glancing at it he commented this means war the next day december 7 the fourteenth part arrived revealing that japan totally rejected the american position.
officials in washington immediately sent warning messages to american bases in the pacific but they failed to arrive in time.
at 7 55 in the morning just before 1 p m in washington squadrons of japanese carrier based planes caught the american fleet at pearl harbor totally by surprise.
in little more than an hour they crippled the american pacific fleet and its major base sinking eight battleships and killing more than twenty four hundred american sailors.
in washington the japanese envoys had requested a meeting with secretary hull at 1 p m just before the meeting news arrived of the attack on pearl harbor.
an irate cordell hull read the note the japanese handed him and then unable to restrain himself any longer burst out in all my fifty years of public service i have never seen a document that was more crowded with infamous falsehoods and distortions on a scale so huge that i never imagined until today that any government was capable of uttering them speaking before congress the next day president roosevelt termed december 7 a date which will live in infamy and asked for a declaration of war on japan.
with only one dissenting vote both branches passed the measure.
on december 11 germany and italy declared war against the united states the nation was now fully involved in world war ii.
the whole country united behind roosevelts leadership to seek revenge for pearl harbor and to defeat the axis threat to american security.
after the war however critics charged that fdr had entered the conflict by a back door claiming the president had deliberately exposed the pacific fleet to attack.
subsequent investigations uncovered negligence in both hawaii and washington but no evidence to support the conspiracy charge.
commanders in hawaii like most military experts believed the japanese would not launch an attack on a base four thousand miles from japan.
fdr like too many americans had badly underestimated the daring and skill of the japanese he and the nation alike paid a heavy price for this cultural and racial prejudice.
but there was no plot.
roosevelt could not have known that hitler so restrained in the atlantic would reverse his policy and foolishly declare war against the united states after pearl harbor.
perhaps the most frightening aspect of the whole episode is that it took the shock of the japanese sneak attack to make the american people aware of the extent of the axis threat to their well being and lead them to end the long american retreat from responsibility.
turning the tide against the axis how did america and its allies halt the advances of germany and japan.
in the first few months after the united states entered the war the outlook for victory was bleak.
in europe hitlers armies controlled virtually the entire continent from norway in the north to greece in the south.
despite the nonaggression pact german armies had penetrated deep into russia after an initial invasion in june 1941.
although they had failed to capture either moscow or leningrad the nazi forces had conquered the ukraine and by the spring of 1942 were threatening to sweep across the volga river and seize vital oil fields in the caucasus.
in north africa general erwin rommels afrika korps had pushed the british back into egypt and threatened the suez canal see the map on p 656.
the situation was no better in asia.
the pearl harbor attack had enabled the japanese to move unopposed across southeast asia.
within three months they had conquered malaya and the dutch east indies with its valuable oil fields and were pressing the british back both in burma and new guinea.
american forces under general douglas macarthur had tried vainly to block the japanese conquest of the philippines.
macarthur finally escaped by torpedo boat to australia the american garrison at corregidor surrendered after a long siege the survivors then enduring the cruel death march across the bataan peninsula.
with the american navy still recovering from the devastation at pearl harbor japan controlled the western half of the pacific see the map on p 650.
over the next two years the united states and its allies would finally halt the german and japanese offensives in europe and asia.
but then they faced the difficult process of driving back the enemy freeing the vast conquered areas and finally defeating the axis powers on their home territory.
it would be a difficult and costly struggle that would require great sacrifice and heavy losses world war ii would test american will and resourcefulness to the utmost.
wartime partnerships the greatest single advantage that the united states and its partners possessed was their willingness to form a genuine coalition to bring about the defeat of the axis powers.
although there were many strains within the wartime alliance it did permit a high degree of coordination.
in striking contrast was the behavior of germany and japan each fighting a separate war without any attempt at cooperation.
the united states and britain achieved a complete wartime partnership.
prewar military talks led to the formation of a combined chiefs of staff headquartered in washington which directed anglo american military operations.
the close cooperation between president roosevelt and prime minister churchill ensured a common strategy.
the leaders decided at the outset that a german victory posed the greater danger and thus gave priority to the european theater in the conduct of the war.
in a series of meetings in december 1941 roosevelt and churchill signed a declaration of the united nations eventually subscribed to by twenty six countries that pledged them to fight together until the axis powers were defeated.
relations with the other members of the united nations coalition in world war ii were not quite so harmonious.
the decision to defeat germany first displeased the chinese who had been at war with japan since 1937.
roosevelt tried to appease chiang kai shek with a trickle of supplies flown in at great risk by american airmen over the himalayas from india.
france posed a more delicate problem.
fdr virtually ignored the free french chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 government in exile under general charles de gaulle.
roosevelt preferred to deal with the vichy regime despite its collaboration with germany because it still controlled the french fleet and retained frances overseas territories.
the greatest strain of all within the wartime coalition was with the soviet union.
although roosevelt had ended the long period of nonrecognition in 1933 close ties had failed to develop.
the russian refusal to pay prerevolutionary debts together with continued soviet support of domestic communist activity in the united states in the 1930s intensified american distaste for stalins regime.
the great russian purge trials and the temporary nazi soviet alliance from 1939 to 1941 along with deep seated cultural and ideological differences made wartime cooperation difficult.
ever the pragmatist roosevelt tried hard to break down the old hostility and establish a more cordial relationship with russia during the war.
even before pearl harbor he extended lend lease aid to russia and after american entry into the war this economic assistance grew rapidly limited only by the difficulty of delivering the supplies.
eager to keep russia in the war the president promised a visiting russian diplomat in may 1942 that the united states would create a second front in europe by the end of that year a pledge he could not fulfill.
in january 1943 roosevelt and churchill met in casablanca morocco where they declared a policy of unconditional surrender vowing that the allies would fight until the axis nations were completely defeated.
despite these promises the soviet union bore the brunt of battle against hitler in the early years of the war fighting alone against more than two hundred german divisions.
the united states and england grateful for the respite to build up their forces could do little more than offer promises of future help and send lend lease supplies.
the result was a rift that never fully healed one that did not prevent the defeat of germany but did ensure future tensions and uncertainties between the soviet union and the western nations.
against germany before the end of 1942 to offset growing pressure at home to concentrate on the pacific hence after he overruled objections from his military advisers american and british troops landed on the atlantic and mediterranean coasts of morocco and algeria in november 1942.
the british launched an attack against rommel at el alamein in egypt and soon forced the afrika korps to retreat across libya to tunisia.
eisenhower delayed by poor roads and bad weather was slow in bringing up his forces and in their first encounter with rommel at the kasserine pass in the desert south of tunis inexperienced american troops suffered a humiliating defeat.
general george patton quickly rallied the demoralized soldiers and by may 1943 germany had been driven from africa leaving behind nearly 300 000 troops.
during these same months the soviet unions red army had broken the back of german military power in the battle of stalingrad.
turned back at the critical bend in the volga hitler had poured in division after division in what was ultimately a losing cause never again would germany be able to take the offensive in europe.
at churchills insistence fdr agreed to follow up the north african victory with the invasion first of sicily and then italy in the summer of 1943.
italy dropped out of the war when mussolini fled to germany but the italian campaign proved to be a strategic dead end.
germany sent in enough divisions to establish a strong defensive line in the mountains south of rome american and british troops were forced to fight their way slowly up the peninsula suffering heavy casualties.
more important these mediterranean operations delayed the second front postponing it eventually to the spring of 1944.
meanwhile the soviets began to push the germans out of russia and looked forward to the liberation of poland hungary and romania where they could establish friendly communist regimes.
having borne the brunt of the fighting against nazi germany russia was ready to claim its reward the postwar domination of eastern europe.
halting the german blitz from the outset the united states favored an invasion across the english channel.
army planners led by chief of staff george c marshall and his protg dwight d eisenhower were convinced such a frontal assault would be the quickest way to win the war.
roosevelt concurred in part because it fulfilled his second front commitment to the soviets.
the initial plan drawn up by eisenhower called for a fullscale invasion of europe in the spring of 1943 with provision for a temporary beachhead in france in the fall of 1942 if necessary to keep russia in the war.
marshall surprised everyone by placing eisenhower until then a relatively junior general in charge of implementing the plan.
but the british remembering the heavy casualties of trench warfare in world war i and hoping to protect the route to india their most important colony preferred a perimeter approach.
air and naval attacks around the edge of the continent especially in the mediterranean would be a prelude to a final invasion of germany.
british strategists assented to the basic plan but strongly urged a preliminary invasion of north africa in the fall of 1942.
roosevelt too wanted american troops engaged in combat checking japan in the pacific both the decision to defeat germany first and the vast expanses of the pacific dictated the nature of the war against japan.
the united states conducted amphibious island hopping campaigns rather than attempting to reconquer the dutch east indies southeast asia and china.
there would be two separate american operations.
one led by douglas macarthur based in australia would move from new guinea back to the philippines while the other commanded by admiral chester nimitz from hawaii was directed at key japanese islands in the central pacific.
the original plan called for the two offensives to come together for the final invasion of the japanese home islands.
success in the pacific depended above all else on control of the sea.
the devastation at pearl harbor gave japan the initial edge but fortunately the united states had not lost any of its four aircraft carriers.
in the battle of the coral sea in may 1942 american naval forces blocked a japanese thrust to outflank australia.
the turning point came one month later at midway.
a powerful japanese task force threatened to seize this remote american outpost more than a thousand miles west of pearl harbor japans real the home front objective was the destruction of what remained of the american pacific fleet.
superior american airpower enabled nimitzs forces to engage the enemy at long range.
japanese fighters shot down thirty five of forty one attacking torpedo bombers but a second wave of dive bombers scored hits on three japanese carriers.
the battle of midway ended with the loss of four japanese aircraft carriers compared to just one american carrier.
it was the first defeat the modern japanese navy had ever suffered and it left the united states in control of the central pacific.
encouraged by the victory american forces launched their first pacific offensive in the solomon islands east of new guinea in august 1942.
both sides suffered heavy losses but six months later the last japanese were driven from the key island of guadalcanal.
at the same time macarthur began the long slow and bloody job of driving the japanese back along the north coast of new guinea.
by early 1943 the defensive phase of the war with japan was over.
the enemy surge had been halted in both the central and the southwestern pacific and the united states was preparing to penetrate the gilbert marshall and caroline islands and recapture the philippines.
just as russia had broken german power in europe so the united states fighting alone except for australia and new zealand had halted the japanese.
and like the ussr with its plans for eastern europe america expected to reap the rewards of victory by dominating the pacific in the future.
the home front how did american domestic life change during world war ii.
world war ii had a greater impact than the great depression on american life.
while american soldiers and sailors fought abroad the nation underwent sweeping social and economic changes at home.
american industry worked to capacity to meet the need for war materials.
increased production in both industry and agriculture benefited workers and farmers alike.
the expansion of war related industries encouraged many people to move to where new jobs had sprung up.
women moved out of the home into the paid workforce rural dwellers relocated to urban areas and northerners and easterners sought new opportunities and new homes in the south and west.
another beneficiary of the return to prosperity brought on by the war was fdr who had seen the nation through the dark days of the depression.
the nations economic recovery helped him win reelection to the presidency for a fourth term in 1944.
the arsenal of democracy american industry made the nations single most important contribution to victory.
even though more than fifteen million americans served in the armed forces it was the nearly sixty million who worked on farms and factories who achieved the miracle of production that ensured the defeat of germany and japan.
the manufacturing plants that had run at half capacity through the 1930s now hummed with activity.
in detroit automobile assembly lines were converted to produce tanks and airplanes henry ford built the giant willow run factory covering 67 acres where forty two thousand workers turned out a b 24 bomber every hour.
henry j kaiser a california industrialist who constructed huge west coast shipyards to meet the demand for cargo vessels and landing craft operated on an equally large scale.
his plant in richmond california reduced the time to build a merchant ship from 105 to 14 days.
in part america won the battle of the atlantic by building ships faster than german u boats could sink them.
this vast industrial expansion however created many problems.
in 1942 president roosevelt appointed donald nelson a sears roebuck executive to head a war production board wpb.
a jovial easygoing man nelson soon was outmaneuvered by the army and the navy which preferred to negotiate directly with large corporations.
the wpb allowed business to claim rapid depreciation and thus huge tax credits for new plants and it awarded lucrative cost plus contracts for urgently needed goods.
shortages of critical materials such as steel aluminum and copper led to an allocation system based on military priorities.
rubber cut off by the japanese conquest of southeast asia was particularly scarce the administration finally began gasoline rationing in 1943 to curb pleasure driving and prolong tire life.
the government itself built fifty one synthetic rubber plants which by 1944 were producing nearly one million tons a year for the tires of american airplanes and military vehicles.
all in all the nations factories turned out twice as many goods as did german and japanese industry combined.
roosevelt revealed the same tendency toward compromise in directing the economic mobilization as he did in shaping the new deal.
when the office of price administration which tried to curb inflation by controlling prices and rationing scarce goods such as sugar canned food and shoes clashed with the wpb fdr appointed james byrnes to head an office of economic stabilization.
byrnes a former south carolina senator and supreme court justice used political judgment to settle disputes between agencies and keep all groups happy.
the president was also forced to compromise with congress which pared down the administrations requests for large tax increases.
half the cost of the war was financed by borrowing the other half came from revenues.
a 7 billion revenue increase in 1942 included so many first time taxpayers that in the following year the treasury department instituted a new practice withholding income taxes from workers wages.
a result of the wartime economic explosion was a growing affluence.
despite the federal incentives to business heavy excess profit taxes and a 94 percent tax rate for the very rich kept the wealthy from benefiting unduly.
the huge increase in federal spending from 9 billion in 1940 to 98 billion in 1944 spread through american society.
a government agreement with labor unions in 1943 held wage rates to a 15 percent increase but the long hours of overtime resulted in doubling and sometimes tripling the weekly paychecks of factory workers.
farmers shared in the new prosperity as their incomes quadrupled between 1940 and 1945.
for the first time in the twentieth century the lowest fifth of wage earners increased their share of the national income in relation to the more affluent their income rose by 68 percent between 1941 and 1945 compared to a 20 percent increase for the well to do.
chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 view the map world war ii in the pacific alaska u s bering sea soviet union sakhalin.
u s aleutian is attu is.
kiska i mongolia manchukuo manchuria a.
l is japan china korea tibet chungking jan br.
1944 india formosa thailand ap r manila iwo jima feb 19 mar.
16 1945 leyte gulf oct 23 26 1944 wake is.
u s guam u s v 1 no pearl harbor eniwetok marshall is.
at m su tarawa equator borneo ra ap r celebes du tch east i ndi es gilbert is.
rabaul new guinea 1000 miles 1000 kilometers g 1 au guadalcanal aug 7 1942 feb 9 1943 coral sea may 7 8 1942 australia japanese empire extent of japanese control aug 1942 allies solomon is.
java indian ocean dec 7 1941 japanese mandate caroline islands malaya hawaiian is.
u s mariana is.
south china sea equator midway is.
u s philippine is.
u s french indochina singapore br.
midway june 3 6 1942 okinawa apr.
1 june 22 1945 hong kong br.
burma ocean hiroshima aug 6 1945 nagasaki aug 9 1945 nanking pa c i f i c tokyo ellice is.
new hebrides fr br.
new caledonia fr.
neutral nations allied troop movements major battles atomic bomb explosions world war ii in the pacific the tide of battle turned in the pacific the same year as in europe.
the balance of sea power shifted back to the united states from japan after the naval victories of 1942.
most important this rising income ensured postwar prosperity.
workers and farmers saved their money channeling much of it into government war bonds waiting for the day when they could buy the cars and home appliances they had done without during the long years of depression and war.
a nation on the move the war led to a vast migration of the american population.
young men left their homes for training camps and then for service overseas.
defense workers and their families some nine million people in all moved to work in the new booming shipyards munitions factories and aircraft plants.
norfolk virginia san diego california mobile alabama and other centers of defense production grew by more than 50 percent in just a year or two.
rural areas lost population while coastal regions especially along the pacific and the gulf of mexico drew millions of people.
the location of army camps in the south and west created boom conditions in the future sunbelt as did the concentration of aircraft factories and shipyards in this region.
california had the greatest gains adding nearly two million to its population in less than five years.
this movement of people caused severe social problems.
housing was in short supply.
migrating workers crowded into house trailers and boardinghouses bringing unexpected windfalls to landlords.
in one boomtown a reporter described an old victorian house that had five bedrooms on the second floor.
the home front three of them he wrote held two cots apiece the two others held three cots but the owner revealed that the third floor is where we pick up the velvet.
we rent to workers in different shifts.
three shifts a day.
seven bucks a week apiece family life suffered under these crowded living conditions.
an increase in the number of marriages as young people searched for something to hang on to in the midst of wartime turmoil was offset by a rising divorce rate.
the baby boom that would peak in the 1950s began during the war and brought its own set of problems.
only a few publicly funded day care centers were available and working mothers worried about their latchkey children schools in the boom areas were unable to cope with the influx of new students a teacher shortage intensified by the lure of higher wages in war industries compounded the education crisis.
despite these problems women found the war a time of economic opportunity.
the demand for workers led to a dramatic rise in womens employment from fourteen million working women in 1940 to nineteen million by 1945.
most of the new women workers were married and many were middle aged thus broadening the composition of the female workforce which in the past had been composed primarily of young single women.
women entered industries once viewed as exclusively male by the end of the war they worked alongside men tending blast furnaces in steel mills and welding hulls in shipyards.
few challenged the traditional view of gender roles yet the wartime experience helped temporarily undermine the concept that womans only proper place was in the home.
women enjoyed the hefty weekly paychecks which rose by 50 percent from 1941 to 1943 and they took pride in their contributions to the war effort.
to hell with the life i have had commented a former fashion designer.
this war is too damn serious and it is too damn important to win it african americans shared in the wartime migration but racial prejudice limited their social and economic gains.
nearly one million served in the armed forces but relatively few saw combat.
the army placed black soldiers in segregated units usually led by white officers and used them for service and construction tasks.
the navy was even worse relegating them to menial jobs until late in the war.
african americans were denied the chance to become petty officers secretary of the navy frank knox explained because experience had shown that men of the colored race.
cannot maintain discipline among men of the white race african american civilians fared a little better.
in 1941 black labor leader a philip randolph threatened a massive march on washington to force president roosevelt to end racial discrimination in defense industries and government employment and to integrate the armed forces.
fdr compromised persuading randolph to call off the march and drop his integration demand in return for an executive order creating a fair employment practices committee fepc to ban racial discrimination in war industries.
as a result african american employment by the federal government rose from sixty thousand in 1941 to two hundred thousand by the end of the war.
the fepc proved less successful in the private sector.
weak in funding and staff the fepc was able to act on only one third of the eight thousand complaints it received.
the nationwide shortage of labor was more influential than the fepc in accounting for the rise in black employment during wartime.
african americans moved from the rural south watch the video rosie the riveter u s government publicity campaigns encouraged women to assume work in male dominated trades during world war ii to replace men who were now in the military.
perhaps the best known symbol of this industrial female worker was rosie the riveter a strong efficient and patriotic woman who also retained admirable feminine qualities.
to northern and western cities finding jobs in the automobile aircraft and shipbuilding industries.
the movement of an estimated seven hundred thousand people helped transform black white relations from a regional issue into a national concern that could no longer be ignored.
the limited housing and recreational facilities for both black and white war workers created tensions that led to urban race riots.
on a hot sunday evening in june 1943 blacks and whites began exchanging insults and then blows near belle isle recreation park in detroit.
the next day a full scale riot broke out in which twenty three blacks and nine whites died.
the fighting raged for twenty four hours until national guard troops were brought in to restore order.
later that summer only personal intervention by new york mayor fiorello laguardia quelled a harlem riot that took the lives of six blacks.
these outbursts of racial violence fueled the resentments that would grow into the postwar civil rights movement.
for most african americans despite economic gains world war ii was a reminder of the inequality of american life.
just carve on my tombstone chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 read the document a philip randolph why should we march 1942 dressed in their distinctive outfits long jackets worn with pants tightly pegged at the ankles.
the racial prejudice heightened feelings of ethnic identity and led returning mexican american veterans to form organizations such as the american g i.
forum to press for equal rights in the future.
a tragic counterpoint to the voluntary movement of american workers in search of jobs was the forced relocation of 120 000 japanese americans from the west coast.
responding to racial fears in california after pearl harbor president roosevelt approved an army order in february 1942 to move all japanese americans on the west coast to concentration camps in the interior.
more than two thirds of those detained were nisei nativeborn americans whose only crime was their japanese ancestry.
forced to sell their farms and businesses at distress prices the japanese americans lost not only their liberty but also most of their worldly goods.
herded into ten hastily built detention centers in seven western and southern states they lived as prisoners in tarpapered barracks behind barbed wire guarded by armed troops.
appeals to the supreme court proved fruitless in 1944 six justices upheld relocation on grounds of national security in wartime.
beginning in 1943 individual nisei could win release by pledging their loyalty and finding a job away from the west coast.
some thirty five thousand left the camps during the next two years including more than thirteen thousand who joined the armed forces.
the all nisei 442nd combat team served gallantly in the european theater losing more than five hundred men in battle and winning more than a thousand citations for bravery.
one world war ii veteran remembers that when his unit was in trouble the commander would issue a familiar appeal call in the japs canada washington north dakota montana minn oregon a philip randolph 1889 1979 was a prominent african american labor leader and civil rights leader.
in 1941 fdr and randolph reached a political compromise that averted a threatened march on washington d c demanding integration of the military and an end to racial discrimination in defense industries and government employment.
wis south dakota hart mountain idaho minidoka tule lake wyoming nevada nebraska iowa ill topaz colorado utah manzanar mo.
kansas granada remarked one black soldier in the pacific here lies a black man killed fighting a yellow man for the protection of a white man one third of a million mexican americans served in the armed forces and shared some of the same experiences as african americans.
although they were not as completely segregated many served in the 88th division made up largely of mexican american officers and troops which earned the nickname blue devils in the italian campaign.
at home spanish speaking people left the rural areas of texas new mexico and california for jobs in the cities especially in aircraft plants and petroleum refineries.
despite low wages and union resistance they improved their economic position substantially.
but they still faced discrimination based both on skin color and language most notably in the los angeles zoot suit riots in 1943 when white sailors attacked mexican american youths california arizona ark.
okla new mexico poston gila rohwer jerome texas la.
mexico military area exclusion zone internment camps 300 miles 300 kilometers japanese american internment camps following the attack on pearl harbor president roosevelt established the war relocation authority and charged the agency with the task of evacuating japanese americans from the west coast and transporting them to internment camps.
the home front read the document japanese relocation order family in jerome camp by japanese american painter henry sugimoto depicts a family in their quarters at an internment camp in a southern arkansas swampland.
like many japanese americans living on the west coast the sugimotos were first ordered from their homes to large assembly centers such as the former fairgrounds at fresno california.
there whole families were assigned to individual horse stalls while they awaited relocation to one of the internment camps located in isolated areas of california arizona idaho utah colorado wyoming and arkansas.
conditions in the camps were equally dismal.
whole families lived in a single room furnished with little more than a few cots some blankets and a single light bulb.
for other nisei the experience was bitter.
more than five thousand renounced their american citizenship and chose to live in japan at the wars end.
the government did not close down the last detention center until march 1946.
japanese americans never experienced the torture and mass death of the german concentration camps but their treatment was a disgrace to a nation fighting for freedom and democracy.
finally in 1988 congress voted an indemnity of 1 2 billion for the estimated sixty thousand surviving japanese americans detained during world war ii.
susumi emori who had been moved with his wife and four children from his farm in stockton california to a camp in arkansas felt vindicated.
it was terrible he said with tears in his eyes but it was a time of war.
anything can happen.
i didnt blame the united states for that win the war politics franklin roosevelt used world war ii to strengthen his leadership and maintain democratic political dominance.
as war brought about prosperity and removed the economic discontent that had chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 sustained the new deal fdr announced that dr.
new deal had given way to dr.
win the war congress already controlled by a conservative coalition of southern democrats and northern republicans had almost slipped into gop hands in 1942.
with a very low voter turnout due in part to the large numbers of men in service and uprooted workers who failed to meet residency requirements for voting the republicans won forty four new seats in the house and nine in the senate and elected governors in new york and california as well.
in 1944 roosevelt responded to the democratic slippage by dropping henry wallace his liberal and visionary vice president for harry truman a moderate and down to earth missouri senator who was acceptable to all factions of the democratic party.
equally important fdr received increased political support from organized labor which had grown in membership during the war from ten to fifteen million.
the newly organized political action committee pac of the cio headed by sidney hillman conducted massive door to door drives to register millions of workers and their families.
the election of 1944 candidate roosevelt dewey party democrat republican popular vote 25 602 504 22 006 285 electoral vote the republicans nominated thomas e dewey who had been elected governor of new york after gaining fame as a prosecutor of organized crime.
dewey moderate in his views played down opposition to the new deal and instead tried to make roosevelts age and health the primary issues along with the charge that the democrats were soft on communism.
despite his abrasive campaign style dewey did not advocate a return to isolationism.
the republican party was trying hard to shake the obstructionist image it had gained during the league of nations fight in 1919 it went on record in 1943 as favoring american postwar cooperation for world peace.
indeed dewey pioneered a bipartisan approach to foreign policy.
he accepted wartime planning for the future united nations and kept the issue of an international organization out of the campaign.
reacting to the issues of his age and health especially after a long bout with influenza in the spring fdr disregarded the advice of his doctors and took a five hour drive in an open car through the rain soaked streets of new york city just before the election.
his vitality impressed the voters and in november 1944 he swept back into office for a fourth term.
the campaign however had taken its toll.
the president suffering from high blood pressure and congestive heart failure had only a few months left to lead the nation.
victory how did the war end and what were its consequences.
world war ii ended with surprising swiftness.
by 1943 the axis tide had been turned in europe and asia and it did not take long for russia the united states and england to mount the offensives that drove germany and japan back across the vast areas they had conquered and set the stage for their final defeat.
the long awaited second front finally came on june 6 1944.
for two years the united states and england concentrated on building up an invasion force of nearly three million troops and a vast armada of ships and landing craft to carry them across the english channel.
hoping to catch hitler by surprise eisenhower chose the normandy peninsula where the absence of good harbors had led to lighter german fortifications.
allied aircraft bombed northern france for six weeks preceding the assault in order to block the movement of german reinforcements once the invasion began.
d day was originally set for june 5 but bad weather forced a delay.
relying on a forecasted break in the storm eisenhower gambled on going ahead on june 6.
during the night three divisions parachuted down behind the german defenses at dawn the british and american troops fought their way ashore at five points along a sixty mile stretch of beach encountering stiff german resistance at several points.
by the end of the day however eisenhower had won his beachhead a week later more than one third of a million men were slowly pushing back the german forces through the hedgerows of normandy.
the breakthrough came on july 25 when general omar bradley decimated the enemy with a massive artillery and aerial bombardment at saint l opening a gap for general george pattons third army.
american tanks raced across the french countryside trapping thousands of germans and liberating paris by august 25.
allied troops reached the rhine river by september but a shortage of supplies especially gasoline forced a three month halt.
hitler took advantage of this breathing spell to deliver a daring counterattack.
in mid december the remaining german armored divisions burst through a weak point in the allied lines in the ardennes forest planning a breakout to the coast that would have cut off nearly one third of eisenhowers forces.
a combination of tactical surprise and bad weather which prevented allied air support led to a huge bulge in the american lines.
but an airborne division dug in at the key crossroads of bastogne in belgium and held off a much larger german force.
allied reinforcements and clearing weather then combined to end the attack.
by committing nearly all his reserves to the battle of the bulge hitler had delayed eisenhowers advance into germany but he also had fatally weakened german resistance in the west.
the end came quickly.
a massive russian offensive began in mid january and swept across the oder river toward berlin.
general bradleys troops finding a bridge left virtually intact by the retreating germans crossed the rhine on march 7.
eisenhower overruled the british who favored one concentrated drive on berlin.
instead the allied forces advanced on a broad front capturing the industrial ruhr basin and breaking the nazi death grip on prisoner populations.
see the feature essay the face of the holocaust pp.
the americans and british met the russians at the elbe in late april.
with the red army already in the suburbs of berlin adolf hitler committed suicide on april 30.
a week later on may 7 1945 eisenhower accepted the unconditional surrender of all german forces.
just eleven months and a day after the landings victory view the closer look d day landing june 6 1944 the d day landing by american and british forces on june 6 1944 actually represented two landings an airborne assault of 24 000 allied paratroopers shortly after midnight and an allied amphibious landing by allied armored and infantry divisions at 6 30 am off the coast of france in normandy.
in normandy the allied forces had brought the war in europe to a successful conclusion.
war aims and wartime diplomacy the american contribution to hitlers defeat was relatively minor compared to the damage inflicted by the soviet union.
at the height of the german invasion of russia more than 300 soviet divisions had been locked in battle with 250 german ones a striking contrast to the 58 divisions the united states and britain used in the normandy invasion.
as his armies overran poland and the balkan countries joseph stalin was determined to retain control over this region which had been the historic pathway for western invasion into russia.
delay in opening the second front and an innate distrust of the west convinced the soviets that they should maximize their territorial gains by imposing communist regimes on eastern europe.
american postwar goals were quite different.
now believing the failure to join the league of nations in 1919 had led to the coming of world war ii the american people and their leaders vowed to put their faith in a new attempt at collective security.
at moscow in 1943 secretary of state cordell hull had won russian agreement to participate in a future world organization at the wars end.
the first wartime big three conference brought together roosevelt churchill and stalin at teheran iran in late 1943.
stalin reaffirmed this commitment and also indicated to president roosevelt that russia would enter the war against japan once germany was defeated.
by the time the big three met again in february 1945 at the yalta conference the military situation favored the russians.
while british and american forces were still recovering from the battle of the bulge the red army was advancing to within fifty miles of berlin.
stalin drove a series of hard bargains.
he refused to give up his plans for communist domination of poland and the balkans although he did agree to roosevelts request for a declaration of liberated europe which called for free elections without providing for any method of enforcement or supervision.
more important for the united states stalin promised to enter the pacific war three months after germany surrendered.
in return roosevelt offered extensive concessions in asia chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 axis powers before world war ii 400 miles extent of axis control early nov 1942 400 kilometers finland allies norway neutral nations est.
northern ireland sweden warsaw be o mar.
de r austria switz.
s ov ie t uni o n poland g stalingrad aug 21 1942 jan 31 1943 ukraine hungary caucasus romania aug a east prussia ger.
el france vichy france.
19 apr lith.
rr germany.
battle of cze c h the bulge oslo vakia dec 16 1944 jan 31 1945 danu be r normandy paris liberated aug 1944 ic au rhine r at l a n t i c ocean lt ba berlin surrendered may 2 1945 neth.
moscow aug 1944 denmark g reat bri tai n d day june 6 1944 volg a r a north sea london t 1 sep lat.
se major battles ireland leningrad besieged sept 1941 june 19 1944 ju ly allied troop movements r danube dec 1944 yugo.
italy port.
spain black sea bulgaria rome liberated june 4 1944 a turkey greece nov sp.
morocco july 1943 sicily syria rhodes it.
kasserine pass feb 14 22 1943 morocco tunisia cyprus br.
mediterranean sea palestine f r e n c h n or t h af r ic a br.
19 el alamein oct 23 nov.
5 1942 algeria libya it.
egypt transjordan suez canal nile r vichy france joined allies nov 1942 world war ii in europe and north africa the tide of battle shifted in this theater during the winter of 1942 1943.
the massive german assault on the eastern front was turned back by the russians at stalingrad and the allied forces recaptured north africa.
including russian control over manchuria.
while neither a sellout nor a betrayal as some critics have charged yalta was a significant diplomatic victory for the soviets one that reflected russias major contribution to a victory in europe.
for the president the long journey to yalta proved to be too much.
his health continued to fail after his return to washington.
in early april fdr left the capital for warm springs georgia where he had always been able to relax.
he was sitting for his portrait at midday on april 12 1945 when he suddenly complained of a terrific headache then slumped forward and died.
the nation mourned a man who had gallantly met the challenge of depression and global war.
unfortunately fdr had taken no steps to prepare his successor for the difficult problems that lay ahead.
the defeat of nazi germany dissolved the one strong bond between the united states and the soviet union.
with very different histories cultures and ideologies the two nations were bound to drift apart.
it was now up to the inexperienced harry truman to manage the growing rivalry that was destined to develop into the future cold war.
triumph and tragedy in the pacific the total defeat of germany in may 1945 turned all eyes toward japan.
although the combined chiefs of staff had originally estimated it would take eighteen months after germanys surrender to conquer japan american forces moved with surprising speed.
victory watch the video the big three yalta conference british prime minister winston churchill left and soviet foreign minister vyacheslav molotov right meet prior to the start of the yalta conference february 4 11 1945.
the wartime conference also attended by president franklin roosevelt and soviet premier joseph stalin was organized mainly to discuss the postwar reorganization of european nations and soviet entrance into the war against japan.
admiral nimitz swept through the gilbert caroline and marshall islands in 1944 securing bases for further advances and building airfields for american b 29s to begin a deadly bombardment of the japanese home islands.
general macarthur cleared new guinea of the last japanese defender in early 1944 and began planning his long heralded return to the philippines.
american troops landed on the island of leyte on october 20 1944 and manila fell in early february 1945.
the japanese navy in a pacific version of the battle of the bulge launched a daring three pronged attack on the american invasion fleet in leyte gulf.
the u s navy rallied to blunt all three japanese thrusts sinking four carriers and ending any further japanese naval threat.
the defeat of japan was now only a matter of time.
the united states had three possible ways to proceed.
the military favored a full scale invasion beginning on the southernmost island of kyushu in november 1945 and culminating with an assault on honshu the main island of japan and a climactic battle for tokyo in 1946 casualties were expected to run into the hundreds of thousands.
diplomats suggested a negotiated peace urging the united states to modify the unconditional surrender formula to permit japan to retain the institution of the emperor.
the third possibility involved the highly secret manhattan project.
since 1939 the united states had spent 2 billion to develop an atomic bomb based on the fission of radioactive uranium and plutonium.
scientists many of them refugees from europe worked to perfect this deadly new weapon at the university of chicago oak ridge tennessee hanford washington and a remote laboratory in los alamos new mexico.
in the new mexico desert on july 16 1945 they successfully tested the first atomic bomb creating a fireball brighter than several suns and a telltale mushroom cloud that rose some 40 000 feet above an enormous crater in the desert floor.
truman had been unaware of the existence of the manhattan project before he became president on april 12.
now he simply followed the recommendation of a committee headed by secretary of war henry l stimson to drop the bomb on a japanese city.
the committee discussed but rejected the possibility of inviting the complete the assignment the face of the holocaust on myhistorylab feature essay the face of the holocaust thousands of piled shoes formerly belonging to jewish and other european men women and children murdered at an unidentified nazi death camp during world war ii.
t he liberation of the nazi death camps near the end of world war ii was not a priority objective nor was it a planned operation.
since 1942 the u s government had known that the nazis were murdering jews en masse but officials of the roosevelt administration were divided on what to do about it.
some argued for air raids on the death camps even if such raids were likely to kill large numbers of the jewish inmates.
others contended that air raids alone would not stop the killing that they would divert resources from the broader offensive against germany and that military victory was the surest path to the liberation of the camps.
in part because no one in the united states comprehended the full enormity of hitlers final solution roosevelt sided with the latter group and no special action was taken against the death camps.
as a result it was by chance that allied forces first stumbled upon the camps and the gis who threw open the gates to that living hell were totally unprepared for what they found.
in november 1944 the u s army discovered its first camp natzwillerstruthof which had been abandoned by the germans months before.
viewing natzwiller from a distance milton bracker of the new york times noted its deceptive similarity to an american civilian conservation corps camp the sturdy green barracks buildings looked exactly like those that housed forestry trainees in the u s during the early new deal as he toured the grounds however he faced a starker reality and slowly came to think the unthinkable.
in the crematorium he reported i cranked the elevator tray a few times and slid the furnace tray a few times and even at that moment i did not believe what i was doing was real there were no prisoners he wrote no screams no burly guards no taint of death in the air as on a battlefield bracker had to stretch his imagination to its limits to comprehend the camps silent testimony to the nazi attempt to exterminate the jews of europe.
u s military personnel who toured natzwiller shared this sense of the surreal.
in their report to headquarters they carefully qualified every observation.
they described what appeared to be a disinfection unit a room allegedly used as a lethal gas chamber a cellar room with a special type elevator and an incinerator room with equipment obviously intended for the burning of human bodies they saw before them the evidence of german atrocities but the truth was so horrible they could not quite bring themselves to draw the obvious conclusions.
inside the vicious heart robert abzugs study of the liberation of the concentration camps refers to this phenomenon as double vision faced with a revelation so terrible witnesses could not fully comprehend the evidence of the systematic murder of more than six million men women and children.
but as the allied armies advanced into germany the shocking evidence mounted.
on april 4 1945 the fourth armored division of the third army unexpectedly discovered ohrdruf a relatively small concentration camp.
ohrdrufs liberation had a tremendous impact on american forces.
it was the first camp discovered intact with its grisly array of the dead and dying.
inside the compound corpses were piled in heaps in the barracks.
an infantryman recalled i guess the most vivid recollection of the whole camp is the pyre that was located on the edge of the camp.
it was a big pit where they stacked bodies stacked bodies and wood and burned them on april 12 generals eisenhower bradley and patton toured ohrdruf.
the generals professional soldiers familiar with the devastation of battle had never seen its like.
years later bradley recalled the smell of death overwhelmed us even before we passed through the stockade.
more than 3200 naked emaciated bodies had been flung into shallow graves.
others lay in the street where they had fallen eisenhower ordered every available armed forces unit in the area to visit ohrdruf.
we are told that the american soldier does not know what he is fighting for said eisenhower.
now at least he will know what he is fighting against he urged government officials and journalists to visit the camps and tell the world.
in an official message eisenhower summed it up we are constantly finding german camps in which they have placed political prisoners where unspeakable conditions exist.
from my own personal observation i can state unequivocally that all written statements up to now do not paint the full horrors.
on april 11 the timberwolf division of the third army uncovered nordhausen.
they found three thousand dead and only seven hundred survivors.
the scene sickened battlehardened veterans the odors well there is no way to describe the odors.
many of the boys i am talking about now these were tough soldiers there were combat men who had been all the way through the invasion were ill and vomiting throwing up just at the sight of this.
for some the liberation of nordhausen changed the meaning of the war.
i must also say that my fellow gis most thought that any stories they had read in the paper.
were either not true or at least exaggerated.
and it did not sink in what this was all about until we got into nordhausen.
if the experience at nordhausen gave many gis a new sense of mission in battle it also forced them to distance themselves from the realities of the camps.
only by closing off their emotions could they go about the grim task of sorting out the living from the dead and tending to the survivors.
margaret bourke white whose life magazine photographs brought the horrors of the death camps to millions on the home front recalled working with a veil over my mind people often ask me how it is possible to photograph such atrocities.
in photographing the murder camps the protective veil was so tightly drawn that i hardly knew what i had taken until i saw prints of my own photographs.
by the end of 1945 most of the liberators had come home and returned to civilian life.
once home their experiences produced no common moral responses.
no particular pattern emerged in their occupational political and religious behavior beyond a fear of the rise of postwar totalitarianism shared by most americans.
few spoke publicly about their role in the liberation of the camps most found that after a short period of grim fascination their friends and families preferred to forget.
some had nightmares but few reported being tormented by memories.
for the liberators the ordeal was over.
for the survivors of the holocaust liberation was but the first step in the tortuous process of rebuilding broken bodies and shattered lives.
questions for discussion 1.
why did american leaders during the war have such difficulty comprehending the scope of the holocaust.
how did the discovery of the holocaust confirm americans belief that the war was necessary and just.
chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 the atomic bomb dropped on nagasaki a provincial capital and naval base in southern japan on august 9 1945 virtually obliterated the city and killed about forty thousand people.
only buildings made with reinforced concrete remained standing after the blast.
japanese to observe a demonstration shot at a remote pacific site and even ruled out the idea of giving advance notice of the bombs destructive power.
neither truman nor stimson had any qualms about the decision to drop the bomb without warning.
they viewed it as a legitimate wartime measure one designed to save the lives of hundreds of thousands of americans and japanese that would be lost in a full scale invasion.
weather conditions on the morning of august 6 dictated the choice of hiroshima as the bombs target.
the explosion incinerated four square miles of the city instantly killing more than sixty thousand.
two days later russia entered the war against japan and the next day august 9 the united states dropped a second bomb on nagasaki.
there were no more atomic bombs available but no more were needed.
the emperor personally broke a deadlock in the japanese cabinet and persuaded his ministers to surrender unconditionally on august 14 1945.
three weeks later japan signed a formal capitulation agreement on the decks of the battleship missouri in tokyo bay to bring world war ii to its official close.
many years later scholars charged that truman had more in mind than defeating japan when he decided to use the atomic bomb.
citing air force and naval officers who claimed japan could be defeated by a blockade or by conventional air attacks these revisionists suggested the real reason for dropping the bomb was to impress the soviet union with the fact that the united states had exclusive possession of the ultimate weapon.
the available evidence indicates that while truman and his associates were aware of the possible effect on the soviet union their primary motive was to end world war ii as quickly and effortlessly as possible.
the saving of american lives along with a desire for revenge for pearl harbor were uppermost in the decision to bomb hiroshima and nagasaki.
yet in using the atomic bomb to defeat japan the united states virtually guaranteed a postwar arms race with the soviet union.
conclusion the transforming power of war the second great war of the twentieth century had a lasting impact on american life.
for the first time the nations military potential had been reached.
in 1945 the united states was unquestionably the strongest country on the earth with eleven million men and women in uniform a vast array of shipyards aircraft plants and munitions factories in full production and a monopoly over the atomic bomb.
for better or worse the nation was now launched on a global career.
in the future the united states would be involved in all parts of the world from western conclusion the transforming power of war europe to remote jungles in asia from the nearby caribbean to the distant persian gulf.
and despite its enormous strength in 1945 the nations new world role would encompass failure and frustration as well as power and dominion.
the legacy of war was equally strong at home.
four years of fighting brought about industrial recovery and unparalleled prosperity.
the old pattern of unregulated free enterprise was as much a victim of the war as of the new deal big government and huge deficits had now become the norm as economic control passed from new york and wall street to washington and pennsylvania avenue.
the war led to far reaching changes in american society that would become apparent only decades later.
such distinctive patterns of recent american life as the baby boom and the growth of the sunbelt can be traced back to wartime origins.
world war ii was a watershed in twentieth century america ushering in a new age of global concerns and domestic upheaval.
chapter 27 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 on myhistorylab time line 1922 washington naval conference limits tonnage 1928 kellogg briand pact outlaws war august clark memorandum repudiates roosevelt corollary december japan occupies chinas manchurian province fdr extends diplomatic recognition to ussr hitlers troops reoccupy rhineland fdr signs permanent neutrality act may fdr urges quarantine of aggressor nations october japanese planes sink uss panay in china december munich conference appeases hitler september 1939 germany invades poland world war ii begins 1941 germany invades ussr japan attacks pearl harbor united states enters world war ii u s defeats japanese at battle of midway june allies land in north africa november soviets smash nazis at stalingrad allies land on normandy beaches big three meet at yalta february fdr dies harry truman becomes president april germany surrenders unconditionally may united states drops atomic bombs on hiroshima and nagasaki japan surrenders august chapter review retreat reversal and rivalry turning the tide against the axis why were the united states and japan on a collision course in the years following world war i.
how did america and its allies halt the advances of germany and japan.
to sustain its developing industrial economy after world war i japan sought to dominate china and exploit its resources.
in response the united states either had to abandon china or forcefully oppose japans expansion there.
p 639 the united states formed an alliance with britain and the soviet union against germany and japan.
american and british forces fought the germans in north africa and italy while soviet forces beat back the germans in russia.
american ships and planes defeated japanese forces at the coral sea and midway.
p 647 isolationism the home front what were isolationism and why was it so appealing to americans in the 1920s and 1930s.
mongolia manchuku manchuria a how did american domestic life change during world war ii.
ug 1 disillusionment with the outcome of world war i led to a policy of isolationism by which americans hoped to avoid responsibility for the peace of europe and asia and to spare themselves the agony of war if peace failed.
isolationism had traditionally served americans well and many americans expected that it would continue to do so.
p 641 during the war american industry churned out equipment at a rate unimagined before 1941.
record numbers of women and minorities entered the workforce.
but 120 000 japanese americans were forced into concentration camps.
p 649 china kore nanking nagasak aug 9 1945 victory the road to war how did the united states go from neutrality in the 1930s to war in 1941.
fdr gradually led the united states from neutrality in the 1930s to war in 1941 responding to german and japanese aggression with careful political and diplomatic steps including aid to britain an undeclared naval war against germany and economic pressure on japan which lashed out by attacking pearl harbor.
p 644 how did the war end and what were its consequences.
the war in europe ended in may 1945 after allied and soviet forces overran germany.
the war in the pacific ended after the atomic bombing of hiroshima and nagasaki and left the united states in undisputed control of japan.
p 654 study resources key terms and definitions kellogg briand pact also called the pact of paris this 1928 agreement was the brainchild of u s secretary of state frank b kellogg and french premier aristide briand.
its signatories eventually including nearly all nations pledged to shun war as an instrument of policy.
it had little effect on the conduct of world affairs.
p 638 axis powers during world war ii the alliance between italy germany and japan was known as the rome berlin tokyo axis and the three members were called the axis powers.
they fought against the allied powers led by the united states britain and the soviet union.
p 642 neutrality acts laws in the 1930s that forbade selling munitions or lending money to belligerents.
the 1937 act required that all other trade with countries at war be conducted on a cash and carry basis.
p 642 lend lease in 1941 congress gave president franklin d roosevelt the authority to sell lend lease or transfer war materials to any country whose defense he declared vital to that of the united states.
p 644 pearl harbor on december 7 1941 japanese warplanes attacked the u s fleet at pearl harbor hawaii.
the attack marked americas entrance into world war ii.
p 647 d day june 6 1944 the day allied troops crossed the english channel and opened a second front in western europe during world war ii.
the d stands for disembarkation to leave a ship and go ashore.
p 654 yalta conference a wartime conference in february 1945 in which the allies agreed to final plans for the defeat of germany and the terms of its occupation.
the soviets agreed to allow free elections in poland but they were never held.
p 655 manhattan project the top secret world war ii program that produced the first atomic weapons.
p 657 holocaust the slaughter of six million jews and other persons by hitlers regime.
p 659 critical thinking questions 1.
how did the memory of world war i affect the american approach to world war ii.
what happened to the civil rights movement during the war.
was the atom bomb necessary to end the war.
why or why not.
how did franklin roosevelt aid britain prior to american entry into world war ii.
why did he have to be so careful in doing so.
what were some causes of tension within the american alliance during the war.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 27 on myhistorylab isolationism view the map the road to war read the document 1941 p 645 read the document a philip randolph why should we march 1942 p 652 world war ii in europe p 643 charles lindbergh radio address watch the video rosie the riveter p 651 view the closer look p 655 d day landing june 6 1944 watch the video the big three yalta conference p 657 the home front world war ii in the pacific p 650 japanese relocation victory view the closer look the japanese raid on pearl harbor december 7 1941 p 646 view the map read the document order p 653 complete the assignment holocaust p 658 indicates study plan media assignment the face of the the onset of the cold war contents and learning objectives the cold war begins pg.
666 eisenhower wages the cold war pg.
680 how did the cold war begin.
how successful was eisenhower at dealing with the foreign policy issues facing the united states.
containment pg.
668 what was containment and why was it adopted.
feature essay america enters the middle east the cold war expands pg.
671 how did the cold war expand from europe to asia.
the cold war at home pg.
674 how did the cold war affect life in america.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism the republicans split on a sunny spring morning in 1909 theodore roosevelt wearing the greatcoat of a colonel of the rough riders left new york for a safari in africa.
an ex president at the age of 50 he had turned over the white house to his chosen successor william howard taft and was now off for the joy of wandering through lonely lands the joy of hunting the mighty and terrible lords of africa where death broods in the dark and silent depths some of roosevelts enemies hoped he would not return.
i trust some lion will do its duty wall street magnate j p morgan said.
always prepared roosevelt took nine extra pairs of eyeglasses and just in case several expert hunters accompanied him.
when the nearsighted roosevelt took aim three others aimed at the same moment.
roosevelt had a fairly good idea of the general direction the safari leader said but we couldnt take chances with the life of a former president though he had built a reputation as an ardent conservationist roosevelt shot nine lions five elephants thirteen rhinoceroses seven hippopotamuses and assorted other game acquiring nearly three hundred trophies in all.
it was all good fun and afterward roosevelt set off on a tour of europe.
he attended the funeral of the king of england with the crowned heads of europe dined with the king and queen of italy an experience he likened to a jewish wedding on the east side of new york and happily spent five hours reviewing troops of the german empire.
less happily he followed events back home where in the judgment of many friends taft was not working out as president.
gifford pinchot roosevelts close companion in the conservation movement came to italy to complain personally about taft and at almost every stop there were letters waiting for him from other disappointed republicans.
for his part taft was puzzled by it all.
honest and warmhearted he had intended to continue roosevelts policies even writing roosevelt that he would see to it that your judgment in selecting me as your successor and bringing about that succession shall be vindicated but events turned out differently.
the conservative and progressive wings of the republican party split and taft often sided with the conservatives.
among progressive republicans tafts troubles stirred talk of a roosevelt back from elba movement akin to napoleons return from exile.
thousands gathered to greet roosevelt on his return from europe.
he sailed into new york harbor on june 18 1910 to the sound of naval guns and loud cheers.
a 1910 puck cartoon shows taft snarled in the intricacies of office as his disappointed mentor looks on.
in characteristic fashion he had helped make the arrangements if there is to be a great crowd do arrange it so that the whole crowd has a chance to see me and that there is as little disappointment as possible greeting pinchot one of tafts leading opponents with a hearty hello gifford roosevelt slipped away to his home in oyster bay new york where other friends awaited him.
he carried with him a touching letter from taft received just before he left europe.
i have had a hard time i do not know that i have had harder luck than other presidents but i do know that thus far i have succeeded far less than have others.
i have been conscientiously trying to carry out your policies but my method of doing so has not worked smoothly taft invited teddy to spend a night or two at the white house but roosevelt declined saying that ex presidents should not visit washington.
relations between the two friends cooled.
it is hard very hard taft said in 1911 to see a devoted friendship going to pieces like a rope of sand new party the progressive or bull moose party to unseat taft and capture the white house.
with taft roosevelt woodrow wilson the democratic partys candidate and socialist party candidate eugene v debs all in the race the election of 1912 became one of the most exciting in american history.
it was also one of the most important.
people were worried about the social and economic effects of urban industrial growth.
the election of 1912 provided a forum for those worries and to a degree unusual in american politics it pitted deeply opposed candidates against one another and outlined differing views of the nations future.
in the spirited battle between roosevelt and wilson it also brought to the forefront some of the currents of progressive reform.
those currents built on a number of important developments including the rise of a new professional class reform movements designed to cure problems in the cities and states and the activist achievement oriented administrations of roosevelt and wilson.
together they produced the age of progressivism.
year later there was no longer thought of friendship only a desperate fight between taft and roosevelt for the republican presidential nomination.
taft won the nomination but angry and ambitious roosevelt bolted and helped form a in one way or another progressivism touched all aspects of society.
politically it fostered a reform movement that sought cures for the problems of city state and nation.
intellectually it drew on the expertise of the new social sciences and reflected a a the spirit of progressivism what were the six major characteristics of progressivism.
chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism shift from older absolutes such as religion to newer schools of thought that emphasized relativism and the role of the environment in human development.
culturally it inspired fresh modes of expression in dance film painting literature and architecture.
touching individuals in different ways progressivism became a set of attitudes as well as a definable movement.
though broad and diverse progressivism as a whole had a half dozen characteristics that gave it definition.
first the progressives acted out of concern about the effects of industrialization and the conditions of industrial life.
while their viewpoints varied they did not as a rule set out to harm big business but instead sought to humanize and regulate it.
in pursuing these objectives the progressives displayed a second characteristic a fundamental optimism about human nature the possibilities of progress and the capacity of people to recognize problems and take action to solve them.
progressives believed they could investigate educate and legislate learn about a problem inform people about it and with the help of an informed public find and enforce a solution.
third more than many earlier reformers the progressives were willing to intervene in peoples lives confident that it was their right to do so.
they knew best some of them thought and as a result there was an element of coercion in a number of their ideas.
fourth while progressives preferred if possible to use voluntary means to achieve reform they tended to turn more and more to the authority of the state and government at all levels in order to put into effect the reforms they wanted.
as a fifth characteristic many progressives drew on a combination of evangelical protestantism which gave them the desire and they thought the duty to purge the world of sins such as prostitution and drunkenness and the natural and social sciences whose theories made them confident that they could understand and control the environment in which people lived.
progressives tended to view the environment as a key to reform thinking in the way some economists sociologists and other social scientists were suggesting that if they could change the environment they could change the individual.
finally progressivism was distinctive because it touched virtually the whole nation.
not everyone of course was a progressive and there were many who opposed or ignored the ideas of the movement.
there were also those who were untouched by progressive reforms and those whom the movement overlooked.
but in one way or another a remarkable number of people were caught up in it giving progressivism a national reach and a mass base.
that was one of the features in fact that set it off from populism which had grown mostly in the rural south and west.
progressivism drew support from across society.
the thing that constantly amazed me said william allen white a leading progressive journalist was how many people were with us progressivism appealed to the expanding middle class prosperous farmers and skilled laborers it also attracted significant support in the business community.
the progressives believed in progress and disliked waste.
no single issue or concern united them all.
some progressives wanted to clean up city governments others to clean up city streets.
some wanted to purify politics or control corporate abuses others to eradicate poverty or prostitution.
some demanded social justice in the form of womens rights child labor laws temperance and factory safety.
they were democrats republicans socialists and independents.
read the document lincoln steffens from the shame of the cities 1904 lincoln steffens was among the best known of the muckraking journalists.
his famous book the shame of the cities was a collection of articles on municipal corruption that he wrote for mcclure s magazine in 1902 and 1903.
in his articles he reflected the disgust that reformers felt for political machines and their methods.
progressives believed in a better world and in the ability of people to achieve it.
they paid to people as a friend said of social reformer florence kelley the high compliment of believing that once they knew the truth they would act upon it progress depended on knowledge.
the progressives emphasized individual morality and collective action the scientific method and the value of expert opinion.
like contemporary business leaders they valued system planning management and predictability.
they wanted not only reform but efficiency.
in the introduction to the shame of the cities steffens said that the cure for american ills lay in good conduct in the individual simple honesty courage and efficiency historians once viewed progressivism as the triumph of one group in society over another.
in this view farmers took on the hated and powerful railroads upstart reformers challenged the city bosses business interests fought for favorable legislation youthful professionals carved out their place in society.
now the spirit of progressivism historians emphasize the way progressivism brought people together rather than drove them apart.
disparate groups united in an effort to improve the well being of many groups in society.
the rise of the professions progressivism fed on an organizational impulse that encouraged people to join forces share information and solve problems.
between 1890 and 1920 a host of national societies and associations took shape nearly four hundred of them in just three decades.
groups such as the national child labor committee which lobbied for legislation to regulate the employment and working conditions of children were formed to attack specific issues.
other groups reflected one of the most significant developments in american society at the turn of the century the rise of the professions.
growing rapidly in these years the professions law medicine religion business teaching and social work were the source of much of the leadership of the progressive movement.
the professions attracted young educated men and women who in turn were part of a larger trend a dramatic increase in the number of individuals working in administrative and professional jobs.
in businesses these people were managers architects technicians and accountants.
in city governments they were experts in everything from education to sanitation.
they organized and ran the urban industrial society.
these professionals formed part of a new middle class whose members did not derive their status from birth or inherited wealth as had many members of the older middle class.
instead they moved ahead through education and personal accomplishment and worked to become doctors lawyers ministers and teachers.
proud of their skills they were ambitious and self confident and they thought of themselves as experts who could use their knowledge for the benefit of society.
see the feature essay madam c j walker african american business pioneer pp.
as a way of asserting their status they formed professional societies to look after their interests and govern entry into their professions.
just a few years before for example a doctor had become a doctor simply by stocking up on patent medicines and hanging out a sign.
now doctors began to insist they were part of a medical profession and they wanted to set educational requirements and minimum standards for practice.
in 1901 they reorganized the american medical association ama and made it into a modern national professional society.
the ama had 8 400 members that year.
a decade later it had more than 70 000 and by 1920 nearly two thirds of all doctors belonged.
other groups and professions showed the same pattern.
lawyers formed bar associations created examining boards and lobbied for regulations restricting entry into the profession.
teachers organized the national education association 1905 and pressed for teacher certification and compulsory education laws.
social workers formed the national federation of settlements 1911 business leaders created the national association of manufacturers 1895 and the u s chamber of commerce 1912 and farmers joined the national farm bureau federation to spread information about farming and to try to improve their lot.
working both as individuals and groups members of the professions had a major effect on the era as the career of one of them dr alice hamilton illustrated.
hamilton early decided to devote her life to helping the less fortunate.
choosing medicine she went to the university of michigan medical school one of a shrinking number of medical schools that admitted women and then settled in chicago where she met jane addams and took a room in hull house.
soon thereafter she traced a local typhoid epidemic to flies carrying germs from open privies.
the study won national acclaim but hamilton had already turned her attention to the work related illnesses she found everywhere around hull house.
combining field study with meticulous laboratory techniques she pioneered research into the causes of lead poisoning and other industrial disease.
in 1908 the governor of illinois appointed her to a commission on occupational diseases two years later she headed a statewide survey of industrial poisons.
thanks to her work in 1911 illinois passed the first state law providing compensation for industrial disease caused by poisonous fumes and dust.
by the end of the 1930s all the major industrial states had such laws.
one of the new professionals hamilton had used her education and skill to broaden knowledge of her subject change industrial practices and improve the lives of countless workers.
for me she said later in a comment characteristic of the progressives the satisfaction is that things are better now and i had some part in it the social justice movement as alice hamiltons career exemplified progressivism began in the cities during the 1890s.
it first took form around settlement workers and others interested in freeing individuals from the crushing impact of cities and factories.
ministers intellectuals social workers and lawyers joined in a social justice movement that focused national attention on the need for tenement house laws more stringent child labor legislation and better working conditions for women.
they brought pressure on municipal agencies for more and better parks playgrounds day nurseries schools and community services.
blending private and public action settlement leaders turned increasingly to government aid.
private beneficence jane addams said is totally inadequate to deal with the vast numbers of the citys disinherited social justice reformers were more interested in social cures than individual charity.
unlike earlier reformers they saw problems as endless and interrelated individuals became part of a citys larger patterns.
with that insight social service casework shifted from a focus on an individuals well being to a scientific analysis of neighborhoods occupations and classes.
in the spring of 1900 the charity organization society of new york held a tenement house exhibition that graphically presented the new kind of sociological data.
put together by lawrence veiller a young social worker the exhibition included more than a thousand photographs detailed maps of slum districts statistical tables and charts and graphic cardboard depictions of tenement blocks.
never before had so much information been pulled together in one place.
veiller correlated data on poverty and disease with housing conditions and he pointed out that new slums were springing up in more areas of the city.
stirred by the public outcry governor theodore roosevelt appointed the new york state tenement house commission to do something about the problem.
with veillers success as a model study after study analyzed the condition of the poor.
books and pamphlets such as the standard of living among working mens families in new york city 1909 contained pages of data on family budgets womens wages and working chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism conditions child labor and other matters.
between 1910 and 1913 the u s commissioner of labor issued a massive nineteen volume report on conditions of women and children wage earners in the united states.
social justice reformers banding together to work for change formed the national conference of charities and corrections which in 1915 became the national conference of social work.
controlled by social workers the conference reflected the growing professionalization of reform.
through it social workers discovered each others efforts shared methodology and tried to establish themselves as a separate field within the social sciences.
once content with informal training sessions in a settlement house living room they now founded complete professional schools at chicago harvard and other universities.
after 1909 they had their own professional magazine the survey and instead of piecemeal reforms they aimed at a comprehensive program of minimum wages maximum hours workers compensation and widows pensions.
than at any other time until the 1960s.
some working class women pushed for higher wages and better working conditions.
collegeeducated women five thousand a year graduated after 1900 took up careers in the professions from which some of them supported reform.
from 1890 to 1910 the work of a number of national womens organizations including the national council of jewish women the national congress of mothers and the womens trade union league furthered the aims of the progressive movement.
excluded from most of these organizations african american women formed their own groups.
the national association of read the document report of the vice commission 1915 the purity crusade working in city neighborhoods social justice reformers were often struck by the degree to which alcohol affected the lives of the people they were trying to help.
workers drank away their wages some men spent more time at the saloon than at home.
drunkenness caused violence and it angered employers who did not want intoxicated workers on the job.
in countless ways alcohol wasted human resources the reformers believed and along with business leaders ministers and others they launched a crusade to remove the evils of drink from american life.
at the head of the crusade was the womens christian temperance union wctu which had continued to grow since it was founded in the 1870s.
by 1911 the wctu had nearly a quarter of a million members it was the largest organization of women in american history to that time.
in 1893 it was joined by the anti saloon league and together the groups pressed to abolish alcohol and the places where it was consumed.
by 1916 they had succeeded in nineteen states but as drinking continued elsewhere they pushed for a nationwide law.
in the midst of the moral fervor of world war i they succeeded and the eighteenth amendment to the constitution prohibiting the manufacture sale and transportation of intoxicating liquors took effect in january 1920.
the amendment encountered troubles later in the 1920s as the social atmosphere changed but at the time it passed progressives thought prohibition was a major step toward eliminating social instability and moral wrong.
in a similar fashion some progressive reformers also worked to get rid of prostitution convinced that poverty and ignorance drove women to the trade.
by 1915 nearly every state had banned brothels and in 1910 congress passed the mann act which prohibited the interstate transportation of women for immoral purposes.
like the campaign against liquor the campaign against prostitution reflected the eras desire to purify and elevate often through the instrument of government action.
woman suffrage womens rights women played a large role in the social justice movement.
feminists were particularly active especially in the political sphere between 1890 and 1914 feminists were more active then in fact during the first two decades of the twentieth century progressive reformers set out to improve society.
one strategy they employed was eradicating vice.
termed vice crusaders these reformers attempted to stamp out prostitution especially in large cities as well as homosexuality.
the pinnacle of the anti vice movement was the passage of the mann act of 1910 which made it illegal to transport women across state lines for immoral purposes the spirit of progressivism view the map changing lives of american women 1880 1930 canada 1916 helena mt.
jeanette rankin is elected the first woman to the u s house of representatives.
washington 1910 columbia r montana 1914 north dakota ke superior la minnesota 1908 salem or.
miller v state of oregon u s supreme court upholds oregons 10 hour work day for women.
do r kansas ka ansas 1912 1 1912 arkan sa c indiana o missouri delaware west virginia.
maryland virginia pacific ocean red r arkansas 1892 memphis tn.
journalist ida b.
wells launches an anti lynching campaign.
mississippi alabama bra south carolina sr.
400 mi 400 km 1839 jackson ms first married womens property act passed granting married women ownership over limited property.
rio an gr 4 24 de number of children per woman florida louisiana fertility rate by race atlantic ocean georgia zo texas north carolina tennessee siss mis rio grand e oklahoma 1918 ippi new mexico r kentucky 1932 little rock ar.
hattie wyatt caraway is the first woman elected to the u s senate.
arizona 1912 non white mexico gulf of mexico 3 56 3 87 3 56 3 42 2 73 3 22 2 62 2 51 2 18 white 1916 brooklyn ny.
margaret sanger opens first u s birth control clinic.
ohio r hio s r california 1911 nj pennsylvania 1889 889 ch chicago il.
jane addams establishes establi ablishe hull house.
colorado 1893 ra o ol property act passed granting married women legal right to own property in their own name.
iowa io 1894 denver co first u s women omen me elected to state house of representatives.
esentatives.
entatives utah 1870 r ri r lake michiga mis sou nebraska vermont new new hampshire york o mich ontari 1917.
l 1918 massachusetts conn ri 1848 albany ny.
model married womens uron i ipp nevada 1914 south dakota 1918 wyoming 1869 great salt lake mi ss eh ak idaho 1896 r snake n l wisconsin iss oregon 1912 maine 1848 seneca falls ny.
women gather for convention to organize womens rights.
percentage of total women working by race or nativity 1890 nonwhite 52 37 white 21 5 foreign born 26 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 percentage of women working 1900 single 89 married 11 percentage of women in the workforce 1900 less than 10 10 20 20 30 more than 40 1918 date womens suffrage legislation was passed states which never ratified the 19th amendment in 1920 wyoming was the first of several western states to grant women the right to vote however in most eastern states women s suffrage came only with the passage of the nineteenth amendment in 1920.
the number of women in the workforce grew steadily to 18 percent by 1900 a figure that reflects an emphasis on industrial workers and ignores workers more informally employed in agricultural and domestic occupations.
colored women was founded in 1895 fourteen years before the better known male oriented national association for the advancement of colored people naacp.
aimed at social welfare the womens organization was the first african american social service agency in the country.
at the local level african american womens clubs established kindergartens day nurseries playgrounds and retirement homes.
from two hundred thousand members in 1900 the general federation of womens clubs grew to more than one million by 1912.
the clubs met as they had before for coffee and literary conversation but they also began to look closely at conditions around them.
forming an industrial section and a committee on legislation for women and children the federation supported reforms to safeguard child and women workers improve schools ensure pure food and beautify the community.
reluctant at first the federation finally lent support in 1914 to woman suffrage a cause that dated back to the first womens rights convention in seneca falls new york in 1848.
divided over tactics since the civil war the suffrage movement suffered from disunity male opposition indecision over whether to seek action at the state or at the national level resistance from the catholic church and opposition from liquor interests who linked the cause to prohibition.
women in the social justice movement needed to influence elected officials most of them men whom they could not reach chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism laws to protect workers and other reforms.
this argument attracted read the document national american woman suffrage association many progressives who believed mothers day letter the womens vote would purify politics.
in 1918 the house passed a constitutional amendment stating simply that the right to vote shall not be denied on account of sex the senate and enough states followed and after three generations of suffragist efforts the nineteenth amendment took effect in 1920.
the social justice movement had the most success in passing state laws limiting the working hours of women.
by 1913 thirty nine states set maximum working hours for women or banned the employment of women at night.
illinois had a ten hour law california and washington had eight hour laws.
wisconsin oregon and kansas allowed expert commissions to set different hours depending on the degree of strain in various occupations.
as early as 1900 thanks to groups such as the national child labor committee twenty eight states had laws regulating child the national american woman suffrage association nawsa was formed in 1890 from the merger of labor.
but the courts often ruled two organizations founded by elizabeth cady stanton and susan b anthony respectively in 1869.
under against such laws and families the leadership of carrie chapman catt membership in the organization rose to 2 million.
catt s organization needing extra income sometimes was relatively mainstream especially in contrast to the militant national woman s party which adopted ignored them.
parents sent children radical tactics including hunger strikes demonstrations and pickets.
off to jobs with orders to lie about their ages.
through the vote.
because politics was an avenue for reform growing in 1916 president woodrow wilson backed a law to limit child numbers of women activists became involved in the suffrage movelabor the keating owen act but in hammer v dagenhart 1918 ment.
after years of disagreement the two major suffrage organizathe supreme court overturned it as an improper regulation of local tions the national woman suffrage association and the american labor conditions.
in 1919 congress tried again in the second child woman suffrage association merged in 1890 to form the national labor act but in bailey v drexel furniture company 1922 the legamerican woman suffrage association.
the merger opened a islation was again struck down.
not until the 1930s did congress new phase of the suffrage movement characterized by unity and a succeed in passing a court supported national child labor law.
tightly controlled national organization.
in 1900 carrie chapman catt a superb organizer became a ferment of ideas challenging president of the national american woman suffrage association the status quo which by 1920 had nearly two million members.
catt and anna howard shaw who became the associations head in 1904 believed a dramatic shift in ideas became one of the most important forces in organization and peaceful lobbying to win the vote.
alice paul behind progressive reform.
most of the ideas focused on the role of and lucy burns founders of the congressional union were more the environment in shaping human behavior.
progressive reformmilitant they interrupted public meetings focused on congress ers accepted societys growing complexity called for factual treatrather than the states and in 1917 picketed the white house.
ment of piecemeal problems allowed room for new theories and significantly catt paul and others made a major change in above all rejected age encrusted divine or natural laws in favor the argument for woman suffrage.
when the campaign began in of thoughts and actions that worked.
the nineteenth century suffragists had claimed the vote as a nata new doctrine called pragmatism emerged in this ferment ural right owed to women as much as men.
now they emphaof ideas.
it came from william james a brilliant harvard psycholosized a pragmatic argument since women were more sensitive to gist who became the key figure in american thought from the 1890s moral issues than men they would use their votes to help create a to world war i.
a warm tolerant person james was impatient with better society.
they would support temperance clean government theories that regarded truth as abstract.
truth he believed should the spirit of progressivism rejecting the older view of the law as universal and unchanging lawyers and legal theorists instead viewed read the document eugene v debs from the outlook for it as a reflection of the environment an instrument socialism in america 1900 for social change.
law reflected the environment that shaped it.
a movement grew among judges for sociological jurisprudence that related the law to social reform instead of only to legal precedent a shift most evident in the famed brandeis brief presented in the case of muller v oregon that came before the supreme court in 1908.
in denver colorado after judge ben lindsey sentenced a boy to reform school for stealing coal the boys mother rushed forward and grief stricken beat her head against the wall.
lindsey investigated the case and found that the father was a smelting worker dying of lead poisoning the family needed coal for heat.
from such experiences lindsey concluded that children were not born with a genetic tendency to crime they were made good or bad by the environment in which they grew.
lindsey sentenced youthful offenders to education and good care.
he worked for playgrounds slum clearance public baths and technical schools.
known as the kids judge he attracted visitors from as far away as japan who presidential campaign poster for eugene v debs on the socialist party of america ticket in 1904 wanted to study and copy his methods.
the posters imagery appeals to industrial workers miners and farmers and its slogan workers socialism a reformist political philosophy grew of the world unite was a key call to action of the party to challenge the injustices of capitalism.
dramatically before world war i.
socialist political parties composed of followers of karl marx first work for the individual and it worked best not in abstraction but appeared in new york chicago milwaukee and other cities after in action.
true ideas are those we can assimilate validate corrobothe civil war.
they urged workers to join a worldwide revolution rate and verify.
false ideas are those we cannot to overthrow capitalism.
such public appeals however drew little people james thought not only were shaped by their environsupport.
leaders of a new socialist labor party founded in 1877 ment they shaped it.
in pragmatism 1907 he praised toughtried in secret to gain control of important labor unions.
that minded individuals who could live effectively in a world with strategy also failed.
no easy answers.
the tough minded accepted change they knew daniel de leon a brilliant tactician took over leadership of how to pick manageable problems gather facts discard ideas that the socialist labor party during the 1890s but he too lacked mass did not work and act on those that did.
ideas that worked became support.
arguing for a more moderate form of socialism eugene truth.
what is the cash value of a thought idea or belief james v debs president of the american railway union in 1896 formed asked.
does it work.
does it make a difference to the individa rival organization the social democratic party.
gentle and reflecual who experiences it.
the ultimate test for us of what a truth tive not at all the popular image of the wild eyed radical debs was means said james is the conduct it dictates thrust into prominence by the pullman strike.
in 1901 persuading the most influential educator of the progressive era john opponents of de leon to join him he formed the socialist party of dewey applied pragmatism to educational reform.
a friend and disamerica.
neither debs nor the party ever developed a cohesive platciple of william james he argued that thought evolves in relation form nor was debs an effective organizer.
but he was eloquent pasto the environment and that education is directly related to expesionate and visionary.
an excellent speaker he captivated audiences rience.
in 1896 dewey founded a separate school of pedagogy at attacking the injustices of capitalism and urging a workers republic.
the university of chicago with a laboratory in which educational the socialist party of america enlisted some intellectuals theory based on the newer philosophical and psychological studies factory workers disillusioned populists tenant farmers miners could be tested and practiced.
and lumberjacks.
by 1911 there were socialist mayors in thirty two dewey introduced an educational revolution that emphasized cities including berkeley california butte montana and flint childrens needs and capabilities.
he described his beliefs and methmichigan.
although its doctrines were aimed at an urban proleods in a number of books notably school and society 1899 and tariat the socialist party drew support in rural texas missouri democracy and education 1916.
new ideas in education he said arkansas idaho and washington.
in oklahoma it attracted as are as much a product of the changed social situation and as much much as one third of the vote.
an effort to meet the needs of the society that is forming as are although torn by factions the socialist party doubled in changes in modes of industry and commerce he opposed memomembership between 1904 and 1908 then tripled in the four years rization rote learning and dogmatic authoritarian teaching methafter that.
running for president debs garnered 100 000 votes in ods he emphasized personal growth free inquiry and creativity.
1900 400 000 in 1904 and 900 000 in 1912 the partys peak year.
chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism reform in the cities and states what methods did progressive reformers use to attack problems in the cities and states.
progressive reformers realized government could be a crucial agent in accomplishing their goals.
they wanted to curb the influence of special interests and through such measures of political reform as the direct primary and the direct election of senators make government follow the public will.
once it did they welcomed government action at whatever level was appropriate.
as a result of this thinking the use of federal power increased as did the power and prestige of the presidency.
progressives not only lobbied for government sponsored reform but also worked actively in their home neighborhoods cities and states much of the significant change occurred in local settings outside the national limelight.
most important the progressives believed in the ability of experts to solve problems.
at every level local state and federal thousands of commissions and agencies took form.
staffed by trained experts they oversaw a multitude of matters ranging from railroad rates to public health.
voter participation in presidential elections 1876 1920 percentage 81 8 79 4 79 3 79 3 73 2 77 5 74 7 65 4 61 6 65 2 58 8 49 2 interest groups and the decline of popular politics placing government in the hands of experts was one way to get it out of the hands of politicians and political parties.
the direct primary which allowed voters rather than parties to choose candidates for office was another way.
these initiatives and others like them were part of a fundamental change in the way americans viewed their political system.
as one sign of the change fewer and fewer people were going to the polls.
voter turnout dropped dramatically after 1900 when the intense partisanship of the decades after the civil war gave way to media oriented political campaigns based largely on the personalities of the candidates.
from 1876 to 1900 the average turnout in presidential elections was 77 percent.
from 1900 to 1916 it was 65 percent and in the 1920s it dropped to 52 percent close to the average today.
turnout was lowest among young people immigrants the poor and ironically the newly enfranchised women.
it was particularly low in the south where conservative whites used restrictive election laws to keep blacks and others from the polls.
turnout in the south fell sharply from an average of 64 percent in the presidential elections of the 1880s to just 20 percent in 1920 and 1924.
although the decline in the north was less sharp the reasons for it were more complex.
by the 1920s as many as onequarter of all eligible northern voters never cast a ballot.
there were numerous causes for the falloff but among the most important was the fact that people had found another way to achieve some of the objectives they had once assigned to political parties.
they had found the interest group a means of action that assumed importance in this era and became a major feature of politics ever after.
professional societies trade associations labor organizations farm lobbies and scores of other interest groups worked outside the party system to pressure government for things their members wanted.
social workers womens clubs reform groups and others learned to apply pressure in similar ways and the result was much of the significant legislation of the progressive era.
1876 1880 1884 1888 1892 1896 1900 1904 1908 1912 1916 1920 reform in the cities during the early years of the twentieth century urban reform movements many of them born in the depression of the 1890s spread across the nation.
in 1894 the national municipal league was organized and it became the forum for debate over civic reform changes in the tax laws and municipal ownership of public utilities.
within a few years nearly every city had a variety of clubs and organizations directed at improving the quality of city life.
in the 1880s reformers would call an evening conference pass resolutions and then go home after 1900 they formed associations adopted long range policies and hired a staff to achieve them.
in the mid 1890s only chicago had an urban reform league with a full time paid executive within a decade there were such leagues in every major city.
in city after city reformers reordered municipal government.
tightening controls on corporate activities they broadened the scope of utility regulation and restricted city franchises.
they updated tax assessments often skewed in favor of corporations and tried to clean up the electoral machinery.
devoted to efficiency they developed a trained civil service to oversee planning and operations.
the generation of the 1880s also had believed in civil service but the goal then was mostly negative to get spoilsmen out and good people in.
now the goal was efficiency and above all results.
in constructing their model governments urban reformers often turned to recent advances in business management and organization.
they emphasized continuity and expertise a system in which professional experts staffed a government overseen by elected officials.
at the top the elected leader surveyed the breadth of city reform in the cities and states state or national affairs and defined directions.
below a corps of experts trained in the various disciplines of the new society funneled the definition into specific scientifically based policies.
reformers created a growing number of regulatory commissions and municipal departments.
they hired engineers to oversee utility and water systems physicians and nurses to improve municipal health and city planners to oversee park and highway development.
they created specialized academies to train police and firefighters.
imitated by the state and federal governments the proliferation of experts and commissions widened the gap between voters and decision makers but dramatically improved the efficiency of government.
as cities exploded in size they freed themselves from the tight controls of state legislatures and began to experiment with their own governments.
struggling to recover from a devastating hurricane in 1900 galveston texas pioneered the commission form of government a form of municipal government in which commissions of appointed experts rather than elected officials ran the city.
wanting nonpartisan expertise staunton virginia was the first to hire a city manager.
other cities followed and by 1910 more than one hundred cities were using either the commission or manager type of government.
in the race for reform a number of city mayors won national reputations among them seth low in new york city and hazen s pingree in detroit working to modernize taxes clean up politics lower utility rates and control the awarding of valuable city franchises.
in toledo ohio mayor samuel m golden rule jones a wealthy manufacturer took billy clubs away from the police established free kindergartens playgrounds and night schools and improved wages for city workers.
in cleveland ohio tom l johnson demonstrated an innovative approach to city government.
a millionaire who had made his fortune manipulating city franchises johnson one day read henry georges progress and poverty and turned to reform.
elected mayor of cleveland he served from 1901 to 1909 and collected a group of aggressive and talented young advisers.
frederic c howe newton d baker and edward bemis all of whom later won national reputations shaped johnsons ideas on taxes prison reform utility regulation and other issues facing the city.
johnson combined shrewdness and showmanship.
believing in an informed citizenry he held outdoor meetings in huge tents.
he used colorful charts to give cleveland residents a course in utilities and taxation.
he cut down on corruption cut off special privilege updated taxes and gave cleveland a reputation as the countrys best governed city.
finding it difficult to regulate powerful city utilities and keep their costs down johnson and mayors in other cities turned more and more to public ownership of gas electricity water and transportation.
the idea of gas and water socialism in which cities owned their own gas electricity water and other utilities spread swiftly.
in 1896 fewer than half of american cities owned their own waterworks by 1915 almost two thirds did.
action in the states reformers soon discovered however that many problems lay beyond a citys boundaries and they turned for action to the state governments.
from the 1890s to 1920 reformers worked to stiffen state laws regulating the labor of women and children to create and strengthen commissions to regulate railroads and utilities to impose corporate and inheritance taxes to improve mental and penal institutions and to allocate more funds for state universities which were viewed as the training ground for the experts and educated citizenry needed for the new society.
maryland passed the first workers compensation law in 1902 soon most industrial states had such legislation.
after 1900 many states adopted factory inspection laws and by 1916 almost two thirds of the states mandated insurance for the victims of factory accidents.
by 1914 twenty five states had enacted employers liability laws.
to regulate business virtually every state created regulatory commissions empowered to examine corporate books and hold public hearings.
building on earlier experience state commissions after 1900 were given new power to initiate actions rather than await complaints and in some cases to set maximum prices and rates.
dictating company practices they pioneered regulatory methods later adopted in federal legislation of 1906 and 1910.
some business leaders supported the federal laws in order to get rid of the intolerable supervision of dozens of separate state commissions.
historians have long praised the regulation movement but the commissions did not always act wisely or even in the public interest.
elective commissions often produced commissioners who had little knowledge of corporate affairs.
in addition to win an election some promised specific rates or reforms obligations that might bias the commissions investigative functions.
appointive commissions sometimes fared better but they too had to oversee extraordinarily complex businesses such as the railroads.
shaping everything from wages to train schedules the regulatory commissions affected railroad profits and growth negatively and in the end damaged the railroad industry.
to the progressives commissions offered a way to end the corrupt alliance between business and politics.
there was another way too and that was to democratize government by reducing the power of politicians and increasing the influence of the electorate.
to do that progressives backed three measures to make office holders responsive to popular will the initiative which allowed voters to propose new laws the referendum which allowed them to accept or reject a law at the ballot box and the recall which gave them a way to remove an elected official from office.
oregon adopted the initiative and referendum in 1902 by 1912 twelve states had them.
that year congress added the seventeenth amendment to the constitution to provide for the direct election of u s senators.
by 1916 all but three states had direct primaries which allowed the people rather than nominating conventions to choose candidates for office.
as attention shifted from the cities to the states reform governors throughout the country earned greater visibility.
joseph folk steffenss hero in st louis became the governor of missouri in 1904.
hiram johnson won fame in california for his shrewd and forceful campaign against the southern pacific railroad.
in the east the cause of reform was upheld by charles evans hughes in new york and woodrow wilson the former president of princeton university in new jersey.
robert m la follette became the most famous reform governor.
a graduate of the university of wisconsin la follette served three terms in congress during the late 1880s.
a staunch republican he supported the tariff and other republican doctrines but the democratic landslide of 1890 turned him out of office.
moving to state politics he became interested in reform chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism spurred in part as so many were by the depression of the 1890s.
in 1901 he became governor of wisconsin.
then forty five years old la follette was talented aggressive and a superb stump speaker.
in the following six years he put together the wisconsin idea one of the most important reform programs in the history of state government.
he established an industrial commission the first in the country to regulate factory safety and sanitation.
he improved education workers compensation public utility controls and resource conservation.
he lowered railroad rates and raised railroad taxes.
under la follettes prodding wisconsin became the first state to adopt a direct primary for all political nominations.
it also became the first to adopt a state income tax.
like other progressives la follette drew on expert advice and relied on academic figures such as richard ely and edward ross at the university of wisconsin.
la follette supporters established the first legislative reference bureau in the universitys library the bureau stocked the governor and his allies with facts and figures to support the measures they wanted.
theodore roosevelt called la follettes wisconsin the laboratory of democracy and the wisconsin idea soon spread to many other states including new york california michigan iowa and texas.
after 1905 the progressives looked more and more to washington.
for one thing teddy roosevelt was there with his zest for publicity and his alluring grin.
progressives also had a growing sense that many concerns corporations and conservation factory safety and child labor crossed state lines.
federal action seemed desirable specific reforms fit into a larger plan perhaps best seen from the nations center.
within a few years la follette and hiram johnson became senators and while reform went on back home the focus of progressivism shifted to washington.
read the document theodore roosevelt from the strenuous life 1900 the republican roosevelt how would you describe the personality and programs of theodore roosevelt.
when president william mckinley died of gunshot wounds in september 1901 vice president theodore roosevelt succeeded him in the white house.
the new president initially vowed to carry on mckinleys policies.
he continued some developed others of his own and in the end brought to them all the particular exuberance of his own personality.
at age forty two roosevelt was then the youngest president in american history.
in contrast to the dignified mckinley he was open aggressive and high spirited.
at his desk by 8 30 every morning he worked through the day usually with visitors for breakfast lunch and dinner.
politicians labor leaders industrialists poets artists and writers paraded through the white house.
if mckinley cut down on presidential isolation roosevelt virtually ended it.
the presidency he thought was the bully pulpit a forum of ideas and leadership for the nation.
the president was a steward of the people bound actively and affirmatively to do all he could for the people self confident roosevelt enlisted talented associates including elihu root secretary of war and later secretary of state william howard taft secretary of war gifford pinchot the nations chief forester and leading conservationist and oliver wendell holmes jr whom he named to the supreme court.
this photograph of tr theodore roosevelt captures key parts of his personality exuberant jovial expansive self confident personally warm outgoing aggressive spirited and friendly.
these characteristics among others are important because they shaped his presidency between 1901 and 1909.
in 1901 roosevelt invited booker t washington the prominent african american educator to dinner at the white house.
many southerners protested a crime equal to treason a newspaper said and they protested again when roosevelt appointed several african americans to important federal offices in south carolina and mississippi.
at first roosevelt considered building a biracial black and tan southern republican party thinking it would foster racial progress and his own renomination in 1904.
he denounced lynching and ordered the justice department to act against peonage.
but roosevelt soon retreated.
in some areas of the south he supported lily white republican organizations and his policies often reflected his own belief in african american inferiority.
he said nothing when a race riot broke out in atlanta in 1906 although twelve persons died.
he joined others in blaming african american soldiers stationed near brownsville texas after a night of violence there in august 1906.
acting quickly and on little evidence he discharged without honor three companies of african american troops.
six of the soldiers who were discharged held the congressional medal of honor.
the republican roosevelt busting the trusts there is a widespread conviction in the minds of the american people that the great corporations known as trusts are in certain of their features and tendencies hurtful to the general welfare roosevelt reported to congress in 1901.
like most people however the president wavered on the trusts.
large scale production and industrial growth he believed were natural and beneficial they needed only to be controlled.
still he distrusted the trusts impact on local enterprise and individual opportunity.
distinguishing between good and bad trusts he pledged to protect the former while controlling the latter.
at first roosevelt hoped the combination of investigative journalism and public opinion would be enough to uncover and correct business evils and in public he both praised and attacked the trusts.
mr dooley poked fun at his wavering th trusts says he are heejous monsthers built up be th enlightened intherprise iv th men that have done so much to advance progress in our beloved country he says.
on wan hand i wud stamp thim undher fut on th other hand not so fast in 1903 roosevelt asked congress to create a department of commerce and labor with a bureau of corporations empowered to investigate corporations engaged in interstate commerce.
congress balked roosevelt called in reporters and in an offthe record interview charged that john d rockefeller had organized the opposition to the measure.
the press spread the word and in the outcry that followed the proposal passed easily in a matter of weeks.
roosevelt was delighted.
with the new bureau of corporations publicizing its findings he thought the glare of publicity would eliminate most corporate abuses.
roosevelt also undertook direct legal action.
on february 18 1902 he instructed the justice department to bring suit against the northern securities company for violation of the sherman antitrust act.
it was a shrewd move.
a mammoth holding company northern securities controlled the massive rail networks of the northern pacific great northern and chicago burlington quincy railroads.
some of the most prominent names in business were behind the giant company j.
p morgan and company the rockefeller interests kuhn loeb and company and railroad operators james j hill and edward h harriman.
shocked by roosevelts action morgan charged that the president had not acted like a gentleman and hill talked glumly of having to fight for our lives against the political adventurers who have never done anything but pose and draw a salary morgan rushed to washington to complain and to ask whether there were plans to attack my other interests notably u s steel.
no roosevelt replied unless we find out they have done something that we regard as wrong in 1904 the supreme court in a 5 to 4 decision upheld the suit against northern securities and ordered the company dissolved.
roosevelt was jubilant and he followed up the victory with several other antitrust suits.
in 1902 he had moved against the beef trust an action applauded by western farmers and urban consumers alike.
after a lull he initiated suits in 1906 and 1907 against the american tobacco company the du pont corporation the new haven railroad and standard oil.
but roosevelts policies were not always clear nor his actions always consistent.
he invited morgan to the white house to confer with him and allowed the president of national city bank to preview a draft of the presidents third annual message to congress.
roosevelt also asked for and received business support in his bid for reelection in 1904.
large donations came in from industrial leaders and morgan himself later testified that he gave 150 000 to roosevelts campaign.
in 1907 acting in part to avert a threatened financial panic the president permitted morgans u s steel to absorb the tennessee coal and iron company an important competitor.
roosevelt in truth was not a trustbuster although he was frequently called that.
william howard taft his successor in the white house initiated forty three antitrust indictments in four years nearly twice as many as the twenty five roosevelt initiated in the seven years of his presidency.
instead roosevelt used antitrust threats to keep businesses within bounds.
regulation he believed was a better way to control large scale enterprise.
square deal in the coalfields a few months after announcing the northern securities suit roosevelt intervened in a major labor dispute involving the anthracite coal miners of northeastern pennsylvania.
led by john mitchell a moderate labor leader the united mine workers demanded wage increases an eight hour workday and company recognition of the union.
the coal companies refused and in may 1902 one hundred forty thousand miners walked off the job.
the mines closed.
as the months passed and the strike continued coal prices rose.
with winter coming on schools hospitals and factories ran short of coal.
public opinion turned against the companies.
morgan and other industrial leaders privately urged them to settle but george f baer head of one of the largest companies refused the rights and interests of the laboring man baer said will be protected and cared for not by the labor agitators but by the christian men to whom god in his infinite wisdom has given the control of the property interests of this country roosevelt was furious.
complaining of the companies arrogance he invited both sides in the dispute to an october 1902 conference at the white house.
there mitchell took a moderate tone and offered to submit the issues to arbitration but the companies again refused to budge.
roosevelt ordered the army to prepare to seize the mines and then leaked word of his intent to wall street leaders.
alarmed morgan and others again urged settlement of the dispute and at last the companies retreated.
they agreed to accept the recommendations of an independent commission the president would appoint.
in late october the strikers returned to work and in march 1903 the commission awarded them a 10 percent wage increase and a cut in working hours.
it recommended however against union recognition.
the coal companies in turn were encouraged to raise prices to offset the wage increase.
more and more roosevelt saw the federal government as an honest and impartial broker between powerful elements in society.
rather than leaning toward labor he pursued a middle way to curb corporate and labor abuses abolish privilege and enlarge individual opportunity.
conservative by temperament he sometimes backed reforms in part to head off more radical measures.
during the 1904 campaign roosevelt called his actions in the coal miners strike a square deal for both labor and capital a term that stuck to his administration.
roosevelt was not the first president to take a stand for labor but he was the first to bring opposing sides in a labor dispute to the white house to settle it.
chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism he was the first to threaten to seize a major industry and he was the first to appoint an arbitration commission whose decision both sides agreed to accept.
roosevelt progressivism at its height what were the major measures of theodore roosevelts term from 1905 to 1909.
in the election of 1904 the popular roosevelt soundly drubbed his democratic opponent alton b parker of new york and the socialist party candidate eugene v debs of indiana.
roosevelt attracted a large campaign chest and won votes everywhere.
in a landslide victory he received 57 percent of the vote to parkers 38 percent and on election night he savored the publics confidence.
overjoyed he pledged that under no circumstances will i be a candidate for or accept another nomination a statement he later regretted.
jurisdiction to include oil pipeline express and sleeping car companies.
icc orders were binding pending any court appeals thus placing the burden of proof of injustice on the companies.
delighted roosevelt viewed the hepburn act as a major step in his plan for continuous expert federal control over industry.
cleaning up food and drugs soon roosevelt was dealing with two other important bills these aimed at regulating the food and drug industries.
muckraking articles had touched frequently on filthy conditions in meatpacking houses but upton sinclairs the jungle 1906 set off a storm of read the document upton sinclair from the jungle 1906 the election of 1904 candidate t roosevelt parker debs swallow party republican democrat socialist prohibition popular vote 7 623 486 5 077 911 402 400 258 596 electoral vote regulating the railroads following his election roosevelt in late 1904 laid out a reform program that included railroad regulation employers liability for federal employees greater federal control over corporations and laws regulating child labor factory inspection and slum clearance in the district of columbia.
he turned first to railroad regulation.
in 1903 he had worked with congress to pass the elkins act to prohibit railroad rebates and increase the powers of the interstate commerce commission icc.
the elkins act a moderate law was framed with the consent of railroad leaders.
in 1904 and 1905 the president wanted much more and he urged congress to empower the icc to set reasonable and nondiscriminatory rates and prevent inequitable practices.
widespread demand for railroad regulation strengthened roosevelts hand.
in the midwest and farther west the issue was a popular one and reform governors la follette in wisconsin and albert b cummins in iowa urged federal action.
roosevelt maneuvered cannily.
as the legislative battle opened he released figures showing that standard oil had reaped 750 000 a year from railroad rebates.
he also skillfully traded congressional support for a strong railroad measure in return for his promise to postpone a reduction of the tariff a stratagem that came back to plague president taft.
triumph came with passage of the hepburn act of 1906.
a significant achievement the act strengthened the rate making power of the interstate commerce commission.
it increased membership on the icc from five to seven empowered it to fix reasonable maximum railroad rates and broadened its a poster for the movie version of upton sinclairs the jungle promises a wonderful story of the beef packing industry the conditions that sinclair described in the book brought to public attention the scandals of the meatpacking industry knowingly selling diseased meat and the filthy disease ridden dangerous conditions in which the workers toiled for their subsistence wages.
roosevelt progressivism at its height indignation.
ironically sinclair had set out to write a novel about the packinghouse workers the wage slaves of the beef trust hoping to do for wage slavery what harriet beecher stowe had done for chattel slavery.
but readers largely ignored his story of the workers and seized instead on the graphic descriptions of the things that went into their meat of patent medicines in several sensational articles in colliers.
patent medicines adams pointed out contained mostly alcohol drugs and undiluted fraud dr harvey w wiley the chief chemist in the department of agriculture led a poison squad of young assistants who experimented with the medicines.
with evidence in hand wiley pushed for regulation roosevelt and the recently reorganized american medical association joined the fight and the act passed on june 30 1906.
requiring manufacturers to list certain ingredients on the label it represented a pioneering effort to ban the manufacture and sale of adulterated misbranded or unsanitary food or drugs.
there would be meat stored in great piles in rooms and the water from leaky roofs would drip over it and thousands of rats would race about on it.
it was too dark in these storage places to see well but a man could run his hand over these piles of meat and sweep off handfuls of the dried dung of rats.
these rats were nuisances and the packers would put poisoned bread out for them they would die and then rats bread and meat would go into the hoppers together.
conserving the land an expert on birds roosevelt loved nature and the wilderness and some of his most enduring accomplishments came in the field of conservation.
working closely with gifford pinchot chief of the forest service he established the first comprehensive national conservation policy.
to roosevelt conservation meant the wise use of natural resources not locking them away so those who thought the wilderness should be preserved rather than developed generally opposed his policies.
using experts in the federal government roosevelt undertook a major reclamation program created the federal reclamation service and strengthened the forest preserve program in the department of agriculture.
broadening the concept of conservation he placed power sites coal lands and oil reserves as well as national forest in the public domain.
when roosevelt took office in 1901 there were 45 million acres in government preserves.
in 1908 there were almost sinclair was disappointed at the reaction.
i aimed at the publics heart he later said and by accident i hit it in the stomach he had indeed.
after reading the jungle roosevelt ordered an investigation.
the result he said was hideous and he threatened to publish the entire sickening report if congress did not act.
meat sales plummeted in the united states and europe.
demand for reform grew.
alarmed the meat packers themselves supported a reform law which they hoped would be just strong enough to still the clamor.
the meat inspection act of 1906 stronger than the packers wanted set rules for sanitary meatpacking and government inspection of meat products.
a second measure the pure food and drug act passed more easily.
samuel hopkins adams a muckraker exposed the dangers north cascades 1968 kobuk valley 1978 1980 gates of the arctic 1978 1980 isle royale c a n a d a olympic 1909 1938 mt.
rainier wrangeldenali st elias 1917 1980 1978 1980 lake clark 1978 1980 katmai 1918 1980 glacier bay kenai fjords 1978 1980 1925 1980 glacier theodore roosevelt 1947 1978 crater lake acadia 1916 1929 wind cave 1903 yellowstone badlands 1929 1978 grand teton redwood voyageurs 1971 1975 lassen volcanic 1907 1916 yosemite haleakala 1916 1960 kings canyon 1890 1940 sequoia channel islands 1938 1980 pacific ocean joshua tree 1936 1994 shenandoah 1926 1935 arches 1929 1978 zion 1909 1919 death valley 1933 1994 hawaii volcanoes 1916 1961 rocky mountain capitol reef 1937 1971 great basin 1922 1986 mammoth cave canyonlands 1964 mesa verde 1906 grand canyon 1908 1919 saguaro 1933 1994 great smoky mountains bryce canyon 1923 1928 hot springs 1832 1921 petrified forest 1906 1962 atlantic ocean carlsbad caverns 1923 1930 guadalupe mountains 1966 1972 big bend 1935 1944 national parks with date of initial protection and date of current designation mexico national forests virgin islands puerto rico virgin is.
national parks and forests during the presidency of theodore roosevelt who considered conservation his most important domestic achievement millions of acres of land were set aside for national parks and forests.
biscayne 1968 1980 dry tortugas 1935 1992 everglades chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism 195 million.
that year he called a national conservation congress attended by forty four governors and hundreds of experts.
roosevelt formed the national commission on the conservation of natural resources to look after waters forests lands and minerals.
with pinchot as head it drew up an inventory of the nations natural resources.
as 1908 approached roosevelt became increasingly strident in his demand for sweeping reforms.
he attacked malefactors of great wealth urged greater federal regulatory powers criticized the conservatism of the federal courts and called for laws protecting factory workers.
many business leaders blamed him for a severe financial panic in the autumn of 1907 and conservatives in congress stiffened their opposition.
divisions between republican conservatives and progressives grew.
immensely popular roosevelt prepared in 1908 to turn over the white house to william howard taft his close friend and colleague.
the roosevelt policies will not go out with the roosevelt administration a party leader said.
if taft weakens he will annihilate himself as expected taft soundly defeated the democratic standard bearer william jennings bryan who was making his third try for the presidency.
the republicans retained control of congress.
taft prepared to move into the white house ready and willing to carry on the roosevelt legacy.
the ordeal of william howard taft why was the presidency of william howard taft so difficult for him.
the republican national convention that nominated taft had not satisfied either roosevelt or taft.
true taft won the presidential nomination as planned but conservative republicans beat back the attempts of progressive republicans to influence the convention.
they named a conservative james s sherman for vice president and built a platform that reflected conservative views on labor the courts and other issues.
taft wanted a pledge to lower the tariff but got only a promise of revision which might lower or raise it.
la follette cummins jonathan p dolliver of iowa albert j beveridge of indiana and other progressive republicans were openly disappointed.
taking office in 1909 taft felt just a bit like a fish out of water the son of a distinguished ohio family and a graduate of yale law school he became an ohio judge solicitor general of the united states and a judge of the federal circuit court.
in 1900 mckinley asked him to head the philippine commission charged with the difficult and challenging task of forming a civil government in the philippines.
later taft was named the first governor general of the philippines.
in 1904 roosevelt appointed him secretary of war.
in all these positions taft made his mark as a skillful administrator.
he worked quietly behind the scenes avoided controversy and shared none of roosevelts zest for politics.
a good natured man taft had personal charm and infectious humor.
he fled from fights rather than seeking them out and he disliked political maneuvering preferring instead quiet solitude.
i dont like politics he said.
i dont like the limelight the election of 1908 candidate taft bryan debs chafin party republican democrat socialist prohibition popular vote 7 678 908 6 409 104 402 820 252 821 electoral vote weighing close to three hundred pounds taft enjoyed conversation golf and bridge good food and plenty of rest.
compared to the hardworking roosevelt and wilson he was lazy.
he was also honest kindly and amiable and in his own way he knew how to get things done.
reflective he preferred the life of a judge but his wife helen h taft who enjoyed politics prodded him toward the white house.
when a supreme court appointment opened in 1906 taft reluctantly turned it down.
ma wants him to wait and be president his youngest son said.
tafts years as president were not happy.
mrs tafts health soon collapsed and as it turned out taft presided over a republican party torn with tensions that roosevelt had either brushed aside or concealed.
the tariff business regulation and other issues split conservatives and progressives and taft often wavered or sided with the conservatives.
taft revered the past and distrusted change although an ardent supporter of roosevelt he never had roosevelts faith in the ability of government to impose reform and alter individual behavior.
he named five corporation attorneys to his cabinet leaned more to business than to labor and spoke of a desire to clean out the unions at that time and later tafts reputation suffered by comparison to the flair of roosevelt and the moral majesty of woodrow wilson.
he deserved better.
taft was an honest and sincere president who sometimes firm sometimes befuddled faced a series of important and troublesome problems during his term of office.
party insurgency taft started his term with an attempt to curb the powerful republican speaker of the house joseph uncle joe cannon of illinois.
using the powers of his position cannon had been setting house procedures appointing committees and virtually dictating legislation.
straightforward and crusty he often opposed reform.
in march 1909 thirty republican congressmen joined tafts effort to curb cannons power and the president sensed success.
but cannon retaliated and threatening to block all tariff bills forced a compromise.
taft stopped the anti cannon campaign in return for cannons pledge to help with tariff cuts.
republicans were divided over the tariff and there was a growing party insurgency against high rates.
the house quickly passed a bill providing for lower rates but in the senate protectionists raised them.
senate leader nelson w aldrich of rhode island introduced a revised bill that added more than eight hundred amendments to the rates approved in the house.
angry la follette and other republicans attacked the bill as the child of special interests.
in speeches on the senate floor they called themselves progressives invoked roosevelts name the ordeal of william howard taft and urged taft to defeat the high tariff proposal.
caught between protectionists and progressives taft wavered then tried to compromise.
in the end he backed aldrich.
the payne aldrich act passed in november 1909 called for higher rates than the original house bill though it lowered them from the dingley tariff of 1897.
an unpopular law payne aldrich helped discredit taft and revealed the tensions in the republican party.
republican progressives and conservatives drifted apart.
thinskinned taft resented the persistent pinpricks of the progressives who criticized him for virtually everything he did.
he tried to find middle ground but leaned more and more toward the conservatives.
during a nationwide speaking tour in the autumn of 1909 he praised aldrich scolded the low tariff insurgents and called the payne aldrich act the best bill that the republican party ever passed traveling through the midwest he pointedly ignored la follette cummins and other progressive republicans.
by early 1910 progressive republicans in congress no longer looked to taft for leadership.
as before they challenged cannons power and taft wavered.
in an outcome embarrassing to the president the progressives won managing to curtail cannons authority to dictate committee assignments and schedule debate.
in progressive circles there was growing talk of a roosevelt return to the white house.
the ballinger pinchot affair the conservation issue dealt another blow to relations between roosevelt and president taft.
in 1909 richard a ballinger tafts secretary of the interior offered for sale a million acres of public land that pinchot who had stayed on as tafts chief forester had withdrawn from sale.
pinchot fearing that ballinger would hurt conservation programs protested and seizing on a report that ballinger had helped sell valuable alaskan coal lands to a syndicate that included j p morgan asked taft to intervene.
after investigating taft supported ballinger on every count although he asked pinchot to remain in office.
pinchot refused to drop the matter.
behind the scenes he provided material for two anti ballinger magazine articles and he wrote a critical public letter that senator dolliver of iowa read to the senate.
taft had had enough.
he fired the insubordinate pinchot an action which though appropriate again lost support for taft.
newspapers followed the controversy for months and muckrakers assailed the administrations surrender to morgan and other despoilers of the national heritage the ballinger pinchot controversy obscured tafts important contributions to conservation.
he won from congress the power to remove lands from sale and he used it to conserve more land than roosevelt did.
still the controversy tarred taft and it upset his old friend roosevelt.
pinchot hurried to italy where roosevelt was on tour he talked again with roosevelt within days of the ex presidents arrival home in june 1910 a special commerce court to hear appeals from icc decisions because most judges were traditionally conservative in outlook and usually rejected attempts to regulate railroad rates.
they also thought the railroads had been consulted too closely in drawing up the bill.
democratic and republican progressives tried to amend the bill to strengthen it taft made support of it a test of party loyalty.
the mann elkins act of 1910 gave something to everyone.
it gave the icc power to set rates stiffened long and short haul regulations and placed telephone and telegraph companies under icc jurisdiction.
these provisions delighted progressives.
the act also created a commerce court pleasing conservatives.
in a tradeoff conservative republican senate leaders pledged their support for a statehood bill for arizona and new mexico which were both predicted to be democratic.
in return enough democratic senators promised to vote for the commerce court provision to pass the bill.
while pleased with the act taft and the republican party lost further ground.
in votes on key provisions of the mann elkins act taft raised the issue of party regularity and progressive republicans defied him.
taft attempted to defeat the progressive republicans in the 1910 elections.
he helped form antiprogressive organizations and he campaigned against progressive republican candidates for the senate.
in california he opposed hiram johnson the progressive republican champion in wisconsin the home of la follette he sent vice president james s sherman to take control of the state convention.
progressive republicans retaliated taft alienates the progressives interested in railroad regulation taft backed a bill in 1910 to empower the icc to fix maximum railroad rates.
progressive republicans favored that plan but attacked tafts suggestion of according to this 1913 cartoon the new income tax legislation distributed the tax burden more evenly so that contributions from the wealthy eased some of the burden on the working class.
chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism now roosevelt listened to anti taft republicans who urged him by organizing a nationwide network of anti taft progressive to run for president in 1912.
in february 1912 he announced republican clubs.
my hat is in the ring the 1910 election results were a major setback for taft and the republicans especially conservative republicans.
a key issue in the election the high cost of living gave an edge to differing philosophies in the the progressive wings in both major parties lending support election of 1912 to their attack on the tariff and the trusts.
in party primaries progressive republicans overwhelmed most taft candidates delighted democrats looked on as taft and roosevelt fought for the and in the general election they tended to fare better than the republican nomination.
as the incumbent president taft controlled conservatives which increased progressive influence in the the party machinery and when the republican convention met in republican party.
june 1912 he took the nomination.
in early july the democrats for republicans of all persuasions however it was a difficult met in baltimore and confident of victory for the first time in two election.
the democrats swept the urban industrial states from decades struggled through forty six ballots before finally nominatnew york to illinois.
new york new jersey indiana and even ing woodrow wilson the reform minded governor of new jersey.
tafts ohio elected democratic governors.
for the first time since a month later some of the anti taft and progressive 1894 republicans lost control of both the house and the senate.
republicans now calling themselves the progressive party in all they lost fifty eight seats in the house and ten in the senate.
whooped it up in chicago.
roosevelt was there to give a stirring disappointed taft called it not only a landslide but a tidal wave confession of faith and listen to the delegates sing and holocaust all rolled into one general cataclysm despite the defeat taft pushed through several importhou wilt not cower in the dust tant measures before his term ended.
with the help of the new roosevelt o roosevelt.
democratic house he backed laws to regulate safety in mines and thy gleaming sword shall never rust on railroads create a childrens bureau in the federal government roosevelt o roosevelt.
establish employers liability for all work done on government contracts and mandate an eight hour workday for government workers.
watch the video bull moose campaign speech in 1909 congress initiated a constitutional amendment authorizing an income tax which along with woman suffrage was one of the most significant legislative measures of the twentieth century.
the sixteenth amendment took effect early in 1913.
a few months later an important progressive goal was realized when the direct election of senators was ratified as the seventeenth amendment to the constitution.
an ardent supporter of competition taft relentlessly pressed a campaign against trusts.
the sherman antitrust act he said in 1911 is a good law that ought to be enforced and i propose to enforce it that year the supreme court in cases against standard oil and american tobacco established the rule of reason which allowed the court to determine whether a business presented reasonable restraint on trade.
taft thought the decisions gave the court too much discretion and he pushed ahead with the antitrust effort.
in october 1911 he sued u s steel for its acquisition of the tennessee coal and iron company in 1907.
roosevelt had approved the acquisition see p 547 and the suit seemed designed to impugn his action.
enraged he attacked taft and taft for once fought theodore roosevelt campaigns for president in 1912.
roosevelt champions national health back.
he accused roosevelt of undermin insurance and tries to ride his progressive bull moose party back to the white house.
its an idea ing the conservative tradition in the country ahead of its time health insurance is a rarity and medical fees are relatively low because doctors and began working to undercut the influence cannot do much for most patients.
but medical breakthroughs are beginning to revolutionize of the progressive republicans.
increasingly hospitals and drive up costs.
woodrow wilsons new freedom naming roosevelt for president at its convention the progressive party soon known as the bull moose party set the stage for the first important three cornered presidential contest since 1860.
taft was out of the running before the campaign even began.
i think i might as well give up so far as being a candidate is concerned he said in july.
there are so many people in the country who dont like me taft stayed at home and made no speeches before the election.
roosevelt campaigned strenuously even completing one speech after being shot in the chest by an anti third term fanatic.
i have a message to deliver he said and will deliver it as long as there is life in my body roosevelts message involved a program he called the new nationalism.
an important phase in the shaping of twentiethcentury american political thought it demanded a national approach to the countrys affairs and a strong president to deal with them.
the new nationalism called for efficiency in government and society.
it exalted the executive and the expert urged social justice reforms to protect workers women and children and accepted good trusts.
the new nationalism encouraged large concentrations of labor and capital serving the nations interests under a forceful federal executive.
for the first time in the history of a major political party the progressive campaign enlisted women in its organization.
jane addams the well known settlement worker seconded read the document woodrow wilson from the new freedom 1913 roosevelts nomination at chicago and she and other women played a leading role in his campaign.
some labor leaders who saw potential for union growth and some business leaders who saw relief from destructive competition and labor strife supported the new party.
wilson in contrast set forth a program called the new freedom that emphasized business competition and small government.
a states rights democrat he wanted to rein in federal authority using it only to sweep away special privilege release individual energies and restore competition.
drawing on the thinking of louis d brandeis the brilliant shaper of reform minded law he echoed the progressive partys social justice objectives while continuing to attack roosevelts planned state.
for wilson the vital issue was not a planned economy but a free one.
the history of liberty is the history of the limitation of governmental power he said in october 1912.
if america is not to have free enterprise then she can have freedom of no sort whatever in the new nationalism and new freedom the election of 1912 offered competing philosophies of government.
both roosevelt and wilson saw the central problem of the american nation as economic growth and its effect on individuals and society.
both focused on the governments relation to business both believed in bureaucratic reform and both wanted to use government to protect the ordinary citizen.
but roosevelt welcomed federal power national planning and business growth wilson distrusted them all.
on election day wilson won 6 3 million votes to 4 1 million for roosevelt who had recovered quickly from his wound and 900 000 for eugene v debs the socialist party candidate.
taft the incumbent president finished third with 3 5 million votes he carried only vermont and utah for 8 electoral votes.
the democrats also won outright control of both houses.
election of 1912 woodrow wilsons new freedom popular vote electoral vote by state democratic woodrow wilson 6 293 454 progressive bull moose theodore roosevelt 4 119 538 republican william h taft what were the central principles of woodrow wilsons new freedom.
3 484 980 1 135 697 minor parties 15 033 939 if under roosevelt social reform took on the excitement of a circus under wilson it acquired the dedication of a sunrise service born in virginia in 1856 and raised in the south wilson was the son of a presbyterian minister.
as a young man he wanted a career in public service and he trained himself carefully in history and oratory.
a moralist he reached judgments easily.
once reached almost nothing shook them.
opponents called him stubborn and smug.
he gives me the creeps a maryland ward boss said.
the time i met him he said something to me and i didnt know whether god or him was talking after graduating from princeton university and the university of virginia law school wilson found that practicing law bored him.
shifting to history from 1890 to 1902 he served as professor of jurisprudence and political economy at princeton.
in 1902 he became president of the university.
eight years later he was governor of new jersey where he led a campaign to reform election procedures abolish corrupt practices and strengthen railroad regulation.
wilsons rise was rapid and he knew relatively little about national issues and personalities.
but he learned fast and in some chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism ways the lack of experience served him well.
he had few political debts to repay and he brought fresh perspectives to older issues.
ideas intrigued wilson details bored him.
although he was outgoing at times he could also be cold and aloof and aides soon learned that he preferred loyalty and flattery to candid criticism.
prone to self righteousness wilson often turned differences of opinion into bitter personal quarrels.
like roosevelt he believed in strong presidential leadership.
a scholar of the party system he cooperated closely with democrats in congress and his legislative record placed him among the most effective presidents in terms of passing bills that he supported.
forbidding in individual conversation wilson could move crowds with graceful oratory.
unlike taft and to a greater degree than roosevelt he could inspire.
his inaugural address was eloquent.
the nation he said has been deeply stirred stirred by a solemn passion stirred by the knowledge of wrong of ideals lost of government too often debauched and made an instrument of evil.
the feelings with which we face this new age of right and opportunity sweep across our heartstrings like some air out of gods own presence the new freedom in action on the day of his inauguration wilson called congress into special session to lower the tariff.
when the session opened on april 8 1913 wilson himself was there the first president since john adams in 1801 to appear personally before congress.
in forceful language he urged congress to reduce tariff rates.
as the bill moved through congress wilson showed exceptional skill.
he worked closely with congressional leaders and when lobbyists threatened the bill in the senate he appealed for popular support.
the result was a triumph for wilson and the democratic party.
the underwood tariff act passed in 1913.
it lowered tariff rates about 15 percent and removed duties from sugar wool and several other consumer goods.
to make up for lost revenue the act also levied a modest graduated income tax authorized under the just ratified sixteenth amendment.
marking a significant shift in the american tax structure it imposed a 1 percent tax on individuals and corporations earning more than 4 000 annually and an additional 1 percent tax on incomes more than 20 000.
above all the act reflected a new unity within the democratic party which had worked together to pass a difficult tariff law.
wilson himself emerged as an able leader.
at a single stage a foreign editor said he went from the man of promise to the man of achievement encouraged by his success wilson decided to keep congress in session through the hot washington summer.
now he focused on banking reform and the result in december 1913 was the federal reserve act the most important domestic law of his administration.
meant to provide the united states with a sound yet flexible currency the act established the countrys first efficient banking system since andrew jackson killed the second bank of the united states in 1832.
it created twelve regional banks each to serve the banks of its district.
the regional banks answered to a federal reserve board appointed by the president which governed the nationwide system.
a compromise law the act blended public and private control of the banking system.
private bankers owned the federal reserve banks but answered to the presidentially appointed federal reserve board.
the reserve banks were authorized to issue currency and through the discount rate the interest rate at which they loaned money to member banks they could raise or lower the amount of money in circulation.
monetary affairs no longer depended solely on the price of gold.
within a year nearly half the nations banking resources were in the federal reserve system.
the clayton antitrust act 1914 completed wilsons initial legislative program.
like previous antitrust measures it reflected confusion over how to discipline a growing economy without putting a brake on output.
in part it was a response to the revelations of the pujo committee of the house publicized by brandeis in a disquieting series of articles other peoples money in its investigation of wall street the committee discovered a pyramid of money and power capped by the morgan rockefeller empire that through interlocking directorates controlled companies worth 22 billion more than one tenth of the national wealth.
the clayton act outlawed such directorates and prohibited unfair trade practices.
it forbade pricing policies that created monopoly and it made corporate officers personally responsible for antitrust violations.
delighting samuel gompers and the labor movement the act declared that unions were not conspiracies in restraint of trade outlawed the use of injunctions in labor disputes unless necessary to protect property and approved lawful strikes and picketing.
to gomperss dismay the courts continued to rule against union activity.
a related law established a powerful federal trade commission to oversee business methods.
composed of five members the commission could demand special and annual reports investigate complaints and order corporate compliance subject to court review.
at first wilson opposed the commission concept which was an approach more suitable to roosevelts new nationalism but he changed his mind and along with brandeis called it the cornerstone of his antitrust plan.
to reassure business leaders he appointed a number of conservatives to the new commission and to the federal reserve board.
in november 1914 wilson proudly announced the completion of his new freedom program.
tariff banking and antitrust laws promised a brighter future he said and it was now a time of healing because a time of just dealing many progressives were aghast.
that wilson could think societys ills were so easily cured the new republic said casts suspicion either upon his own sincerity or upon his grasp of the realities of modern social and industrial life wilson moves toward the new nationalism distracted by the start of war in europe wilson gave less attention to domestic issues for more than a year.
when he returned to concern with reform he adopted more and more of roosevelts new nationalism and blended it with the new freedom to set it off from his earlier policies.
one of wilsons problems was the congress.
to his dismay the republicans gained substantially in the 1914 elections.
reducing woodrow wilsons new freedom the democratic majority in the house they swept key industrial and farm states.
at the same time a recession struck the economy which had been hurt by the outbreak of the european war in august 1914.
some business leaders blamed the tariff and other new freedom laws.
on the defensive wilson soothed business sentiment and invited bankers and industrialists to the white house.
he allowed companies fearful of antitrust actions to seek advice from the justice department.
preoccupied with such problems wilson blocked significant action in congress through most of 1915.
he refused to support a bill providing minimum wages for women workers sidetracked a child labor bill on the ground that it was unconstitutional and opposed a bill to establish long term credits for farmers.
he also refused to endorse woman suffrage arguing that the right to vote was a state matter not a federal one.
wilsons record on race disappointed african americans and many progressives.
he had appealed to african american voters during the 1912 election and a number of african american leaders campaigned for him.
soon after the inauguration oswald garrison villard a leader of the naacp proposed a national race commission to study the problem of race relations.
initially sympathetic wilson rejected the idea because he feared he might lose southern democratic votes in congress.
a virginian himself he appointed many southerners to high office and for the first time since the civil war southern views on race dominated the nations capital.
at one of wilsons first cabinet meetings the postmaster general proposed the segregation of all african americans in the federal service.
no one dissented including wilson.
several government bureaus promptly began to segregate workers in offices shops rest rooms and restaurants.
employees who objected were fired.
african american leaders protested and they were joined by progressive leaders and clergymen.
surprised at the protest wilson backed quietly away from the policy although he continued to insist that segregation benefited african americans.
as the year 1916 began wilson made a dramatic switch in focus and again pushed for substantial reforms.
the result was a virtual river of reform laws which was significant because it began the second more national minded phase of the new freedom.
with scarcely a glance over his shoulder wilson embraced important portions of roosevelts new nationalism campaign.
in part he was motivated by the approaching presidential election.
a minority president wilson owed his victory in 1912 to the split in the republican party now almost healed.
roosevelt was moving back into republican ranks and there were issues connected with the war in europe that he might use against wilson.
moreover many progressives were voicing disappointment with wilsons limited reforms and his failure to support more advanced reform legislation on matters such as farm credits child labor and woman suffrage.
moving quickly to patch up the problem wilson named brandeis to the supreme court in january 1916.
popular among progressives brandeis was also the first person of jewish faith to serve on the court.
when conservatives in the senate tried to defeat the nomination wilson stood firm and won earning further praise from progressives jews and others.
in may he reversed his stand on farm loans and accepted a rural credits bill to establish farm loan banks backed by federal funds.
the federal farm loan act of 1916 created a federal farm loan board to give farmers credit similar to the federal reserves benefits for trade and industry.
wilson was already popular within the labor movement.
going beyond roosevelts policies which had sought a balance between business and labor he defended union recognition and collective bargaining.
in 1913 he appointed william b wilson a respected leader of the united mine workers as the first head of the labor department and he strengthened the departments division of conciliation.
in 1914 in ludlow colorado state militia and mine guards fired machine guns into a tent colony of coal strikers killing twenty one men women and children.
outraged wilson stepped in and used federal troops to end the violence while negotiations to end the strike went on.
in august 1916 a threatened railroad strike again revealed wilsons sympathies with labor.
like roosevelt he invited the two sides to the white house where he urged the railroad companies to grant an eight hour day and labor leaders to abandon the demand for overtime pay.
labor leaders accepted the proposal railroad leaders did not.
i pray god to forgive you i never can wilson said as he left the room.
soon he signed the adamson act 1916 that imposed the eight hour day on interstate railways and established a federal commission to study the railroad problem.
ending the threat of a strike the act marked a milestone in the expansion of the federal governments authority to regulate industry.
with wilson leading the way the flow of reform legislation continued until the election.
the federal workmens compensation act established workers compensation for government employees.
the keating owen act the first federal child labor law prohibited the shipment in interstate commerce of products manufactured by children under the age of fourteen.
it too expanded the authority of the federal government though it was soon struck down by the supreme court.
the warehouse act authorized licensed warehouses to issue negotiable receipts for farm products deposited with them.
in september wilson signed the tariff commission act creating an expert commission to recommend tariff rates.
the same month the revenue act of 1916 boosted income taxes and furthered tax reform.
four thousand members of the national american woman suffrage association cheered when wilson finally came out in support of woman suffrage.
two weeks later he endorsed the eight hour day for all the nations workers.
the 1916 presidential election was close but wilson won it on the issues of peace and progressivism.
by the end of 1916 he and the democratic party had enacted most of the important parts of roosevelts progressive party platform of 1912.
to do it wilson abandoned portions of the new freedom and accepted much of the new nationalism including greater federal power and commissions governing trade and tariffs.
in mixing the two programs he blended some of the competing doctrines of the progressive era established the primacy of the federal government and foreshadowed the pragmatic outlook of franklin d roosevelts new deal of the 1930s.
complete the assignment madam c j walker african american business pioneer on myhistorylab feature essay madam c j walker african american business pioneer a t the 1912 convention of the national negro business league a group devoted to promoting african american businesses a 45 year old woman madam c j walker tried to catch the eye of booker t washington the leagues founder and head.
but washington ignored her until finally her patience gone she sprang to her feet and said surely you are not going to shut the door in my face.
i feel that i am in a business that is a credit to the womanhood of our race i.
came from the cotton fields of the south she went on.
i was promoted from there to the washtub then i was promoted to the cook kitchen and from there i promoted myself into the business of manufacturing hair goods and preparations.
i have built my own factory on my own ground had washington listened madam walker had a remarkable story to tell.
she was born sarah breedlove in 1867 on a plantation in delta louisiana the first in her sharecropper family born free.
orphaned at age seven she married at fourteen to escape a cruel brother in law and find a home.
her husband died when she was twenty leaving her with a young daughter and a back already aching from years of picking cotton and doing laundry.
looking for a better life she moved to st louis and then to denver working as a cook and laundress.
in denver she married charles j walker and began calling herself madam a title that lent prestige to a new business she had just begun.
for years walker had had trouble with her hair.
it came out in bunches partly because of the painful wrap and twist method that was popular photographs of madam c j walker before and after using her hair care formula.
madam walker was the first black woman millionaire and a pioneer in the development and manufacture of beauty products for african american women.
for styling african american hair.
after trying various remedies she developed her own formula that she said came to her in a dream.
i tried it on my friends she said.
it helped them.
i made up my mind to begin to sell it filling jars of the mixture in the attic of her home she sold it door to door.
madam walker began promoting her system of hair care in 1905.
the walker system called for women first to wash their hair with madam walkers vegetable shampoo then apply her wonderful hair grower add a light oil called glossine and finally press and relax the hair with a wide toothed hot comb as her business grew walker opened schools to teach her system hired thousands of african american women as sales agents and in 1910 moved her factory to indianapolis for its central location.
knowing that white stores would not stock her products she relied on churches and womens clubs two key institutions of the black community.
sales soon extended throughout the united states central america and the caribbean josephine baker the famous dancer used walkers products in paris.
dressed in white shirts and long black skirts walker agents became a familiar sight in african american neighborhoods everywhere.
there were twenty thousand agents by 1916 most of them former maids laundresses and farm workers.
i have made it possible for many colored women to abandon the washtub for more pleasant and profitable occupation she said.
as her income grew walker gave generously to various causes including the ymca mary mcleod bethunes educational and industrial institute for negro girls now bethune cookman college the tuskegee institute and the naacp.
lady bountiful she was called and she encouraged her agents to contribute to charity too.
i love to use a part of what i make in trying to help others she said.
when the country entered world war i walker helped sell war bonds and joined the many black leaders who encouraged african americans to aid in the war effort hoping that contributions to victory abroad would improve race relations at home.
but she grew impatient as lynchings and other racial incidents continued.
angered by a race riot in east st louis illinois in 1917 she supported the negro silent protest parade in which ten thousand black new yorkers marched in silence down fifth avenue while another twenty thousand african americans looked on.
walker went to washington to ask president woodrow wilson to support legislation making lynching a federal crime but wilson was too busy to see her.
refusing to give up walker donated 5 000 to the naacps antilynching campaign and defended the rights of returning war veterans.
in 1918 walker built villa lewaro a mansion overlooking the hudson river above new york city near the estate of john d rockefeller.
walker called her home a symbol to show young negroes what a lone woman accomplished and to inspire them to do big things madam walker died at the villa in 1919 aged fifty one.
at her death the crisis the journal of the naacp said she had revolutionized the personal habits and appearance of millions of human beings according to the guinness book of world records madam walker was the first self made woman millionaire.
what she did said ida b wells barnett the militant black leader made me take pride anew in negro womanhood mary mcleod bethune the black educator said she has gone but her work still lives and shall live as an inspiration to not only her race but to the world walker bequeathed her company to her daughter asking that a woman always serve at the head but it began to fail during the great depression.
housed in the walker building a national historic landmark the madam walker theatre center today serves as a cultural center for the performing arts in downtown indianapolis.
even at the height of madam walkers business hot combs and hair straighteners were controversial.
some black leaders booker t washington among them denounced them as attempts to imitate whites but many african american women straightened their hair anyway.
walker herself argued that she had no interest in straightening hair only in boosting confidence and personal hygiene.
walkers business dwindled but the debate over hair continued carrying important economic as well as social dimensions.
in recent years african americans spent three times more per person than other consumer groups on hair care products cosmetics toiletries and other grooming aids.
famous african american singers actresses and television personalities including oprah winfrey relax their hair.
others object.
alice walker an african american and one of the nations foremost authors calls hair straightening a form of oppression a ceiling on the brain that keeps people from fulfillment.
hip hop music reinforces the message taking hair as one music magazine has said back to its african roots.
from dreads cornrows and braids to twists coils to fros hip hop is keeping it real.
for many hair is more than just a style its a statement madam walker would have agreed.
hair care she believed involved more than hair it meant pride better health and new opportunities for black women everywhere.
when she returned to the negro business league convention in 1913 she talked about economic independence for african american women.
the girls and women of our race she said must not be afraid to take hold of business endeavor.
wring success out of a number of business opportunities that lie at their very doors.
i want to say to every negro woman present dont sit down and wait for the opportunities to come.
get up and make them questions for discussion 1.
why was madam c j.
walkers business so successful.
why did some black people oppose using her products.
how did walker try to empower black women and win more rights for black americans.
chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism conclusion the fruits of progressivism the election of 1916 showed how deeply progressivism had reached into american society.
we have in four years wilson said that fall come very near to carrying out the platform of the progressive party as well as our own for we are also progressives in retrospect however 1916 also marked the beginning of progressivisms decline.
at most the years of progressive reform lasted from the 1890s to 1921 and in large measure they were compressed into a single decade between 1906 and american entry into world war i in 1917.
many problems the progressives addressed but did not solve and some important ones such as race they did not even tackle.
yet their regulatory commissions direct primaries city improvements and child labor laws marked an era of important and measured reform.
the institution of the presidency expanded.
from the white house radiated executive departments that guided a host of activities.
independent commissions operating within flexible laws supplemented executive authority.
these developments owed a great deal to both roosevelt and wilson.
to manage a complex society roosevelt developed a simple formula expert advice growth minded policies a balancing of business labor and other interests the use of publicity to gather support and stern but often permissive oversight of the economy.
roosevelt strengthened the executive office and he called on the newer group of professional educated public minded citizens to help him.
i believe in a strong executive he said i believe in power at first wilson had different ideas wanting to dismantle much of roosevelts governing apparatus.
but driven by outside forces and changes in his own thinking wilson soon moved in directions similar to those roosevelt had championed.
starting out to disperse power he eventually consolidated it.
through such movements government at all levels accepted responsibility for the welfare of various elements in the social order.
a reform minded and bureaucratic society took shape in which men and women labor and capital political parties and social classes competed for shares in the expansive framework of twentieth century life.
but there were limits to reform.
as both roosevelt and wilson found the new government agencies understaffed and underfinanced depended on the responsiveness of those they sought to regulate.
soon there was a far darker cloud on the horizon.
the spirit of progressivism rested on a belief in human potential peace and progress.
after napoleons defeat in 1815 a century of peace began in western europe and as the decades passed war seemed a dying institution.
it looks as though this were going to be the age of treaties rather than the age of wars an american said in 1912 the century of reason rather than the century of force it was not to be.
two years later the most devastating of wars broke out in europe and in 1917 americans were fighting on the battlefields of france.
study resources study y resources take the study plan for chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism on myhistorylab time line 1894 national municipal league formed to work for reform in cities galveston texas is first city to try commission form of government theodore roosevelt becomes president robert m la follette elected reform governor of wisconsin doctors reorganize the american medical association socialist party of america organized roosevelt sues northern securities company for violation of antitrust act coal miners in northeastern pennsylvania strike maryland is first state to pass workers compensation law oregon adopts the initiative and referendum roosevelt elected president hepburn act strengthens interstate commerce commission icc upton sinclair attacks meatpacking industry in the jungle congress passes meat inspection act and pure food and drug act 1908 taft elected president supreme court upholds oregon law limiting working hours for women in muller v oregon payne aldrich tariff act divides republican party mann elkins act passed to regulate railroads taft fires gifford pinchot head of u s forest service democrats sweep midterm elections progressive party formed nominates roosevelt for president woodrow wilson elected president underwood tariff act lowers rates federal reserve act reforms u s banking system sixteenth amendment authorizes congress to collect taxes on incomes clayton act strengthens antitrust legislation wilson wins reelection supreme court strikes down federal law limiting child labor in hammer v dagenhart nineteenth amendment gives women the right to vote chapter review the spirit of progressivism the republican roosevelt what were the six major characteristics of progressivism.
how would you describe the personality and programs of theodore roosevelt.
progressivism sought cures for social and economic problems and was defined by six major characteristics 1 a desire not to harm big business but to humanize and regulate it 2 optimism about human nature 3 a willingness to intervene in peoples lives 4 a tendency to stress the authority of the state and the government 5 belief in the environment as a key to reform and 6 a nationwide base.
p 537 roosevelt attacked some trusts and through the courts broke up a railroad holding company.
his intervention in the coal strike of 1902 reflected his active energetic personality and represented an advance in presidential power.
p 546 reform in the cities and states roc capitol reef 1937 1971 n arches 1929 1978 n canyonlands 1964 mesa verde 1906 what methods did progressive reformers use to attack problems in the cities and states.
progressive reformers turned increasingly to the government to carry out their measures.
at the same time ironically fewer people tended to vote.
reformers focused on life in the growing cities.
robert m la follette of wisconsin personified the movement.
his focus was on improving factory safety regulating the railroads and adopting political reforms.
p 544 grand canyon 1908 1919 saguaro 1933 1994 bryce canyon 1923 1928 petrified forest 1906 1962 carlsbad caverns 1923 1930 roosevelt progressivism at its height what were the major measures of theodore roosevelts term from 1905 to 1909.
winning easy election in 1904 roosevelt persuaded congress to improve railroad regulation backed pure food and drug laws and enlarged national parks.
in all these actions he reflected the values of the progressive generation a reliance on experts a faith in government power to initiate reform and a desire to tame big business.
p 548 chapter 23 chapter review the ordeal of william howard taft woodrow wilsons new freedom why was the presidency of william howard taft so difficult for him.
what were the central principles of woodrow wilsons new freedom.
roosevelt had left taft a variety of difficult problems including the tariff and a widening split between progressive and conservative republicans.
taft increasingly alienated the progressives and roosevelt.
in the election of 1912 taft finished third behind woodrow wilson and roosevelt.
p 550 victorious in 1912 wilson set out to put into effect the central principles of his new freedom program including tariff reform an antitrust law and the federal reserve act a measure that still guides our economy today.
by 1916 however wilson found greater value in roosevelts new nationalism which had emphasized government intervention and measures to protect women labor and other groups.
p 553 key terms and definitions progressive or bull moose party this political party was formed by theodore roosevelt to advance progressive ideas and unseat president william howard taft in 1912 p 537 national american woman suffrage association founded by susan b anthony in 1890 this organization worked to secure women the right to vote.
it stressed careful organization and peaceful lobbying.
p 541 pragmatism an early twentieth century doctrine based n the ideas of william james.
pragmatists were impatient with the concept of truth as an abstract reality.
they believed that truth should work for the individual and that people were not only shaped by their environment but also helped to shape it.
if an idea worked it became truth.
p 542 hepburn act a 1906 law that strengthened the power of the interstate commerce commission icc to regulate the railroads.
p 548 conservation president theodore roosevelt made this principle one of his administrations top goals.
conservation in his view aimed at protecting the nations natural resources but called for the wise use of them rather than locking them away.
p 549 new freedom president woodrow wilsons program which emphasized business competition and small government.
it sought to rein in federal authority release individual energy and restore competition.
it achieved many of the progressive social justice objectives while pushing for a free economy rather than a planned one.
p 553 underwood tariff act this 1913 law reduced tariff rates and levied a graduated income tax to make up for the lost revenue.
p 554 federal reserve act this 1913 act created a central banking system consisting of 12 regional banks governed by the federal reserve board.
it was an attempt to provide the united states with a sound yet flexible currency.
p 554 clayton antitrust act this law outlawed interlocking directorates in which the same people served as directors for several competing companies forbade policies that created monopolies and made corporate officers responsible for antitrust violations.
it also declared that unions were not conspiracies in restraint of trade and outlawed the use of injunctions in labor disputes unless they were necessary to protect property.
p 554 new nationalism president theodore roosevelts program calling for a national approach to the countrys affairs and a strong president to deal with them efficiency in government and society and protection of children women and workers.
it accepted good trusts and exalted the expert and the executive.
it also encouraged large concentrations of capital and labor.
p 553 critical thinking questions 1.
how might american history have changed if the progressive era had not occurred.
how did the major measures of roosevelts second term continue the progressive approaches on his first term.
how did the differences of opinion during the progressive era affect the taft administration.
how did the wilson administration draw on the characteristics of the progressive era.
study resources myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 23 on myhistorylab roosevelt progressivism at its height the spirit of progressivism read the document of the cities p 538 read the document 1906 p 548 lincoln steffens from the shame read the document 1915 p 540 report of the vice commission view the map changing lives of american women 1880 1930 p 541 read the document national woman suffrage association mothers day letter p 542 read the document eugene v debs from the outlook for socialism in america p 543 upton sinclair from the jungle the ordeal of william howard taft watch the video speech p 552 read the document woodrow wilson from the new feedom p 553 bull moose campaign woodrow wilsons new freedom complete the assignment madam c j walker african american business pioneer p 556 the republican roosevelt read the document theodore roosevelt from the strenuous life 1900 p 546 indicates study plan media assignment the nation at war contents and learning objectives a new world power pg.
564 over here pg.
577 what were the main events that showed the united states was becoming a world power.
what programs and changes did world war i bring at home.
foreign policy under wilson pg.
566 what mistakes did wilson make in negotiating the treaty of versailles.
what did woodrow wilson mean by moral diplomacy.
toward war pg.
568 the treaty of versailles pg.
582 feature essay measuring the mind what were the reasons behind and dangers of wilsons neutrality policy.
over there pg.
572 how did the united states entry affect the course of world war i.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 22 the progressive era muckrakers call for reform in 1902 samuel s mcclure the shrewd owner of mcclures magazine sensed something astir in the country that his reporters were not covering.
like life munseys the ladies home journal and cosmopolitan mcclures was reaching more and more people more than a quarter million readers a month.
americans were snapping up the new popular magazines filled with eye catching illustrations and up to date fiction.
advances in photoengraving during the 1890s dramatically reduced the cost of illustrations at the same time income from advertisements rose sharply.
by the turn of the century some magazines earned as much as 60 000 an issue from advertising alone and publishers could price them as low as 10 cents a copy.
mcclure was always chasing new ideas and readers and in 1902 certain that something was happening in the public mood he told one of his editors 36 year old lincoln steffens a former wall street reporter to find out what it was.
get out of here travel go somewhere he said to steffens.
buy a railroad ticket get on a train and there where it lands you there you will learn to edit a magazine mcclures it turned out had an unpaid bill from the lackawanna railroad and steffens traveled west.
in st louis he came across a young district attorney named joseph w folk who had found a trail of corruption linking politics and some of the citys respected business leaders.
eager for help folk did not mind naming names to the visiting editor from new york.
it is good business men that are corrupting our bad politicians he emphasized again and again.
it is the leading citizens that are battening on our city steffenss story tweed days in st louis appeared in the october 1902 issue of mcclures.
the november mcclures carried the first installment of ida tarbells scathing history of the standard oil company and in january 1903 steffens was back with the shame of minneapolis another tale of corrupt partnership between business and politics.
mcclure had what he wanted and in the january issue he printed an editorial concerning three articles in this number of mcclures and a coincidence that may set us thinking steffens on minneapolis tarbell on standard oil and an article on abuses in labor unions all mcclure said on different topics but actually on the same theme corruption in american life.
capitalists workingmen politicians citizens all breaking the law or letting it be broken readers were enthralled and articles and books by other muckrakers theodore roosevelt coined the term in 1906 to describe the writers who made a practice of exposing the corruption of public and s mcclure had hoped steffens had found something astir in the country something so important and pervasive that it altered the course of american history in the twentieth century.
the muckrakers were a journalistic voice of this larger movement in american society.
called progressivism it lasted from the mid 1890s through world war i.
like muckraking itself progressivism reflected worry about the state of society the effects of industrialization and urbanization social disorder political corruption and a host of other issues.
with concerns so large progressivism often had a sense of crisis and urgency although it was rooted in a spirit of hopefulness and confidence in human progress.
for varying reasons thousands of people became concerned about their society and separately and together they set out to cure some of the ills they saw around them.
the efforts of the so called progressives changed the nation and gave the era its name.
a the changing face of industrialism how did industrialism change after 1900.
at the beginning of the twentieth century magazines enjoyed increasing popularity.
mcclures magazine pioneered investigative journalism.
the november 1902 edition featured the first installment of ida tarbells two year series on standard oil that exposed the corrupt practices and deals that had helped create the company.
prominent figures spread swiftly.
colliers had articles on questionable stock market practices patent medicines and the beef trust.
novelist upton sinclair tackled the meatpackers in the jungle 1906.
in 1904 steffens collected his mcclures articles in the shame of the cities with an introduction expressing confidence that reform was possible that our shamelessness is superficial that beneath it lies a pride which being real may save us yet muckraking flourished from 1903 to 1909 and while it did good writers and bad investigated almost every corner of american life government labor unions big business wall street health care the food industry child labor womens rights prostitution ghetto living and life insurance.
life in the states an english visitor said in 1900 is one perpetual whirl of telephones telegrams phonographs electric bells motors lifts and automatic instruments if not quite as automated as the visitor described conditions in america were better than just a few years before.
farms and factories were once again prosperous in 1901 for the first time in years the economy reached full capacity.
farm prices rose almost 50 percent between 1900 and 1910.
unemployment dropped.
in the united states of today a boston newspaper said in 1904 everyone is middle class.
the resort to force the wild talk of the nineties are over.
everyone is busily happily getting ahead everyone of course was not middle class nor was everyone getting ahead.
wild talk persisted.
many of the problems that had angered people in the 1890s continued into the new century and millions of americans still suffered from poverty and disease.
racism sat even more heavily on african americans in both south and north and there was increasing hostility against immigrants from southern and eastern europe and from mexico and asia.
yet to some degree the boston newspaper was right economic conditions were better for many people and as a result prosperity became one of the keys to understanding the era and the nature of progressive reform.
the start of the new century was another key as well for it influenced people to take a fresh look at themselves and their times.
excited about beginning the twentieth century people believed technology and enterprise would shape a better life.
savoring the word new they talked of the new poetry new cinema new history new democracy new woman new art new immigration new morality and new city.
magazines picked up the word there were the new republic and the new statesman.
presidents theodore roosevelt and woodrow wilson called their political programs the new nationalism and the new freedom.
the word mass also cropped up frequently.
victors in the recent war with spain americans took pride in teeming cities burgeoning corporations and other marks of the mass society.
they enjoyed the fruits of mass production read mass circulation newspapers chapter 22 the progressive era and magazines and took mass transit from the growing spiral of suburbs into the central cities.
behind mass production lay significant changes in the nations industrial system.
businesses grew at a rapid rate.
they were large in the three decades after the civil war but in the years between 1895 and 1915 industries became mammoth employing thousands of workers and equipped with assembly lines to turn out huge quantities of the companys product.
inevitably changes in management attitudes business organization and worker roles influenced the entire society.
inevitably too the growth of giant businesses gave rise to a widespread fear of trusts and a desire among many progressive reformers to break them up or regulate them.
the innovative model t in the movement toward large scale business and mass production the automobile industry was one of those that led the way.
in 1895 there were only four cars on the nations roads in 1917 there were watch the video nearly five million and the automobile had already helped work a small revolution in industrial methods and social mores.
mass production of automobiles began in the first years of the century.
using an assembly line system that foreshadowed later techniques ransom e olds turned out five thousand olds runabouts in 1904.
but oldss days of leadership were numbered.
in 1903 henry ford and a small group of associates formed the ford motor company the firm that transformed the business.
ford was forty years old.
he had tried farming and hated it.
during the 1890s he worked as an engineer for detroits edison company but spent his spare time designing internal combustion engines and automobiles.
at first like many others in the industry he concentrated on building luxury and racing cars.
racing his own cars ford became the speed demon of detroit in 1904 he set the worlds land speed record more than ninety miles per hour in the 999 a large red racer that shot flames from the motor.
in 1903 ford sold the first ford car.
the price was high and in 1905 ford raised prices still higher.
sales plummeted.
in 1907 the rise and fall of the automobile economy the twentieth century was the century of the expansive automobile industry.
it remade american culture.
in the model t era of 1908 to 1927 automobiles transitioned from being toys to being household necessities.
the changing face of industrialism he lowered the price sales and revenues rose.
ford learned an important lesson of the modern economy a smaller unit profit on a large number of sales meant enormous revenues.
early in 1908 he introduced the model t a four cylinder 20 horsepower tin lizzie costing 850 and available only in black.
eleven thousand were sold the first year.
i am going to democratize the automobile ford proclaimed.
when im through everybody will be able to afford one and about everyone will have one the key was mass production and after many experiments ford copied the techniques of meatpackers who moved animal carcasses along overhead trolleys from station to station.
adapting the process to automobile assembly ford in 1913 set up moving assembly lines in his plant in highland park michigan that dramatically reduced the time and cost of producing cars.
emphasizing continuous movement he strove for a nonstop flow from raw material to finished product.
in 1914 he sold 248 000 model t cars.
that year ford workers assembled a car in ninety three minutes one tenth the time it had taken just eight months before.
on a single day in 1925 ford set a record by turning out 9109 model ts a new car for every ten seconds of the workday.
while ford was putting more and more cars on the road the 1916 federal aid roads act a little noticed measure set the framework for road building in the twentieth century.
removing control from county governments it required every state desiring federal funds to establish a highway department to plan routes oversee construction and maintain roads.
in states that had such departments the federal government paid half the cost of building the roads.
providing for a planned highway system the act produced a national network of two lane all weather intercity roads.
the burgeoning trusts as businesses like fords grew capital and organization became increasingly important and the result was the formation of a growing number of trusts.
standard oil started the trend in 1882 but the greatest momentum came two decades later.
between 1898 and 1903 a series of mergers and consolidations swept the economy.
many smaller firms disappeared swallowed up in giant corporations.
by 1904 large scale combinations of one form or another controlled nearly two fifths of the capital in manufacturing in the country.
the result was not monopoly but oligopoly control of a commodity or service by a small number of large powerful companies.
six great financial groups dominated the railroad industry a handful of holding companies controlled utilities and steel.
rockefellers standard oil owned about 85 percent of the oil business.
large companies such as standard oil and american tobacco had weathered the depression of the 1890s and after 1898 financiers and industrialists followed their example and formed the amalgamated copper company consolidated tobacco u s rubber and a host of others.
by 1909 just 1 percent of the industrial firms were producing nearly half of all manufactured goods.
giant businesses reached abroad for raw materials and new markets.
united fruit an empire of plantations and steamships in the caribbean exploited opportunities created by victory in the war with spain.
u s steel worked with overseas companies to fix the price of steel rails an unattainable business consolidations mergers 1895 1905 1896 1897 1898 1899 1900 1901 1902 1903 1904 dream just a few years before.
for decades competition had sent rail prices up and down now they stayed at 28 a ton and through the famous gary dinners in which elbert h gary of u s steel brought steel executives from competing firms together to set prices market conditions were fixed for wide areas of the industry.
though the trend has been overstated finance capitalists such as j p morgan tended to replace the industrial capitalists of an earlier era.
able to finance the mergers and reorganizations investment bankers played a greater and greater role in the economy.
a multibillion dollar financial house j p morgan and company operated a network of control that ran from new york city to every industrial and financial center in the nation.
like other investment firms it held directorships in many corporations creating interlocking directorates that allowed it to control many businesses.
in 1913 two banking groups morgans and rockefellers held 341 directorships in 112 corporations with an aggregate capital of more than 22 billion.
massive business growth set off a decade long debate over what government should do about the trusts.
some critics who believed that the giant companies were responsible for stifling individual opportunity and raising prices wanted to break them up into small competitive units.
others argued that large scale business was a mark of the times and that it produced more goods and better lives.
the debate over the trusts was one of the issues that shaped the progressive era but it was never a simple contest between high minded reformers and greedy business titans.
some progressives favored big business others wanted it broken up.
business leaders themselves were divided in their viewpoints and some welcomed reform led assaults on giant competitors.
as a rule both progressives and business leaders drew on similar visions of the country complex expansive hopeful managerially minded chapter 22 the progressive era and oriented toward results and efficiency.
they both believed in private property and the importance of economic progress.
in fact in working for reform the progressives often drew on the managerial methods of a business world they sought to regulate.
managing the machines mass production changed the direction of american industry.
size system organization and marketing became increasingly important.
management focused on speed and product not on workers.
assembly line technology changed tasks and to some extent values.
the goal was no longer to make a unique product that would be better than the one before.
the way to make automobiles ford said as early as 1903 is to make one automobile like another automobile to make them all alike to make them come through the factory just alike read the document frederick winslow taylor scientific management 1911 in 1911 frederick winslow taylor published his book the principles of scientific management.
in this work taylor proposed two major reforms.
first management must take responsibility for job related knowledge and classify it into rules.
second management should control the workplace through standardization of methods.
in a development that rivaled assembly lines in importance businesses established industrial research laboratories where scientists and engineers developed new products.
general electric founded the first one in 1900 housed in a barn.
it soon attracted experts who designed improvements in light bulbs invented the cathode ray tube worked on early radio and even tinkered with atomic theory.
du pont opened its labs in 1911 eastman kodak in 1912 and standard oil in 1919.
as the source of new ideas and technology the labs altered life in the twentieth century.
through all this business became large scale mechanized and managed.
while many shops still employed fewer than a dozen workers the proportion of such shops shrank.
by 1920 close to one half of all industrial workers toiled in factories employing more than 250 people.
more than one third worked in factories that were part of multiplant companies.
industries that processed materials iron and steel paper cement and chemicals were increasingly automated and operated continuously.
in the glass industry machines ended the domination of highly skilled and well paid craftspeople.
in 1908 irving w colburn invented a machine to manufacture plate glass the libbey owens ford company bought the patent and ford soon had a glassmaking machine from which emerged every day for two years a 3 mile ribbon of automobile window glass.
eventually the plant produced almost two thousand miles of glass.
workers tending such ribbons could not fall behind.
foremen still managed the laborers on the factory floor but more and more the rules came down from a central office where trained professional managers supervised production flow.
systematic record keeping cost accounting and inventory and production controls became widespread.
workers lost control of the work pace.
if you need to turn out a little more a manager at swift and company said you speed up the conveyor a little and the men speed up to keep pace it worked.
for that and other reasons in the automobile industry output per worker hour multiplied an extraordinary four times between 1909 and 1919.
folkways of the workplace workers passing job related knowledge to each other performing their tasks with little supervision setting their own pace and in effect running the shop began to give way to scientific labor management.
more than anyone else frederick winslow taylor an inventive mechanical engineer strove to extract maximum efficiency from each worker.
in the past he believed the man has been first in the future the system must be first in his book the principles of scientific management 1911 taylor proposed two major reforms.
first management must take responsibility for job related knowledge and classify it into rules laws and formulae second management should control the workplace through enforced standardization of methods enforced adoption of the best implements and working conditions and enforced cooperation although few factories wholly adopted taylors principles he had great influence and the doctrines of scientific management spread through american industry.
workers caught up in the changing industrial system experienced the benefits of efficiency and productivity in some industries they earned more.
but they suffered important losses as well.
societys masses performing repetitive tasks they seemed part of the machinery moving to the pace and needs of their mechanical pacesetters.
bored they might easily lose pride of workmanship though many workers it is clear did not.
efficiency engineers experimented with tools and methods a process many workers found unsettling.
yet the goal was to establish routine to work out as someone said of a garment worker one single precise motion each second 3 600 in one hour and all exactly the same praising that worker the manager said she is a sure machine jobs became not only monotonous but dangerous.
as machines and assembly lines sped up boredom or miscalculation could bring disaster.
meat cutters sliced fingers and hands.
illinois steel mills a magazine said were making steel and killing men one mill had forty six deaths in 1906 alone.
injuries were part of many jobs.
the machines go like mad all day a garment worker said because the faster you work the more money you get.
sometimes in my haste i get my finger caught and the needle goes right through it.
i bind the finger up with a piece of cotton and go on working watch the video rural free delivery mail societys masses how did mass production affect women children immigrants and african americans.
spreading consumer goods through society mass production not only improved peoples lives but sometimes cost lives too.
tending the machines took hard painful labor often under dangerous conditions.
as businesses expanded they required more and more people and the labor force increased tremendously to keep up with the demand for workers in the factories mines and forests.
women african americans asian americans and mexican americans played larger and larger roles.
immigration soared.
between 1901 and 1910 nearly 8 8 million immigrants entered the united states between 1911 and 1920 another 5 7 million came.
for many of these people life was harsh spent in crowded slums and long hours on the job.
fortunately the massive unemployment of the 1890s was over and in many skilled trades such as cigar making there was plenty of work to go around.
though the economic recovery helped nearly everyone the less skilled continued to be the less fortunate.
migrant workers lumberjacks ore shovelers and others struggled to find jobs that paid decently.
under such circumstances many people fought to make a living and many too fought to improve their lot.
their efforts along with the efforts of the reform minded people who came to their aid became another important hallmark of the progressive era.
better times on the farm while people continued to flee the farms by 1920 fewer than one third of all americans lived on farms and fewer than one half lived in rural areas farmers themselves prospered the beneficiaries of greater production and expanding urban markets.
rural free delivery begun in 1896 helped diminish the farmers sense of isolation and changed farm life.
the delivery the west virginia experiment with rural free delivery was launched in relative obscurity and in an atmosphere of hostility.
critics of the plan claimed it was impractical and too expensive to have a postal carrier trudge over rutted roads and through forests trying to deliver mail in all kinds of weather.
of mail to the farm door opened that door to a wider world it exposed farmers to urban thinking national advertising and political events.
in 1911 more than one billion newspapers and magazines were delivered over rfd routes.
parcel post 1913 permitted the sending of packages through the u s mail.
mail order houses flourished rural merchants suffered.
packages went both ways president woodrow wilsons first parcel post delivery held 8 pounds of new jersey apples and within a year 300 million packages were being mailed annually.
while telephones and electricity did not reach most rural areas for decades better roads mail order catalogs and other innovations knit farmers into the larger society.
early in the new century mary e lease who in her populist days had urged kansas farmers to raise less corn and more hell moved to brooklyn.
farmers still had problems.
land prices rose with crop prices and farm tenancy increased especially in the south.
tenancy grew from one quarter of all farms in 1880 to more than one third in 1910.
in south carolina georgia alabama and mississippi nearly two thirds of the farms were run by tenant farmers.
many southern tenant farmers were african americans and they suffered from farm bred diseases.
in one of the reforms of the progressive era in 1909 the rockefeller sanitary commission acting on recent scientific discoveries began a sanitation campaign that eventually wiped out the hookworm disease and in 1912 the u s public health service began work on rural malaria.
in the arid west irrigation transformed the land as the federal government and private landholders joined to import water from mountain watersheds.
the dry lands bloomed and so did a rural chapter 22 the progressive era read the document gifford pinchot the fight for conservation 1910 co lum bia r canada ssouri r.
mi washington north dakota r montana india called picking asparagus a ghastly job paid at the rate of ten cents a box they gave us miles and miles of asparagus rows.
as soon as i had knelt down with my knife and cut out one head and put it in the box there would be another one sprouting before me.
then i would have to stoop again and it was continuous picking and stooping that made it a terrible form of exercise.
it is walk and bend bend and walk from half past four in the morning or thereabouts until seven in the evening.
o c k oregon south dakota y idaho sn ake r wyoming m s t n sierr utah d ra lo co r nebraska.
a ad ev an california nevada o colorado kansas oklahoma arizona pacific ocean new mexico texas o ri and gr e 400 miles mexico 400 kilometers irrigation projects reservoirs and lakes used as reservoirs federal land reserves irrigation and conservation in the west to 1917 to make the arid lands of the western states productive the state and federal governments regulated the water supply through irrigation projects and the creation of water reservoirs.
the federal government also created land reserves.
class structure that sharply separated owners from workers.
under the newlands act of 1902 the secretary of the interior formed the u s reclamation service which gathered a staff of thousands of engineers and technicians the largest bureaucracy ever assembled in irrigation history dams and canals channeled water into places such as californias imperial valley and as the water streamed in cotton cantaloupes oranges tomatoes lettuce and a host of other crops streamed out to national markets.
by 1920 idaho montana utah wyoming colorado and oregon had extensive irrigation systems all drawing on scarce water supplies california the foremost importer of water had 4 2 million acres under irrigation many of them picked by migrant workers from mexico china and japan.
the work was backbreaking and poorly paid.
a worker from women and children at work women worked in larger and larger numbers.
in 1900 more than five million worked one fift h of all adult women and among those aged fourteen to twenty four the employment rate was almost one third.
of those employed single women outnumbered married women by seven to one yet more than one third of married women worked.
most women held service jobs.
only a small number held higher paying jobs as professionals or managers.
in the 1890s women made up more than one quarter of medical school graduates.
using a variety of techniques men gradually squeezed them out and by the 1920s only about 5 percent of the graduates were women.
few women taught in colleges and universities and those who did were expected to resign if they married.
in 1906 harriet brooks a promising physicist at barnard college in new york became engaged and refused to resign the dean told her icily that barnard expected a married woman to dignify her home making into a profession and not assume that she can carry on two full professions at a time more women than men graduated from high school and with such professions as medicine and science largely closed to them women often turned to the new business schools that offered training in stenography typing and bookkeeping.
in 1920 more than one quarter of all employed women held clerical jobs.
many others taught school.
in 1907 and 1908 investigators studied twenty two thousand women workers in pittsburgh 60 percent of them earned less than 7 a week a minimum for decent living fewer than 1 percent held skilled jobs most tended machines wrapped and labeled or did handwork that required no particular skill.
in new york many women toiled six days a week as garment workers from eight in the morning to six in the evening with an extra hour off on saturdays.
they earned 7 to 12 a week nothing at all during slack season.
they had to buy their own needles and thread and pay for electricity and chairs to sit on.
black women had always worked and in far larger numbers than their white counterparts.
the reason was usually economic an african american man or woman alone could rarely earn enough to support a family.
unlike many white women black women tended to remain in the labor force after marriage or the start of a family.
they also had less opportunity for job advancement and in 1920 between one third and one half of all african american women who were working were restricted to personal and domestic service jobs.
societys masses read the document john spargo from the bitter cry of the children 1906 spurred by the data the childrens bureau was formed within the u s bureau of labor with grace abbott a social worker at its head.
it immediately began its own investigations showing among other things the need for greater protection of maternal and infant health.
in 1921 congress passed the sheppard towner maternity and infancy protection act which helped fund maternity and pediatric clinics.
providing a precedent for the social security act of 1935 it demonstrated the increasing effectiveness of women reformers in the progressive era.
numerous middle class women became involved in the fight for reform while many others reflecting the ongoing changes in the family took increasing pride in homemaking and motherhood.
mothers day the national holiday was formally established in 1913.
women who preferred smaller numbers of children turned increasingly to birth control which became a more acceptable practice.
margaret sanger a nurse and outspoken social reformer led a campaign to give physicians broad discretion in prescribing contraceptives.
when sanger became involved in the birth control movement the federal comstock law banned the interstate transport of contraceptive devices and information.
the niagara movement and the naacp breaker boys who picked out pieces of slate from the coal as it rushed past often became bent backed and suffered respiratory diseases such as bronchitis and tuberculosis after years of working fourteen hours a day in the coal mines.
accidents and deaths were common in the mines.
critics charged that womens employment endangered the home threatened their reproductive functions and even as one man said stripped them of that modest demeanor that lends a charm to their kind adding to these fears the birthrate continued to drop between 1900 and 1920 and the divorce rate soared in part because working class men took advantage of the newer moral freedom and deserted their families in growing numbers.
by 1916 there was one divorce for every nine marriages as compared to one for twenty one in 1880.
many children also worked.
in 1900 about three million children nearly 20 percent of those between the ages of 5 and 15 held full time or almost full time jobs.
twenty five thousand boys under 16 worked in mining twenty thousand children under 12 mainly girls worked in southern cotton mills.
gradually as public indignation grew the use of child labor shrank.
determined to do something about the situation the womens trade union league lobbied the federal bureau of labor to investigate the conditions under which women and children worked.
begun in 1907 the investigation took four years and produced nineteen volumes of data some of it shocking all of it factual.
in 1911 at the turn of the century eight of every ten african americans still lived in rural areas mainly in the south.
most were poor sharecroppers.
jim crow laws segregated many schools railroad cars hotels and hospitals.
poll taxes and other devices disfranchised blacks and many poor whites.
violence was common from 1900 to 1914 white mobs murdered more than a thousand black people.
two murders occurred near vicksburg mississippi in 1904 and they revealed a great deal about the kind of violence african americans faced.
looking for the killer of a white planter a mob captured a black man and woman their guilt or innocence unknown.
they were tied to trees and their fingers and ears were cut off as souvenirs.
the most excruciating form of punishment consisted in the use of a large corkscrew in the hands of some of the mob.
this instrument was bored into the flesh of the man and the woman in the arms legs and body and then pulled out the spirals tearing out big pieces of raw quivering flesh every time it was withdrawn finally both people were thrown on a fire and burned to death a relief a witness said to the maimed and suffering victims many african americans labored on the cotton farms and in the railroad camps sawmills and mines of the south under conditions of peonage.
peons traded their lives and labor for food and shelter.
often illiterate they were forced to sign contracts allowing the planter to use such force as he or his agents may deem necessary to require me to remain on his farm and perform good and satisfactory services armed guards patrolled the camps and whipped those trying to escape.
in the woods a peon said they can do anything they please and no one can see them but god few blacks belonged to labor unions and blacks almost always earned less than whites in the same job.
in atlanta white electricians earned 5 00 a day blacks 3 50.
black songs such as ive got a white man workin for me 1901 voiced more hope than reality.
the illiteracy rate among african americans dropped from 45 percent in 1900 to 30 percent in 1910 but nowhere were chapter 22 the progressive era watch the video the conflict between booker t washington and w e b.
dubois 1960s white mobs invaded black neighborhoods burning looting and killing.
they lynched two blacks one eighty four years old in springfield.
outrage was voiced by william e walling a wealthy southerner and settlement house worker mary ovington a white anthropology student and oswald garrison villard grandson of the famous abolitionist william lloyd garrison.
along with other reformers white and black among them jane addams and john dewey they issued a call for the conference that organized the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp which swiftly became the most important civil rights organization in the country.
created in 1909 within five years the naacp grew to fifty branches and more than six thousand members.
walling headed it and du bois the only african american among the top officers directed publicity and edited the crisis the voice of the organization.
joined by the national urban league which was created in 1911 the naacp pressured employers labor unions and the government on behalf of african americans.
it had some victories.
in guinn v united states 1915 the differences between booker t washington and w e b.
dubois were differences of personality the supreme court overturned a grandfather differences of leadership and quite frankly differences over who was going to exercise power a clause that kept african americans from votsouthern former slave or a northern african american intellectual.
ing in oklahoma and in buchanan v worley 1917 it struck down a law in louisville kentucky that required they given equal school facilities teachers salaries or educational residential segregation.
in 1918 in the midst of world war i the materials.
in 1910 scarcely eight thousand african american naacp and the national urban league persuaded the federal govyouths were attending high schools in all the states of the southeast.
ernment to form a special bureau of negro economics within the south carolina spent 13 98 annually for the education of each labor department to look after the interests of african american white child 1 13 for each black child.
wage earners.
african american leaders grew increasingly impatient with despite these gains african americans continued to this kind of treatment and in 1905 a group of them led by socioloexperience disfranchisement poor job opportunities and gist w e b dubois met near niagara falls new york they met segregation.
as booker t washington said in 1913 i have never on the canadian side of the falls since no hotel on the american seen the colored people so discouraged and so bitter as they are side would take them.
there they pledged action in the matters at the present time of voting equal access to economic opportunity integration and equality before the law.
rejecting booker t washingtons gradualist approach the niagara movement claimed for african i hear the whistle immigrants in americans every single right that belongs to a freeborn american the labor force political civil and social and until we get these rights we will never while women and african americans worked in growing cease to protest numbers much of the huge increase in the labor force in these the niagara movement focused on equal rights and the eduyears came from outside the country particularly from europe cation of african american youth of whom it said they have a and mexico.
between 1901 and 1920 the extraordinarily high total right to know to think to aspire keeping alive a program of miliof 14 5 million immigrants entered the country more than in any tant action it spawned later civil rights movements.
du bois was previous twenty year period.
continuing the trend begun in the its inspiration.
in the souls of black folk 1903 and other works 1880s many came from southern and eastern europe.
still called he called eloquently for justice and equality.
by every civilized and the new immigrants they met hostility from older immigrants peaceful method he said we must strive for the right which the of northern european stock who questioned their values religion world accords to man often catholic or jewish traditions and appearance.
peace was sometimes hard to come by.
race riots broke out labor agents called padroni among the italians greeks in atlanta georgia in 1906 and in springfield illinois in 1908 and syrians recruited immigrant workers found them jobs the latter the home of abraham lincoln.
unlike the riots of the societys masses and deducted a fee from their wages.
headquartered in salt lake city leonidas g skliris the czar of the greeks provided workers for the utah copper company and the western pacific railroad.
in chicago at the turn of the century padroni employed more than one fifth of all italians in new york city they controlled two thirds of the entire labor force.
immigrant patterns often departed from traditional stereotypes.
immigrants for example moved both to and from their homelands.
fifty percent or more of the members of some groups returned home although the proportion varied.
jews and czechs often brought their families to resettle in america serbs and poles tended to come singly intent on earning enough money to make a fresh start at home.
some migrants italian men in particular virtually commuted returning home every slack season.
these temporary migrants became known as birds of passage.
the outbreak of world war i interrupted the practice and trapped thousands of italians and others who had planned to return to europe.
older residents lumped the newcomers together ignoring geographic religious and other differences.
preserving important regional distinctions italians tended to settle as calabreses venetians abruzzis and sicilians.
old stock americans viewed them all simply as italians.
henry ford and other employers tried to erase the differences through english classes and deliberate americanization programs.
the ford motor company ran a school where immigrant employees were first taught to say i am a good american at the graduation ceremony the pupils acted out a gigantic pantomime in which clad in their old country dress they filed into a large melting pot when they emerged they were wearing identical american made clothes and each was waving a little american flag.
in similar fashion the international harvester corporation taught polish laborers to speak english but it had other lessons in view as well.
according to lesson one drilled into the polish pupils i hear the whistle.
i must hurry.
i hear the five minute whistle.
it is time to go into the shop.
i take my check from the gate board and hang it on the department board.
i change my clothes and get ready to work.
the starting whistle blows.
i eat my lunch.
it is forbidden to eat until then.
the whistle blows at five minutes of starting time.
i get ready to go to work.
i work until the whistle blows to quit.
i leave my place nice and clean.
i put all my clothes in the locker.
i must go home.
labor groups soon learned to counter these techniques.
the womens trade union league wtul urged workers to ignore business sponsored english lessons because they did not tell the girl worker the things she really wants to know.
they do not suggest that 5 a week is not a living wage.
they tell her to be respectful to her employer designing its own educational program the wtul in 1912 published new world lessons for old world peoples which provided quite a different kind of english lesson a union girl takes me into the union.
the union girls are glad to see me.
they call me sister.
i will work hard for our union.
i will come to all the union meetings.
in another significant development at the beginning of the twentieth century mexicans for the first time immigrated in large numbers especially after a revolution in mexico in 1910 forced many to flee across the northern border into texas new mexico arizona and california.
their exact numbers were unknown.
american officials did not count border crossings until 1907 and even then many migrants avoided the official immigration stations.
almost all came from the mexican lower class eager to escape immigration to the united states 1900 1920 by area of origin immigrants thousands northern and western europe southern and eastern europe asia africa and america note for purposes of classification northern and western europe includes great britain ireland scandinavia the netherlands belgium luxembourg switzerland france and germany.
southern and eastern europe includes poland austria hungary russia and the baltic states romania bulgaria european turkey italy spain portugal and greece.
asia africa and america includes asian turkey china japan india canada the caribbean latin america and all of africa.
source u s bureau of the census historical statistics of the united states colonial times to 1970 bicentennial edition washington dc 1975.
chapter 22 the progressive era men outnumbered women by ten to one in the chinese american population and with a male median age of 42 their communities were generally dominated by the elderly.
the chinese american population differed in another respect as well.
unlike other immigrant groups whose numbers tended to grow the number of chinese americans shrank in these years from about 125 000 in the early 1880s to just over 60 000 in 1920.
after 1910 the u s government set up a special immigration facility at angel island in san francisco bay but unlike european immigrants who landed at ellis island in new york and were quickly sent on chinese immigrants were kept for weeks and months examined and reexamined before being allowed to cross the narrow band of water to san francisco.
angel island remained open until 1940 and a poem carved into the wall of building 317 showed the feelings of some of those who waited mexican immigration to the united states 1900 1920 immigrants thousands there are tens of thousands of poems composed on these walls they are all cries of complaint and sadness.
the day i am rid of this prison and attain success i must remember that this prison once existed.
in my daily needs i must be frugal.
needless extravagance leads youth to ruin.
all my compatriots please be mindful.
once you have some small gains return home early.
by one from xiangshan peonage and violence in their native land.
labor agents called coyotes usually in the employ of large corporations or working for ranchers recruited mexican workers.
between 1900 and 1910 the mexican population of texas and new mexico nearly doubled in arizona it more than doubled in california it quadrupled.
in all four states it doubled again between 1910 and 1920.
after the turn of the century almost 10 percent of the total population of mexico moved to the american southwest.
in time these mexican americans and their children transformed the southwest.
they built most of the early highways in texas new mexico and arizona dug the irrigation ditches that watered crops throughout the area laid railroad track and picked the cotton and vegetables that clothed and fed millions of americans.
many lived in shacks and shanties along the railroad tracks isolated in a separate spanish speaking world.
like other immigrant groups they also formed enclaves in the cities these barrios became cultural islands of family life foods church and festivals.
fewer people immigrated from china in these years deterred in part by anti chinese laws and hostility.
like many other immigrants most chinese who came did not intend to remain.
wanting to make money and return home they mined farmed and worked as common laborers.
in their willingness to work hard for low wages their desire to preserve clan and family associations from china and their maintenance of strong ties with their home villages chinese americans resembled other immigrant groups but they differed in two important respects.
as late as 1920 many japanese also arrived at angel island and though at first fewer in numbers than the chinese they developed communities along the pacific coast where they settled mainly on farms.
the number of japanese americans grew.
in 1907 the heaviest year of immigration from japan nearly 31 000 japanese entered the united states by 1920 there were 111 000 japanese in the country nearly three quarters of them in california.
as the newcomers arrived from asia europe and mexico nativist sentiment which had criticized earlier waves of immigrants intensified.
old stock americans sneered at their dress and language.
racial theories emphasized the superiority of northern europeans and the new science of eugenics suggested the need to control the population growth of inferior peoples.
hostility toward catholics and jews was common but touched other groups as well.
in 1902 congress enacted a law prohibiting immigration from china.
statutes requiring literacy tests designed to curtail immigration from southern and eastern europe were vetoed by william howard taft in 1913 and by woodrow wilson in 1915 and 1917.
in 1917 such a measure passed despite wilsons veto.
other measures tried to limit immigration from mexico and japan.
conflict in the workplace why were there so many strikes in this period.
assembly lines speedups long hours and low pay produced a dramatic increase in american industrial output and profits after 1900 they also gave rise to numerous strikes and other kinds of labor unrest.
sometimes strikes took place through the conflict in the workplace japanese picture brides arrive at angel island and are lined up for passport inspection before meeting their new husbands.
action of unions sometimes workers just decided they had had enough and walked off the job.
whatever the cause strikes were frequent.
in one industry in one city the meatpacking industry in chicago there were 251 strikes in 1903 alone.
strikes and absenteeism increased after 1910 labor productivity dropped 10 percent between 1915 and 1918 the first such decline in memory.
in many industries labor turnover became a serious problem workers changed jobs in droves.
union membership grew.
in 1900 only about a million workers less than 4 percent of the workforce belonged to unions.
by 1920 five million workers belonged increasing the unionized portion of the workforce to about 13 percent.
as tensions grew between capital and labor some people in the middle class became fearful that unless something was done to improve the workers situation there might be violence or even revolution.
this fear motivated some of the labor oriented reforms of the progressive era.
while some reform supporters genuinely wanted to improve labors lot others embraced reform because they were afraid of something else.
organizing labor samuel gomperss american federation of labor increased from 250 000 members in 1897 to 1 7 million in 1904.
by far the largest union organization it remained devoted to the interests of skilled craftspeople.
while it aimed partly at better wages and working conditions it also sought to limit entry into the crafts and protect worker prerogatives.
within limits the afl found acceptance among giant business corporations eager for conservative policies and labor stability.
of the eight million female workers in 1910 only 125 000 belonged to unions.
gompers continued to resist organizing them saying they were too emotional and as union organizers had a way of making serious mistakes margaret dreier robins an organizer of proven skill scoffed at that.
these men died twenty years ago and are just walking around dead she protested.
robins helped found the womens trade union league in 1903.
the wtul led the effort to organize women into trade unions to lobby for legislation protecting female workers and to educate the chapter 22 the progressive era read the document samuel gompers the american labor movement 1914 samuel gompers second from bottom left co founded the american federation of labor in 1886 and served as its president in 1914 when its membership approached two million skilled workers.
gomperss trade union philosophy focused on the economic ends of skilled workers including achieving higher wages the eight hour day and safe working conditions through collective bargaining with employers.
public on the problems and needs of working women.
it took in all working women who would join regardless of skill although not at first african american women and it won crucial financial support from well to do women such as anne morgan daughter of the feared financier j p morgan.
robinss close friend jane addams belonged as did mary mcdowell the angel of the stockyards who worked with slaughterhouse workers in chicago julia lathrop who tried to improve the lot of wage earning children and dr alice hamilton a pioneer in american research on the causes of industrial disease.
the wtul never had many members a few thousand at most but its influence extended far beyond its membership.
in 1909 it supported the uprising of the 20 000 a strike of shirtwaist workers in new york city.
when female employees of the triangle shirtwaist company tried to form a union the company fired them and they walked out twenty thousand men and women in five hundred other shops followed.
strike meetings were conducted in three languages english yiddish and italian and before being forced to go back to work the strikers won a shorter workweek and a few other gains.
sadly the triangle women lost out on another important demand for unlocked shop doors and safe fire escapes.
their loss proved lethal in the famous triangle shirtwaist company fire of 1911 see the feature essay the triangle fire pp.
the wtul also backed a strike in 1910 against hart schaff ner and marx chicagos largest manufacturer of mens clothing.
one day annie shapiro the 18 year old daughter of russian immigrants was told her wages were being cut from conflict in the workplace 7 a week to 6 20.
that was a large cut and along with sixteen other young women shapiro refused to accept it and walked out.
we had to be recognized as people she said later.
soon other women walked out and the revolt spread.
managers quickly promised to restore the cuts but as one woman said just then there was big noise outside and we all rushed to the windows and there we saw the police beating the strikers on our account and when we saw that we went out in a matter of days some forty thousand garment workers were on strike about half of them women.
manufacturers hurried to negotiate and the result was the important hart schaffner agreement which created an arbitration committee composed of management and labor to handle grievances and settle disputes.
the first successful experiment in collective bargaining the hart schaffner agreement became the model for the kind of agreements that govern industrial relations today.
another union the industrial workers of the world iww attracted by far the greatest attention and the most fears in these years.
unlike the wtul it welcomed everyone regardless of gender or race.
unlike the afl it tried to organize the unskilled and foreign born laborers who worked in the mass production industries.
founded in chicago in 1905 it aimed to unite the american working class into a mammoth union to promote labors interests.
its motto an injury to one is an injury to all emphasized labor solidarity as had the earlier knights of labor.
but unlike the knights the iww or wobblies as they were often known urged social revolution.
it is our purpose to overthrow the capitalist system by forcible means if necessary william d big bill haywood one of its founders said and he went on in his speeches to say he knew of nothing a worker could do that will bring as much anguish to labor union membership 1897 1920 millions the boss as a little sabotage in the right place joe hill the iwws legendary folk poet reminded labor of its potential strength if the workers took a notion they could stop all speeding trains every ship upon the ocean they can tie with mighty chains.
every wheel in the creation every mine and every mill fleets and armies of the nation will at their command stand still.
iww leaders included mary harris mother jones a famous veteran of battles in the illinois coalfields elizabeth gurley flynn a fiery young radical who joined as a teenager and big bill haywood himself the strapping one eyed founder of the western federation of miners.
the iww led a number of major strikes.
strikes in lawrence massachusetts 1912 and paterson new jersey 1912 attracted national attention in lawrence when the strikers sent their children ill clad and hungry out of the city to stay with sympathetic families in paterson when they rented new yorks madison square garden for a massive labor pageant.
iww leaders welcomed the revolutionary tumult sweeping russia and other countries.
in the united states they thought a series of local strikes would bring about capitalist repression then a general strike and eventually a workers commonwealth.
the iww fell short of these objectives but during its lifetime from 1905 to the mid 1920s it made major gains among immigrant workers in the northeast migrant farm laborers on the plains and loggers and miners in the south and far west.
in factories like fords it recruited workers resentful of the speedups on the assembly lines.
although iww membership probably amounted to no more than one hundred thousand at any one time workers came and left so often that its total membership may have reached as high as one million.
working with workers 1897 1900 source u s bureau of the census statistical abstract of the united states 1982 1983 103rd ed washington dc 1982.
concerned about labor unrest some business leaders used violence and police action to keep workers in line but others turned to the new fields of applied psychology and personnel management.
a school of industrial psychology emerged.
as had taylor industrial psychologists studied workers routines and further they showed that output was also affected by job satisfaction.
while most businesses pushed ahead with efficiency campaigns a few did establish industrial relations departments hire public relations firms to improve their corporate image and link productivity to job safety and worker happiness.
ivy l lee a pioneer in the field of corporate public relations advised clients such as the pennsylvania railroad and standard oil on how to improve relations with labor and the public.
calling himself a physician to corporate bodies lee urged complete openness on the companys part.
to please employees companies printed newsletters and organized softball teams they awarded prizes and celebrated retirements.
ford created a sociology department staffed by 150 experts who showed workers how to budget their incomes and care for their health.
they even taught them how to shop for meat.
complete the assignment the triangle fire on myhistorylab feature essay w omens fashion changed rather dramatically in the 1890s and early 1900s reflecting in part the desires of women for greater freedom in many parts of their lives.
confining corsets began to disappear as women turned to looser more casual designs.
the shirtwaist or blouse became especially popular flattering to the figure and tapered to a fitted waistline usually worn with a tailored skirt.
that trend brought business a great deal of it to the triangle waist company of new york city which employed more than 500 people and was the largest maker of blouses in the city.
it produced 2 000 of them a day a million dollars worth a year.
at triangle as at similar companies immigrants from eastern europe provided much of the labor.
the triangle company did not pay well none of the companies did but to many immigrants it was a good place to work because unlike many competitors it offered jobs all year round.
triangle also reflected an important factory movement characteristic of these years in which the garment industry changed from the traditional piece work system to large efficient and mass production factories.
under the old system each worker had pushed a treadle usually in her own apartment to power her machine now electricity powered long drive shafts that connected machine after machine.
triangle company employees worked hard five nine hour days a week plus a shorter seven hour day on saturdays.
saturday was also payday.
that was why people were at work on saturday march 25 1911.
the triangle fire at 4 45 p m that day floor leader annah gullo rang the closing bell and shut off the power to the drive shafts the machines fell silent.
chairs pushed back on the wooden floors as workers made their way to the exits to pick up their pay and get their coats for home.
then suddenly a worker came running across the floor shouting fire workers grabbed the fire pails from a ledge above the tables and poured water on the fire but to no avail.
other workers were already lined up at wooden partitions near the exits which channeled them through one at a time so that watchmen could look in their handbags for stolen lace or blouses.
smoke pouring from the eighth floor windows soon attracted a crowd of bystanders outside.
when a large dark bundle fell from one of the windows an onlooker said hes trying to save his best cloth when another bundle hit the ground people realized that this was not cloth it was a human being.
i learned a new sound a reporter said that day a more horrible sound than description can picture.
it was the thud of a speeding living body on a stone sidewalk the first person jumped at about 4 50 p m deciding not to die in the raging fire.
but it was hard to survive the jump too the street was nearly 100 feet below and in march 1911 ladders on fire trucks could reach no higher than the sixth floor.
inside people screamed as they searched for the exits eyes blinded by the shifting smoke.
as they crowded onto the flimsy fire escape it twisted and fell the victim of its own poor design.
adding to the tragedy workers at triangle had gone on strike in 1909 two years before in the famous uprising of the 20 000 the largest strike ever organized by working women anywhere in the world as one journalist has noted.
some garment workers had won but the triangle women had not.
they had asked for adequate fire escapes and unblocked exits they got neither.
i remembered their great strike.
in which these girls demanded more sanitary workrooms and more safety precautions in the shops a reporter wrote after the fire.
these dead bodies told the result in the days following the fire protest meetings were held across the city.
i would be a traitor to those poor burned bodies if i were to come here to talk good fellowship rose schneiderman a dynamic 29 year old organizer for the womens trade union league told one rally.
we have tried you good people of the public and we have found you wanting.
this is not the first time girls have been burned alive in this city.
every week i must learn of the untimely death of one of my sister workers.
every year thousands of us are maimed.
the life of men and women is so cheap and property is so sacred one hundred forty six people nearly all young women died in the fire.
the fire galvanized reformers interested in factory safety and there were many of them in this progressive era.
frances perkins later secretary of labor under franklin d roosevelt the first female cabinet member in the countrys history was visiting friends near the triangle factory on the day of the fire.
they heard the fire engines and rushed out to see what was happening.
we got there just as they started to jump perkins recalled.
i shall never forget the frozen horror which came over us as we stood with our hands on our throats watching that horrible sight knowing that there was no help view the closer look triangle fire march 25 1911 crowds of young women who made it out onto the fire escape perished when it gave way under their weight.
on april 5 signaling public protest eighty thousand people marched silently in the rain in a funeral procession up fifth avenue.
a quarter million people lined the route.
in response to the outcry new york state authorities created a factory investigating commission that sent examiners into factories across the state.
in all the tragedy spurred passage of thirty six new labor laws a new industrial code for the state of new york and higher national standards for factory safety.
new laws required automatic fire sprinklers in high rise buildings mandatory fire drills and unlocked doors at factory exits.
frances perkins who had advised the commission thought the events at triangle had lasting consequences.
the triangle fire she later said was the first day of the new deal questions for discussion 1.
what changes in american society and industry lay behind the circumstances of the triangle fire.
why were so many women killed in the triangle fire.
why did frances perkins say that the triangle fire was the first day of the new deal.
chapter 22 the progressive era on january 5 1914 ford took another significant step.
he announced the five dollar day the greatest revolution he said in the matter of rewards for workers ever known to the industrial world with a stroke he doubled the wage rate for common labor reduced the working day from nine hours to eight and established a personnel department to place workers in appropriate jobs.
the next day ten thousand applicants stood outside the gates.
as a result ford had the pick of the labor force.
turnover declined absenteeism previously as much as one tenth of all ford workers every day fell to 0 3 percent.
output increased the iww at ford collapsed.
the plan increased wages but it also gave the company greater control over a more stable labor force.
workers had to meet a behavior code in order to qualify for the five dollar day.
at first scornful of the utopian plan business leaders across the country soon copied it and on january 2 1919 ford announced the six dollar day.
amoskeag in size system and worker relations the record of the amoskeag company textile mills was revealing.
located beside the merrimack river in manchester new hampshire the mills an enormous complex of factories warehouses canals and machinery had been built in the 1830s.
by the turn of the century they were producing nearly fifty miles of cloth an hour more cloth each day than any other set of mills in the entire world.
the face of the mills an almost solid wall of red brick stretched nearly a mile.
archways and bridges pierced the facade.
amoskeag resembled a walled medieval city within which workers found a total institution a closed and almost self contained world at first the mills employed young women for labor but by 1900 more and more immigrant males staffed the machines.
french canadians irish poles and greeks seventeen thousand in all worked there and their experiences revealed a great deal about factory work and life at the turn of the century.
the company hired and fired at will and it demanded relentless output from the spindles and spinning frames.
yet it also viewed employees as its children and looked for total loyalty in return an expectation often realized.
workers identified with amoskeag and decades later still called themselves amoskeag men and women.
we were all like a family one said.
most amoskeag workers preferred the industrial world of the mills to the farms they had left behind.
they did not feel displaced they knew the pains of industrial life and they adapted in ways that fit their own needs and traditions.
families played a large role.
they neither disintegrated nor lost their relationships.
french canadians and others often came in family units.
one or two family members left the farm for the mills maintained close ties with those back home and then sent for others creating a form of chain migration once in manchester families often toiled in the same workrooms.
looking after each other they asked for transfers and promotions for relatives they taught their children technical skills and how to get along with bosses and fellow workers.
although low paid amoskeag employees took pride in their work and for many of them a well turned out product provided dignity and self esteem.
as part of its paternal interest in employee welfare in 1910 the company inaugurated a welfare and efficiency program which aimed to increase productivity accustom immigrants to industrial work instill company loyalty and curb labor unrest.
playgrounds and visiting nurses home buying plans a cooking school and dental service were part of the plan.
the amoskeag textile club held employee dinners and picnics organized shooting clubs and a baseball team sponsored christmas parties for the children and published the amoskeag bulletin a monthly magazine of employee news.
from 1885 to 1919 no strike touched the mills.
thereafter however labor unrest increased.
overproduction and foreign competition took their toll and amoskeag closed in 1935.
a new urban culture what happened to art and culture in these years so filled with change.
for many americans the quality of life improved significantly between 1900 and 1920.
jobs were relatively plentiful and in a development of great importance more and more people were entering the professions as doctors lawyers teachers and engineers.
with comfortable incomes a growing middle class could take advantage of new lifestyles inventions and forms of entertainment.
mass production could not have worked without mass consumption and americans in these years increasingly became a nation of consumers.
production and consumption in 1900 business firms spent about 95 million on advertising twenty years later they spent more than 500 million.
ads and billboards touted cigarettes cars perfumes and cosmetics.
advertising agencies boomed.
using new sampling techniques they developed modern concepts of market testing and research.
sampling customer preferences affected business indirectly as well making it more responsive to public opinion on social and political issues.
mass production swept the clothing industry and dressed more americans better than any people ever before.
using lessons learned in making uniforms during the civil war manufacturers for the first time developed standard clothing and shoe sizes that fit most bodies.
clothing prices dropped the availability of inexpensive off the rack clothes lessened distinctions between rich and poor.
by 1900 nine of every ten men and boys wore the new ready to wear clothes.
in 1900 people employed in manufacturing earned on average 418 a year.
two decades later they earned 1 342 a year though inflation took much of the increase.
while the middle class expanded the rich also grew richer.
in 1920 the new income tax showed the first accurate tabulation of income and it confirmed what many had suspected all along.
five percent of the population received almost one fourth of all income.
living and dying in an urban nation in 1920 the median age of the population was only 25.
it is now 35.
immigration accounted for part of the populations youthfulness since most immigrants were young.
thanks to a new urban culture medical advances and better living conditions the death rate dropped in the early years of the century the average life span increased.
between 1900 and 1920 life expectancy rose from 49 to 56 years for white women and from 47 to 54 years for white men.
it rose from 33 to 45 years for blacks and other racial minorities.
despite the increase in life expectancy infant mortality remained high nearly 10 percent of white babies and 20 percent of minority babies died in the first year of life.
in comparison to today fewer babies on average survived to adolescence and fewer people survived beyond middle age.
in 1900 the death rate among people between 45 and 65 was more than twice the modern rate.
as a result there were relatively fewer older people in 1900 only 4 percent of the population was older than 65 compared to nearly 13 percent today.
fewer children than today knew their grandparents.
still improvements in health care helped people live longer and as a result the incidence of cancer and heart disease increased.
cities grew and by any earlier standards they grew on a colossal scale.
downtowns became a central hive of skyscrapers department stores warehouses and hotels.
strips of factories radiated from the center.
as street railways spread cities took on a systematic pattern of socioeconomic segregation usually in rings.
the innermost ring filled with immigrants circled by a belt of working class housing.
the remaining rings marked areas of rising affluence outward toward wealthy suburbs which themselves formed around shopping strips and grid patterns of streets that restricted social interaction.
the giants were new york chicago and philadelphia industrial cities that turned out every kind of product from textiles to structural steel.
smaller cities such as rochester new york or cleveland ohio specialized in manufacturing a specific line of goods or processing regional products for the national market.
railroads instead of highways tied things together in 1916 the rail network the largest in the world reached its peak 254 000 miles of track that carried more than three fourths of all intercity freight tonnage.
step by step cities adopted their twentieth century forms.
between 1909 and 1915 los angeles a city of three hundred thousand people passed a series of ordinances that gave rise to modern urban zoning.
for the first time the ordinances divided a city into three districts of specified use a residential area an industrial area and an area open to residence and a limited list of industries.
other cities followed.
combining several features the new york zoning law of 1916 became the model for the nation within a decade 591 cities copied it.
zoning ordered city development keeping skyscrapers out of factory districts factories out of the suburbs.
it also had powerful social repercussions.
in the south zoning became a tool to extend racial segregation in northern cities it acted against ethnic minorities.
jews in new york italians in boston poles in detroit african americans in chicago zoning laws held them all at arms length.
like other migrants african americans often preferred to settle together but zoning also helped put them there.
by 1920 ten districts in chicago were more than three quarters black.
in los angeles cleveland detroit and washington d c most blacks lived in only two or three wards.
popular pastimes thanks to changing work rules and mechanization many americans enjoyed more leisure time.
the average workweek for manufacturing laborers fell from 60 hours in 1890 to 51 in 1920.
by the early 1900s white collar workers might spend only 8 to 10 hours a day at work and a half day on weekends.
greater leisure time gave more people more opportunity for play and people flocked to places of entertainment.
baseball entrenched itself as the national pastime.
automobiles and streetcars carried growing numbers of fans to ballparks attendance at major league games doubled between 1903 and 1920.
football also drew fans although critics attacked the sports violence and the use of tramp athletes nonstudents whom colleges paid to play.
in 1905 the worst year 18 players were killed and 150 seriously injured.
alarmed president theodore roosevelt who had once said i am the father of three boys and if i thought any one of them would weigh a possible broken bone against the glory of being chosen to play on harvards football team i would disinherit him called a white house conference to clean up college sports.
the conference founded the intercollegiate athletic association which in 1910 became the national collegiate athletic association ncaa.
movie theaters opened everywhere.
by 1910 there were ten thousand of them drawing a weekly audience of ten million people.
admission was usually five cents and movies full of laughter and pathos appealed to a mass market.
in 1915 d w griffith a talented and creative director as well as a racist produced the first movie spectacular birth of a nation.
griffith adopted new film techniques including close ups fade outs and artistic camera angles and he staged dramatic battle scenes.
phonographs brought ready made entertainment into the home.
by 1901 phonograph and record companies included the victor talking machine company the edison speaking machine company and columbia records.
ornate mahogany victrolas became standard fixtures in middle class parlors.
early records were usually of vaudeville skits orchestral recordings began in 1906.
in 1919 2 25 million phonographs were produced two years later more than 100 million records were sold.
as record sales grew families sang less and listened more.
music became a business.
in 1909 congress enacted a copyright law that provided a two cent royalty on each piece of music on phonograph records or piano rolls.
the royalty small as it was offered welcome income to composers and publishers and in 1914 composer victor herbert and others formed the american society of composers authors and publishers ascap to protect musical rights and royalties.
the faster rhythms of syncopated ragtime became the rage especially after 1911 when irving berlin a russian immigrant wrote alexanders ragtime band ragtime set off a nationwide dance craze.
secretaries danced on their lunch hour the first nightclubs opened and restaurants and hotels introduced dance floors.
waltzes and polkas gave way to a host of new dances many with chapter 22 the progressive era another musical innovation came north from new orleans.
charles buddy bolden a cornetist ferdinand jelly roll morton a pianist and a youngster named louis armstrong played an improvisational music that had no formal name.
reaching chicago it became jas then jass and finally jazz jazz jumped and jazz musicians relied on feeling and mood.
a restaurant owner once asked jelly roll morton to play a waltz.
waltz morton exclaimed.
man these people want to dance.
and you talking about waltz.
this is the roll youre talking to popular fiction reflected changing interests.
kate douglas wigginss rebecca of sunnybrook farm 1903 and lucy m montgomerys anne of green gables 1908 showed the continuing popularity of rural themes.
westerns also sold well but readers turned more and more to detective thrillers with hard bitten city detectives and science fiction featuring the latest dream in technology.
the tom swift series begun in 1910 looked ahead to spaceships ray guns and gravity nullifiers.
edward l stratemeyer the mind behind tom swift brought the techniques of mass production to book writing.
in 1906 he formed the stratemeyer literary syndicate which employed a stable of writers to turn consisting of a wide variety vaudeville was probably the most popular mass entertainment in the out hundreds of tom swift rover boys and early 1900s.
with the addition of jugglers pantomimists magicians and others the number of bobbsey twins stories for young readers.
burt vaudeville theaters increased exponentially.
standish another prolific author took the pen name gilbert patten and created the character of frank merriwell animal names the fox trot bunny hop turkey trot snake and wholesome college athlete.
as patten said i took the three qualikangaroo dip.
partners were not permitted to dance too close ties i most wanted him to represent frank and merry in nature bouncers tapped them on the shoulder if they got closer than nine well in body and mind and made the name frank merriwell the inches.
the aging john d rockefeller hired a private instructor to merriwell books sold twenty five million copies.
teach him the tango yale university however banned that dance at its 1914 junior prom.
vaudeville increasingly popular after 1900 reached matuexperimentation in the arts rity around 1915.
drawing on the immigrant experience it voiced there is a state of unrest all over the world in art as in all other the variety of city life and included skits songs comics acrobats things the director of new yorks metropolitan museum said in and magicians.
dances and jokes showed an earthiness new to 1908.
it is the same in literature as in music in painting and mass audiences.
by 1914 stage runways extended into the crowd in sculpture women performers had bared their legs and were beginning to isadora duncan and ruth st denis transformed the dance.
show glimpses of the midriff.
fanny brice ann pennington the departing from traditional ballet steps both women emphasized shimmy queen and eva tanguay who sang its all been done improvisation emotion and the human form.
listen to the music before but not the way i do it starred in florenz ziegfelds follies with your soul duncan told her students.
unless your dancing the peak of vaudeville.
springs from an inner emotion and expresses an idea it will be in such songs as st.
louis blues 1914 w c handy took meaningless draped in flowing robes she revealed more of her legs the black southern folk music of the blues to northern cities.
than some thought tasteful and she proclaimed that the noblest art gertrude ma rainey the daughter of minstrels sang in black is the nude after a triumphant performance with the new york vaudeville for nearly thirty five years.
performing in chattanooga symphony in 1908 her ideas and techniques swept the country.
tennessee about 1910 she came across a twelve year old orphan duncan died tragically in 1927 her neck broken when her long red bessie smith who became the empress of the blues smiths scarf caught in the wheel of a racing car.
voice was huge and sweeping.
recording for the race division the lofts and apartments of new yorks greenwich village of columbia records she made more than eighty records that attracted artists writers and poets interested in experimentation together sold nearly ten million copies.
watch the video a vaudeville act conclusion a ferment of discovery and reform and change.
to these artists the city was the focus of national life and the sign of a new culture.
robert henri and the realist painters known to their critics as the ashcan school relished the citys excitement.
they wanted a friend said to paint truth and to paint it with strength and fearlessness and individuality to the realists a painting carried into the future the look of life as it happened.
their paintings depicted street scenes colorful crowds and slum children swimming in the river.
in paintings such as the cliff dwellers george w bellows captured the color and excitement of the tenements john sloan one of henris most talented students painted the vitality of ordinary people and familiar scenes.
in 1913 a show at the new york armory presented sixteen hundred modernist paintings prints and sculptures.
the work of picasso czanne matisse brancusi van gogh and gauguin dazed and dazzled american observers.
critics attacked the show as worthless and depraved a chicago official wanted it banned from the city because the idea that people can gaze at this sort of thing without it hurting them is all bosh the postimpressionists changed the direction of twentiethcentury art and influenced adventuresome american painters.
john marin max weber georgia okeeffe arthur dove and other modernists experimented in ways foreign to henris realists.
defiantly avant garde they shook off convention and experimented with new forms.
using bold colors and abstract patterns they worked to capture the energy of urban life.
i see great forces at work great movements marin said the large buildings and the small buildings the warring of the great and the small.
i can hear the sound of their strife and there is a great music being played there was an extraordinary outburst of poetry.
in 1912 harriet monroe started the magazine poetry in chicago the hotbed of the new poetry ezra pound and vachel lindsay both daring experimenters with ideas and verse published in the first issue.
t s eliot published the classic love song of j alfred prufrock in poetry in 1915.
attacked bitterly by conservative critics the poem established eliots leadership among a group of poets many of them living and writing in london who rejected traditional meter and rhyme as artificial constraints.
eliot pound and amy lowell among others believed the poets task was to capture fleeting images in verse.
others experimenting with new techniques in poetry included robert frost north of boston 1914 edgar lee masters spoon river anthology 1915 and carl sandburg chicago poems 1916.
sandburgs poem chicago celebrated the vitality of the city come and show me another city with lifted head singing so proud to be alive and coarse and strong and cunning.
fierce as a dog with tongue lapping for action cunning as a savage pitted against the wilderness bareheaded shoveling wrecking planning building breaking rebuilding bragging and laughing that under his wrist is the pulse and under his ribs the heart of the people laughing.
laughing the stormy husky brawling laughter of youth half naked sweating proud to be hog butcher tool maker stacker of wheat player with railroads and freight handler to the nation.
conclusion a ferment of discovery and reform manners and morals change slowly and many americans overlooked the importance of the first two decades of the twentieth century.
yet sweeping change was under way anyone who doubted it could visit a gallery see a film listen to music or read one of the new literary magazines.
garrets and galleries were filled with a breathtaking sense of change.
there was life in all these new things marsden hartley a modernist painter recalled.
there was excitement there was healthy revolt investigation discovery and an utterly new world out of it all the ferment of progressivism in city state and nation reshaped the country.
in a burst of reform people built playgrounds restructured taxes regulated business won the vote for women shortened working hours altered political systems opened kindergartens and improved factory safety.
they tried to fulfill the national promise of dignity and liberty.
marsden hartley it turned out had voiced a mood that went well beyond painters and poets.
across society people in many walks of life were experiencing a similar sense of excitement and discovery.
racism repression and labor conflict were present to be sure but there was also talk of hope progress and change.
in politics science journalism education and a host of other fields people believed for a time that they could make a difference and in trying to do so they became part of the progressive generation.
chapter 22 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 22 the progressive era on myhistorylab time line 1898 mergers and consolidations begin to sweep the business world leading to fear of trusts 1903 ford motor company formed w e b dubois calls for justice and equality for african americans in the souls of black folk womens trade union league wtul formed to organize women workers industrial workers of the world iww established african american leaders inaugurate the niagara movement advocating integration and equal opportunity for african americans shirtwaist workers in new york city strike in the uprising of the 20 000 campaign by rockefeller sanitary commission wipes out hookworm disease naacp founded strike at hart schaffner and marx leads to pioneering collective bargaining agreement national collegiate athletic association ncaa formed fire at the triangle shirtwaist company kills 146 people irving berlin popularizes rhythm of ragtime with alexanders ragtime band frederick winslow taylor publishes the principles of scientific management harriet monroe begins publishing magazine poetry iww leads strikes in massachusetts and new jersey ford introduces the moving assembly line in highland park michigan plant mothers day becomes national holiday d w griffith produces the first movie spectacular birth of a nation t s eliot publishes the love song of j alfred prufrock margaret sanger forms new york birth control league federal aid roads act creates national road network new york zoning law sets the pattern for zoning laws across the nation congress passes law requiring literacy test for all immigrants congress passes the sheppard towner act to help protect maternal and infant health chapter review the changing face of industrialism how did industrialism change after 1900.
conflict in the workplace why were there so many strikes in this period.
as prosperity returned after the late 1890s the american industrial system underwent important changes.
mass production spurred by the spread of the moving assembly line turned out more and more products for american and foreign consumers.
new management methods organized workers on the factory floor.
jobs became both routine and more dangerous.
trusts grew.
p 515 low wages speeded up assembly lines and dangerous conditions in the workplace brought about numerous attempts to organize workers for their own defense.
the womens trade union league had many successes.
the international workers of the world a radical union wanted to place workers in control.
in the end samuel gompers and the american federation of labor won the allegiance of most workers.
p 524 societys masses a new urban culture how did mass production affect women children immigrants and african americans.
what happened to art and culture in these years so filled with change.
while life improved for many people in the post 1900 industrial society many others faced challenges women and children in the workforce and laborers in their efforts to organize.
between 1901 and 1920 some 14 8 million immigrants entered the country and began the difficult process of adjusting to life in their new home.
all of these people faced difficult challenges due to low wages dangerous working conditions and the steady demands of the factory system.
p 519 in the dozen years after 1900 american culture changed in important ways.
cities took on their modern form.
suburbs flourished.
sports became increasingly popular reflecting peoples increased leisure time.
experimentation occurred in literature poetry painting and the arts.
p 530 study resources key terms and definitions muckrakers writers who made a practice between 1903 and 1909 of exposing the wrongdoings of public figures and corporations and highlighting social and political problems.
p 514 birds of passage immigrants who came to the united states to work and save money and then returned to their native countries during the slack season.
p 523 progressivism movement for social change between the late 1890s and world war i.
its orgins lay in a fear of big business and corrupt government and a desire to improve living conditions.
progressives set out to cure the social ills brought about by industrialization and urbanization social disorder and corruption.
p 515 womens trade union league wtul founded in 1903 this group worked to organize women into trade unions.
it also lobbied for laws to safeguard female workers and backed strikes especially in the garment industry.
while it never attracted many members its leaders were influential enough to give the union considerable power.
p 523 niagara movement a movement led by w e b dubois that focused on equal rights for and the education of african american youth.
rejecting the gradualist approach of booker t washington it favored militant action and claimed for african americans all the rights afforded to other americans.
p 522 industrial workers of the world iww founded in 1905 this radical union also known as the wobblies aimed to unite the american working class into one union.
it organized unskilled and foreign born laborers advocated social revolution and led strikes.
p 527 national association for the advancement of colored people naacp created in 1909 this organization became the most important civil rights organization in the country.
p 522 ashcan school early twentieth century realist painters who portrayed the slums and streets of the nations cities and the lives of ordinary urban dwellers.
they often advocated political and social reform.
p 533 critical thinking questions 1.
how did the changing nature of industrialism after the 1890s influence the beginnings of a progressive era.
in what specific ways did workers african americans and immigrants respond to the changing nature of industrial society and in the process help bring about the progressive era.
how did workers organize to try to improve their lot in the cities and factories of the advancing industrial society.
how did changes in popular culture mold attitudes in the new progressive era.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 22 on myhistorylab the changing face of industrialism watch the video the rise and fall of the automobile conflict in the workplace read the document complete the assignment economy p 516 read the document frederick winslow taylor scientific management 1911 p 518 societys masses watch the video rural free delivery mail p 519 gifford pinchot the fight for conservation 1910 p 520 read the document john spargo the bitter cry of the children 1906 p 521 watch the video view the closer look the triangle fire p 528 triangle fire march 25 1911 p 529 read the document samuel gompers the american labor movement 1914 p 526 the conflict between booker t washington and w e b.
dubois p 522 a new urban culture watch the video a vaudeville act p 532 indicates study plan media assignment from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism contents and learning objectives the spirit of progressivism pg.
537 what were the six major characteristics of progressivism.
reform in the cities and states pg.
544 what methods did progressive reformers use to attack problems in the cities and states.
the ordeal of william howard taft pg.
550 why was the presidency of william howard taft so difficult for him.
woodrow wilsons new freedom pg.
553 the republican roosevelt pg.
546 how would you describe the personality and programs of theodore roosevelt.
what were the central principles of woodrow wilsons new freedom.
feature essay madam c j walker african american business pioneer roosevelt progressivism at its height pg.
548 what were the major measures of theodore roosevelts term from 1905 to 1909.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
