chapter 24 the world the war created 1945 1952 the united states in 1945 the cold war begins politics 1948 and 1952 chapter 25 complacency and change 1952 1965 eisenhower s america america s world a culture on the move race and civil rights chapter 26 lives changed 1961 1968 new voices new authorities camelot the white house and dallas the kennedy administration the coming of lyndon b johnson chapter27 rights reaction and limits 1968 1980 the new politics of the late 1960s the movements of the 1960s and 1970s the culture wars of the 1970s politics economics and the impact of watergate 1945 1952 fa members of 11th airborne division kneel on the ground as they watch the mushroom cloud of a 1951 atomic bomb test in nevada threat of the new weapon hung over the world during the cold war.
chapter objective n august 6 1945 the white house released a statement from president harry truman sixteen hours ago an american airplane dropped one bomb on hiroshima.
it is an atomic bomb.
it is a harnessing of the basic power of the universe.
the force from which the sun draws its power has been loosed against those who brought war to the far east.
thus began the atomic age a new and previously unimagined era.
the bomb brought world war ii to a quick end but it also launched the united states and the world into an uncharted arena.
for people living in the united states in 1945 that announcement was but one of many extraordinary changes that year.
in early may less than a month after roosevelts death on april 12 nazi germany surrendered.
in june the united nations a new international organization designed to preserve peace held its first meeting.
then came the news of the atomic bombing of hiroshima on august 6 and nagasaki on august 9.
japan surrendered on august 14.
world war ii was over.
during the 2 day holiday that followed americans celebrated the coming of peace.
few had any sense of what peace would mean.
people wanted to get on with their lives even if it was hard to imagine what the new normal demonstrate an understanding of the post world war ii world that emerged in the united states.
the united states in 1945 describe the new technology living patterns and political arrangements in the united states that resulted from world war ii.
the cold war begins analyze the coming of the cold war tensions with the soviet union and mccarthyism at home.
24 1 24 2 politics 1948 and 1952 explain political developments that led to the elections of truman and then eisenhower as cold war era presidents.
chapter 24 the world the war created 6 significant dates 1944 bretton woods conference creates international monetary fund and world bank dumbarton oaks conference great migration of african americans to the north expands 1945 franklin d roosevelt dies and harry s truman becomes president nazi germany surrenders un charter approved and ratified truman meets with stalin at potsdam germany first successful test of atomic bomb united states drops atomic bomb on japan japan surrenders 1946 george kennan s long telegram winston churchill s iron curtain speech u s baby boom begins 1947 marshall plan proposed levittown new york housing opens 1948 united states recognizes new state of israel beginning of berlin airlift truman defeats dewey wallace and thurmond in presidential election un universal declaration of human rights 1949 berlin airlift ends senate ratifies u s membership in nato soviet union tests atomic bomb chiang kai shek leaves mainland china 1950 alger hiss convicted of lying under oath joseph mccarthy speech in wheeling west virginia north korea invades south korea u s landing at inchon korea chinese forces drive un force south of the 38th parallel 1952 eisenhower defeats stevenson for president might look like.
a navy petty officer and his wife walking hand in hand through the celebrations in seattle on august 14 told a reporter their plans raise babies and keep house many returning from the war followed these plans but they did so in a world much more complex than could be imagined on that idyllic august evening.
this chapter traces the experience of those americans who built a new world in the after math of world war ii describing not only their hopes and fears but also their surprises and disappointments as the postwar world took shape between 1945 and 1952.
the united states in 1945 24 1 describe the new technology living patterns and political arrangements in the united states that resulted from world war ii.
those who had been fighting in europe or asia wanted to get home as fast as they could certainly faster than was possible given difficulties in transporting troops and managing germany and japan.
for some women working in wartime production it was time to welcome a long absent husband or boyfriend quit work and raise a family.
other women very much wanted to continue working.
for some who had moved because of the war it was time to go home.
others who had moved wanted to stay in their new locations and have families join them.
for industrial leaders peacetime conversion meant new profits that would come from fulfilling pent up demands for goods that had been unavailable during the war and from harnessing new discoveries related to medicines and emerging technologies.
for government leaders negotiating the international arrangements and managing the uneasy postwar alliances especially with the united soviet socialist republic u s s r commonly called the soviet union made the postwar era one of the most difficult ever.
science medicine technology and the bomb if the nuclear physicists who designed and built the atomic bomb were in the vanguard of wartime scientific breakthroughs biologists and medical researchers were not far behind.
during world war ii the wonder drugs penicillin and streptomycin combated infections and resulted in a dramatic reduction in battlefield deaths.
soon after the war medical scientists and pharmaceutical companies marketed other new antibiotics.
the national institutes of health which had begun as a tiny government agency in the 1930s now led the nations war on disease.
by 1956 80 percent of prescribed drugs had been invented after the beginning of world war ii.
vaccines ended traditional childhood diseases such as whooping cough diphtheria mumps and measles.
in 1955 a vaccine was found for the feared scourge of polio.
for those having a hard time keeping pace with modern life physicians offered tranquilizers sales of which boomed.
people were growing taller and living longer thanks to advances in medicine nutrition and hygiene.
in 1940 the average americans lifespan was 62 9 years but by 1960 it had reached 69 7.
science it seemed was offering the key to life itself.
for consumers science and technology offered tangible improvements that changed daily life.
in 1945 consumers were being introduced to freezers dishwashers automatic transmissions and ballpoint pens.
in offices workers were beginning to use electric typewriters.
other technologies that had been developed prior to world war ii from washing machines to electric ranges to electric trains were suddenly available after wartime production restrictions were lifted.
pent up consumer demand and industrial availability combined quickly.
what had been impossible to find during the war was now in every store.
no automobiles for private use had been produced in the united states between 1942 and 1945.
but by 1947 new models were replacing the old vehicles from the 1930s.
sales of passenger cars jumped to 6 7 million per year in 1950 and to 7 9 million 686 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 in 1955.
general motors which then sold about half of all cars in america became the first corporation to earn 1 billion in a single year.
advertising by general motors ford and chrysler convinced people to trade in 4 5 million old cars per year in the 1950s for large sleek new models with automatic transmissions air conditioning and picturesque tail fins.
by 1960 80 percent of all american families owned a car and 15 percent owned two or more cars.
while most households had radios in 1945 only a very few had televisions black and white of course.
television was developed by a number of inventors notably philo t farnsworth in the early 1930s and was introduced at the 1939 new york worlds fair.
but television production stopped during world war ii while factories made radar equipment.
the number of television sets in american homes exploded after the war.
in 1946 8 000 homes owned a set by 1950 5 million and by 1960 45 million or 90 percent of all american homes.
in 1945 half of the nations farm homes where 25 million people lived still did not have electricity to plug in a tv but that too would change very quickly.
hanging over all of the advances however was the atomic bomb.
as americans learned more about the bomb they realized that it could end all of their improved health and new found prosperity.
few americans had questioned the morality of using the atomic bomb in 1945 indeed only a tiny handful even knew that the weapon existed before its use.
the few physicists who had developed the bomb understood what it meant however.
very soon many more came to understand the sobering reality of the mushroom cloud that a nuclear explosion unleashed.
the bomb might be a new form of protection since only the united states had it but it was also a new threat see chapter 23.
some scientists proposed the voluntary sharing of atomic technology to avoid an arms race but president truman decided that the safest course was for the united states to retain sole knowledge of nuclear secrets.
however in 1949 to the great surprise of many the soviet union successfully tested its own atomic bomb.
by that time the wartime ally had become a potential enemy.
suddenly with the russian test the idea that the united states was protected by its unique control of the bomb vanished.
before long other nations joined the atomic club great britain the closest u s ally exploded its own bomb in 1952 france followed in 1960 and others were not far behind.
above all other concerns however the fear of the russian bomb is what hung over americans.
officials and scientists within the truman administration debated the development of an even more powerful weapon to counter the russian bomb.
the atomic bomb depended on nuclear fission the splitting of an atom but scientists knew that theoretically an even more powerful explosion could arise from nuclear fusion the merging of atoms to create a thermonuclear explosion a hydrogen bomb.
while virtually no one involved opposed the development of the atomic bomb during world war ii many senior scientists opposed the super bomb.
albert einstein whose scientific work formed the basis for nuclear science said that with such a super bomb general annihilation beckons j robert oppenheimer who led the development of the first atomic bomb at los alamos new mexico in 1944 opposed the larger bomb on moral and practical grounds.
george kennan the state department official often most associated with the coming of the cold war argued that an arsenal of atom bombs was ample deterrent for the soviets.
others disagreed.
when president truman asked his advisory panel can the russians do it.
even those who opposed development of the hydrogen bomb had to answer yes.
the president responded in that case we have no choice.
well go ahead.
the science and the engineering involved were daunting.
when many of those who had built the first atomic bombs declined to participate in the new project a fresh team led by hungarian refugees edward teller and john von neumann moved ahead.
the first u s test of a thermonuclear bomb took place on november 1 1952 at eniwetok atoll in the pacific.
the predictions about the russian capabilities also became true the first russian bomb was exploded in siberia in august 1953 little more than 9 months after the first u s test.
chapter 24 the world the war created 24 1 243 243 the bombs that the united states and russia exploded were powerful beyond imagination.
the united states test sent a fireball 5 miles into the sky and produced a mushroom cloud y1 miles high and 8 miles wide.
eniwetok island disappeared replaced by a large hole in the ocean floor.
the soviet bomb was similar.
soviet premier georgi malenkov told the world that the united states no longer has a monopoly on the hydrogen bomb the possibility of mutually assured destruction influenced international diplomacy and daily life.
children practiced hiding under school desks in case of nuclear attack though critics wondered what good that would do in the face of a bomb that could vaporize a city.
families built bomb shelters in their basements.
the bomb was as much a part of daily life in the 1950s as televisions new automobiles or healthier lives.
gl bill of rights legislation in june 1944 that eased the return of veterans into american society by providing educational and employment benefits.
baby boomers the name given to the generation of children born to the families of returning world war ii veterans between 1945 and 1960.
returning veterans the baby boom and suburban homes in august 1945 as world war ii ended 12 million american men were in the military two thirds of those between the ages of 18 and 34.
they had been through a brutal war and now they wanted get home and get on with their lives.
those waiting at home were equally anxious to get the troops back.
it took time to organize the military governance of germany and japan and to arrange the transport of troops.
by fall members of congress started to get warning letters no boats no votes demobilization moved at a rapid pace.
in less than a year three quarters of those in the military had been mustered out leaving an active military of 3 million.
congress voted to cut that number to 1 million in another year.
coming home from the war was joyous but also difficult.
soldiers and sailors desperately tired of the killing the dying and the boredom of war sometimes had a hard time adjusting to a world where life had gone on without them and in which civilians could never comprehend the horrors they had experienced.
married couples who had been apart sometimes for 3 or 4 years especially those who had married just before a husband shipped out found adjustments difficult.
the divorce rate skyrocketed in the late 1940s.
the government offered generous benefits to returning service men and the few service women to help with the adjustment.
the gi bill of rights provided 20 per week for up to a year for those seeking new jobs.
the maximum payment of 1 040 for a full year was very close to the average american salary of 1 074 in 1945.
the gi bill also offered college tuition for returning veterans allowing a whole generation of young men to be the first in their families to attend college and prepare for middle class occupations.
in addition the veterans administration made loans available for veterans to buy a house.
only later would some note that since the draft often passed over african americans and latinos and excluded women the gi bill constituted a kind of affirmative action for white men.
but in 1945 most americans thought that these men had richly earned any favors they got.
perhaps the greatest goal of returning veterans and the spouses and fiancees who met them was stated by the couple who wanted to raise babies and keep house they did both with amazing speed.
many veterans married very quickly and the new couples started to have babies.
in may 1946 9 months after the end of the war 233 452 babies were born in the united states up from 206 387 earlier that february.
in june the number of babies was 242 302 and in october 339 499.
a total of 3 4 million babies were born in the united states in 1946 20 percent more than were born in 1945 a birthrate unmatched in the united states in decades though it kept climbing after that.
the speed with which returning veterans chose to marry and have children came as quite a surprise.
nothing similar had followed other wars certainly not world war i even though normalcy had been a theme of the 1920s.
nevertheless americans across the spectrum of class and race started having children.
the population soared and a generation known as the baby boomers became a demographic bulge whose sheer size affected many aspects of american life throughout boomer lifespans.
688 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 for white middle class americans a new home located in a suburban neighborhood offered the chance to build a safe and modern life.
it was to these new homes cut off from daily interchange with their extended families but connected to others very much like themselves that a generation of americans moved after 1945.
just as these new families were getting started abraham levitt andhis sons william and alfred bought 4 000 acres of potato farms in the town of hempstead long island outside of new york city.
on this huge parcel of land the levitts built levittown the largest private housing project in american history.
their plan was simple clear the land lay out curving roads or lanes never streets pour concrete slabs every 60 feet along these roadways drop off a set of construction materials at each slab composition rock board and plywood then send in construction crews armed with new power tools saws routers and nailers each of whom was assigned a specific step in the construction process.
at the peak of production 30 houses were built each day.
each had a 12 by 16 foot living room one bathroom two bedrooms and a fireplace.
levittown eventually included 17 400 houses that were home to 82 000 people.
occupants moved into the first houses in levittown in october 1947.
at first houses were sold only to veterans but soon were sold also to other families.
modest down payments and veterans administration and federal housing authority loans brought the price of 7 990 to 9 500 within the range of many middle class and aspiring middle class families.
long islands levittown was so successful that the levitts built two more planned communities near philadelphia.
other developers del webb in phoenix joseph kelly in boston louis h boyar and fritz b burns in los angeles created similar developments that sold at an astounding pace.
between 1945 and 1960 10 times as many houses were constructed in suburbs as in older central cities and 95 percent of these houses were detached single family homes.
mass production that had come to automobiles in the earliest 1900s came to housing after 1945.
architectural and social critics disliked suburban developments.
the nations best known critic lewis mumford described suburbs as with the end of world war ii many americans embraced a new image of domestic bliss in a suburban home filled with children.
a multitude of uniform unidentifiable houses lined up inflexibly at uniform distances on uniform roads in a treeless communal waste inhabited by people of the same class the same income the same age group witnessing the same television performances eating the same tasteless pre fabricated foods from the same freezers confirming in every outward and inward respect to a common mold.
for veterans and their families and those who followed after them in the 1950s however the new suburbs were a dream come true.
immediately after the war a desperate housing shortage led many to double up with parents or other relatives.
half a million veterans lived in army quonset huts or other temporary buildings.
chicago sold 250 old trolley cars as temporary homes.
a home of ones own previously often a reality only for the upper middle class and the rich now became a new norm.
the first issue of the community newspaper in levittown noted that our lives are held closely together because most of us are within the same age bracket in similar income groups live in almost identical houses and have common problems the residents also made their own contribution to the baby boom to such a degree that the community became known as fertility valley and the rabbit hutch a house in a subdivision like levittown new york was a key part of the american dream for many in the 1940s and 1950s.
chapter 24 the world the war created 6 242 242 population shift louisiana 13 5 florida 46 1 decrease over 20 increase 5 20 increase kh under 5 increase map 24 1 americans on the move.
many americans moved around a lot during and after world war ii and many settled in communities distant from where they had been children.
while african americans moved from the south to the north in large numbers accounting for much of the population growth in states like new york and illinois white americans moved from east to west especially to california which grew by 53 percent between 1940 and 1950.
as many in the postwar generation moved to suburbia americans also moved from the east to the west.
between 1940 and 1950 the years of the war and the immediate postwar era the sunbelt grew rapidly.
texas grew by 20 percent nevada by 45 percent and arizona and california by over 50 percent see map 24 1.
soldiers and sailors coming through california on the way to the pacific liked what they saw and vowed to return.
however not all young americans could or wanted to participate in the rush either to the suburbs or to the west.
african americans latinos and asians were excluded from most suburban developments.
levittown specifically excluded people of color from its subdivisions for the first 20 years of the communitys existence.
william levitt believed that if blacks were allowed to move in to levittown the whites would leave.
he commented we can solve a housing problem or we can try to solve a racial problem.
but we cannot combine the two as late as 1960 not a single african american lived among the 82 000 residents of levittown new york.
all white developments like levittown were not unique.
post world war ii suburbanization was a white affair that greatly exacerbated housing segregation in the united states.
urban communities had long been segregated.
most cities had their irish italian and jewish neighborhoods as well as neighborhoods for african americans and in the southwest for latinos.
however the move to the suburbs meant that many whites left the cities and many nonwhites were left behind in core urban communities with a declining tax base declining services and declining opportunities.
suburbia however was not an attraction for all americans.
gay men and lesbians of any race were generally excluded from suburbia unless they chose to live deeply closeted lives.
one lesbian wrote it has never been easy to be a lesbian in this country but the 1950s was surely the worst decade in which to love your own sex others simply preferred to stay in older urban neighborhoods or small towns.
women who worked especially those who remained single or were divorced often found the conformity of suburbia difficult.
for the poets and playwrights who became the beat generation of the 1950s who celebrated nonconformity suburbia was unthinkable.
there was 690 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 thinking historically observations on levittown and other suburbs 24 1 in june 1958 a sociologist herbert j gans and his wife were among the first 25 families to move into the new levittown development just outside philadelphia.
they lived there for the next 2 years as participant observers in this brand new planned suburban development.
unlike many others who wrote about suburbia gans noted more positive than negative observations.
about the ways that living in levittown impacted community and social life one resident whom gans interviewed said we didn t know before we moved here that we would entertain more go out less.
not that we were boozehounds before though.
not that we can t afford to go out we just don t want to.
we have a new house and want to keep it up nice this is not work but enjoyment.
i ve never been more content working in the yard is just like fishing so relaxing.
i have more pep here.
even if outside critics did not like what they saw in suburbia gans found that most of those who actually lived in levittown did like it.
one major exception to the general sense of happiness was found among adolescents.
gans interviewed one girl who complained after school hours you walk into an entirely different world.
everyone goes his own separate way to start his homework take a nap or watch tv.
this is the life of a vegetable not a human being.
as a result of the isolation a car became as important to adolescents as it was to adults.
one high school senior took a job to buy a car and told gans i had no choice it was either going to work or cracking up i ll start living.
i can get out of levittown.
in plain words a boy shouldn t live here if he is between the ages of 14 17.
while he expected to find more boredom and depression among the sometimes isolated residents of levittown he did not.
gans worried about the impact of suburbanization on older cities that were losing middle class residents and their tax base leaving behind people of color who generally didn t or couldn t move to the suburbs and those who were poor.
but in the end he concluded i should like to emphasize once more that whatever its imperfections levittown is a good place to live.
source herbert j gans the levittowners ways of life and politics in a new suburban community new york vintage books 1967 thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how did gans explain the dissatisfaction many adolescents felt with suburban living.
historical interpretation why do you think gans found so many suburban residents content with their new communities while most other social critics found them so negative.
virtually no way to get around most suburbs without a car and for those who needed public transportation cities remained essential.
nevertheless starting in 1945 great numbers of american men and women moved to the suburbs and embraced life there.
the great migration african americans move north while white americans moved to the suburbs a new generation of african americans moved from the south to the north.
the great migration of african americans to the north began during world war i continued through the 1920s and slowed during the depression years of the 1930s see chapter 21.
during and after world war ii the rate of migration exploded.
by 1960 half of the nations african americans lived in northern cities a huge change from the time when more than 90 percent of all blacks lived in the rural south.
while the pull of northern industrial jobs and the push of southern segregation and violence remained constant from the 1920s to the 1950s another factor accelerated the pace of movement in the late 1940s the sharecropping system around which the economic lives of many southern blacks had been organized from the 1880s to the 1940s began to disappear.
on october 2 1944 as the tide of war was turning a crowd gathered at the hopson cotton plantation outside of clarksdale mississippi on highway 49 to look at a new machine that had nothing to do with the war.
howell hopson was conducting the first chapter 24 the world the war created public demonstration of a new international harvester cotton picking machine.
he described the scene an estimated 2 500 to 3 000 people swarmed over the plantation on that one day 800 to 1 000 automobiles leaving their tracks and scars throughout the property the machine that the visitors had come to see changed the face of the south and changed the lives of the nations african americans.
the bright red picker looked like a tractor with a large metal basket on the top.
as it drove down a row of cotton the spindles mounted on the front rotated and stripped the cotton off the plants and then suctioned the cotton up to a basket.
the picker could pick a thousand pounds of cotton in an hour a good worker only 20 pounds.
hopson said it cost 5 26 for a machine to pick a bale of cotton.
a sharecropper cost 39 41 per bale.
he wrote the introduction of the cotton harvester may have been comparable to the unveiling of eli whitneys first hand operated cotton gin hopson was thinking of the machines impact on his profits.
but like whitneys invention a century and a half earlier the machines largest impact was on men and women of african descent.
whitneys cotton gin made slavery profitable.
international harvesters cotton picking machine made the sharecropping that had replaced slavery obsolete.
a wave of 1 5 million african americans had moved north between 1910 and 1940 but 5 million followed between 1940 and 1960.
as people whose lives were centered in the communities churches and culture of the rigidly segregated south moved north they now lived in quite different communities with changing norms.
racial discrimination generally seen as a southern issue until world war ii became a national one.
nevertheless opportunities in the north were better than those offered by sharecropping and the newcomers created their own jobs and a new urban culture.
housing in the north was even more segregated than in the south.
while the federal housing authority dropped explicit racial rules by the 1940s its handbook still said if a neighborhood is to retain stability it is necessary that all properties shall continue to be occupied by the same social class in reality that wording meant dont give mortgages to black families in white neighborhoods the white rush to segregated suburbs opened up new urban housing for blacks.
unscrupulous real estate agents made large profits while engaging in blockbusting in older neighborhoods convincing frightened white homeowners to sell quickly and cheaply.
from boston to los angeles whole city blocks went on the market at the same time transferring the majority of homes from white to black hands in short order.
changes in the racial makeup of urban neighborhoods happened at the same time as cash strapped cities cut back on municipal services and many banks dramatically reduced the availability of mortgages and loans for home improvements.
the creation of the white suburbs and the vastly expanded urban black ghettos went hand in hand in the 1950s.
moving from the south to an unfamiliar north could be painful for african americans.
in the last train north clifton taulbert described the longing for things left behind there were no chinaberry trees.
no pecan trees never again would i pick dew berries or hear the familiar laughter from the field truck.
this was my world now this strange new family and their cramped quarters over the tiny grocery store they grandly called the confectionary nevertheless they kept coming through the 1940s and 1950s.
as a migrant from tennessee to milwaukee said every train every bus they were coming many who arrived were disillusioned.
when harvey clark who originally hailed from mississippi tried to move his family from a crowded apartment in south chicago to a larger one just across the city line in cicero he was greeted by a mob and a police chief who told him to get out of cicero the chief told the agent who arranged the apartment dont come back in town or youll get a bullet through 692 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 you the white mayor of dearborn michigan told alabamas montgomery advertiser that negroes cant get in here.
every time we hear of a negro moving in we respond quicker than you do to a fire.
as detroit became a majority black city its suburb of dearborn remained 99 percent white.
black migrants also found new freedoms and opportunities in the north.
ida mae brandon gladney who had never been able to vote in mississippi cast her first vote for franklin roosevelt in chicago in 1940.
the black vote in chicago carried the state of illinois and thus the electoral college for roosevelt in that election.
robert joseph pershing foster a physician in louisiana established a new practice in the rapidly expanding black community of los angeles in 1954 and 1955.
ihe several million other people making the move from the states of the old confederacy to new york chicago los angeles and a hundred other cities in the north and west each had his or her own tale of the transformations taking place in every region of the country.
latino migrations from puerto rico and mexico as they had in the 1920s african american artists embraced urban life and the new growing black communities of the north few more enthusiastically than musicians like charlie parker and miles davis shown here performing in new york city in 1947.
while the great migration of african americans from the rural south to the urban north and west was occurring migrations of latino people were happening at the same time.
ihe united states had won control of puerto rico in 1898 and puerto ricans had long been american citizens.
after world war ii more of these spanish speaking citizens began moving from puerto rico to the u s mainland especially new york city.
east harlem long an italian neighborhood in new york city quickly became mostly puerto rican.
piri thomas was born in new york in 1928 and described the racial discrimination faced by a young adult in spanish harlem in the 1950s in his 1967 memoir aptly named down these mean streets.
in addition the u s population included about 1 2 million americans of mexican background and this group also grew rapidly after world war ii.
in the southwest the bracero helping hands in spanish began during world war ii to allow mexican farm workers temporary entry into the united states to work in the agricultural fields that other americans had left for war industries or for the military.
the entry program was expanded after the war and between 1948 and 1964 almost 5 million braceros were brought to the united states.
although they were expected to return to mexico when the work was done not all did and they along with others who walked across the hot deserts and the border expanded the countrys mexican american population creating a large group some of whom remained under constant threat of deportation.
in southern california growth led to new militancy in the mexican american community.
in santa ana mexican american parents hired an attorney and sued the board of education over school segregation.
in 1946 the courts issued a permanent injunction against this segregation and later the federal appeals court directed a federal grand jury to consider an indictment against the santa ana board.
in los angeles with the largest mexican american population the community service organization began to fight for political rights in 1947 and was successful in electing edward roybal to the los angeles city council in 1949 the first time since 1881 that someone of mexican descent had served on that body.
in 1962 roybal was elected to the u s congress.
other mexican american organizations sprang up across the southwest supporting a successful mine workers strike in new mexico in 1950 1952 and building a solid base before the civil rights movements of the later 1950s while also supporting a small but growing middle class latino community in california and texas.
chapter 24 the world the war created 24 1 united nations an international organization launched at the end of world war ii with leadership from the united states the soviet union great britain and china.
the united nations and the new economic order while americans were moving around the country the rest of the planet was also in transition.
even before world war ii ended a series of international gatherings reshaped the political and economic climate of the coming postwar world.
the international monetary fund and the world bank in 1944 leaders in the united states and britain were determined not to repeat the mistakes of the treaty of versailles.
among those mistakes they believed were the huge reparations imposed on the defeated germany and the failure of the victors to ensure robust economic activity after the war.
in early 1944 roosevelts secretary of the treasury henry m morgenthau invited great britain and the soviet union to join the united states in establishing a postwar economic system.
both agreed.
morgenthau then invited representatives of more than 40 wartime allies to meet at the mount washington hotel in bretton woods new hampshire in july 1944.
the resulting bretton woods agreement created an international monetary fund imf for promoting international monetary cooperation the purpose of the imf was to maintain exchange rates between different currencies so people could buy and sell in different countries without fear that values would fluctuate wildly as happened in the 1930s to provide loans to a nation that was having problems balancing payments and to provide technical assistance to banks.
the u s dollar was made the base on which all other currencies were calculated and it remained so until 1971.
the bretton woods delegates also created the international bank for reconstruction development better known as the world bank to get the world on stable economic footing as quickly as possible after the devastation of the war.
the world bank was designed to support economic recovery in war torn europe and to reduce world poverty especially in latin america africa and parts of asia that did not have the economic foundation for recovery.
the first loans from the world bank were made to war torn france in 1947 and loans were soon extended around the world.
the united nations when franklin roosevelt and winston churchill agreed to an atlantic charter in august 1941 they called for the establishment of a wider and permanent system of general security see chapter 23.
by 1944 however roosevelt was ready to get more specific.
he proposed an international body that would include every nation but in which the most powerful ones in his proposal the united states britain the soviet union and china would serve as the four policemen as he told reporters in the summer of 1944 if some aggressor started to run amok these policemen would be needed to stop them before they got started by 1944 the wartime alliance was calling itself the united nations and roosevelt wanted to keep the name.
the united states invited representatives from the four policemen to meet at a mansion known as dumbarton oaks in washington dc.
in 7 weeks from august to october 1944 edward r stettinius u s undersecretary of state andrey gromyko soviet ambassador to the united states and sir alexander cadogan permanent undersecretary in the british foreign office consulting with v k.
wellington koo the chinese ambassador to london with whom gromyko refused to meet directly erected the basic structure of what would become the united nations un they agreed that the core of the new organization would be a security council made up of five permanent members france was added as a fifth member and other delegates serving on a rotating basis.
the security council would have the real power within the un.
a majority vote of the security council would be sufficient to authorize military force to stop aggression.
everyone also agreed that each of the core members of the security council should have a veto over any such actions the united states britain and the soviet union were not about to allow sanctions of which they did not approve.
the planners also proposed a un general assembly that would permit all of the nations of the world to debate issues but that unlike the security council could not 94 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 american voices united nations universal declaration of human rights 1948 24 1 24 2 three years after the united nations was created a un commission on human rights chaired by former first lady eleanor roosevelt proposed a universal declaration of human rights.
by 1948 the cold war between the united states and the soviet union was fully underway and many un meetings were little more than shouting matches.
few expected any productive results.
but eleanor roosevelt was able to calm the waters enough to get the document approved.
the final vote was 48 in favor zero opposed and 8 abstentions including the soviet union.
roosevelt considered the adoption of the declaration to be her most important accomplishment.
while the universal declaration of human rights had no enforcement mechanism it set a new standard of international behavior against which every nation could be measured.
preamble whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom justice and peace in the world whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind and the advent of a world in which human beings shall enjoy freedom of speech and belief and freedom from fear and want has been proclaimed as the highest aspiration of the common people whereas it is essential if man is not to be compelled to have recourse as a last resort to rebellion against tyranny and oppression that human rights should be protected by the rule of law whereas it is essential to promote the development of friendly relations between nations whereas the peoples of the united nations have in the charter reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women and have determined to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom whereas member states have pledged themselves to achieve in co operation with the united nations the promotion of universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms whereas a common understanding of these rights and freedoms is of the greatest importance for the full realization of this pledge now therefore the general assembly proclaims this universal declaration of human rights as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations.
the document then includes a total of 30 articles that elaborate the points in detail.
source downloaded may 19 2011.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how might the events of world war ii have shaped this document.
historical interpretation what might explain the decision of the soviet union to abstain from voting on the declaration.
243 hi enforce its resolutions.
in addition they agreed that there should be a secretary with a staff.
finally they agreed that the new body should convene for the first time the following spring in san francisco california.
roosevelt mindful of woodrow wilsons failure to take republicans to versailles appointed a bipartisan delegation to go to san francisco including republican arthur vandenberg of michigan one of the most respected members of the senate.
vandenbergs support would be crucial and roosevelt knew it.
two weeks before the san francisco meeting was to begin franklin d roosevelt died.
moments after taking the oath of office harry s truman made his first presidential decision the conference would go ahead as scheduled on april 25.
some thought the san francisco conference would simply be a celebration of work already done but new tensions especially between the united states and the soviet union almost scuttled the conference.
nevertheless most americans wanted the united nations to be successful and public opinion influenced the delegates especially vandenberg.
on june 25 1945 the delegates unanimously approved the un charter.
on july 28 the u s senate ratified the charter by a vote of 89 to 2.
the united nations was launched.
quick review what were the most radical postwar changes domestically and internationally.
give three reasons to support each of your choices.
chapter 24 the world the war creates 24 1 24 2 243 cold war the political and economic confrontation between the soviet union and the united states that dominated world affairs from 1946 to 1989.
the cold war begins analyze the coming of the cold war tensions with the soviet union and mccarthyism at home.
in 1945 most people in the united states admired the soviet union even if american leaders had already become wary of stalin and his government.
after meeting stalin for the first time at tehran in late 1943 roosevelt said i got along fine with marshall stalin privately however he confided his doubts.
the two nations were allies in world war ii.
american wartime propaganda talked positively about our valiant allies the soviet people had withstood a murderous onslaught by nazi forces and a terrible siege at stalingrad.
the soviet army had done most of the fighting against nazi germany in world war ii.
few americans knew much about stalins policies within russia including the deadly purges of political enemies or the mass starvation that resulted from efforts toward collectivist russian agriculture in the 1930s.
yet within a year the soviet union and the united states were engaged in a cold war that lasted 40 years until the dissolution of the soviet union in the late 1980s.
what happened to turn former allies against each other.
and why did it happen so quickly.
the hardening of positions containment the truman doctrine the marshall plan and the berlin airlift from the beginning of their wartime alliance the united states and the soviet union had very different goals in world war ii.
the soviets wanted a permanent buffer zone between themselves and germany and they wanted to ensure that they obtained absolute control over the countries of eastern europe.
having suffered so much from the war the soviets were also determined to take all of the machinery munitions and art they could from germany.
the united states wanted a rapid 24 2 this picture of american and soviet soldiers in germany in may 1945 just after the nazi surrender illustrates the friendship between the people of the two nations that developed during world war ii and that ended very soon after that.
96 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 post nazi german recovery.
in 1942 roosevelt told soviet foreign minister v m molotov that there might be a proper time to address the differences in war goals between the two nations but in the midst of the war fdr said the present was not the moment within weeks of taking the oath of office president truman became convinced that the soviets were violating promises they had made to roosevelt and needed to be stopped.
when he met with foreign minister molotov for the first time he was ready to show how tough an american president could be.
when molotov began the conversation with diplomatic chit chat truman immediately accused the soviets of breaking promises they had made to fdr at the yalta meeting.
as truman continued his tirade molotov responded i have never been talked to like that in my life to which truman responded carry out your agreements and you wont get talked to like that.
it was not an auspicious start to a new relationship.
truman later told friends i gave him the one two right to the jaw molotov and stalin quickly concluded that truman was reversing roosevelts policies especially when truman cut aid to the soviet union claiming that with the war in europe over they no longer needed it.
but stalin did not back down.
indeed almost immediately after the truman molotov meeting stalin asserted communist control over the new governments of poland romania and bulgaria.
in spite of trumans tough tone with molotov in april 1945 truman knew that he had a weak hand in dealing with the soviets.
he sent one of roosevelts most trusted advisors to moscow to try to build a better relationship and then in july for the first and only time he met face to face with stalin in potsdam just outside the newly conquered berlin.
truman and stalin seemed to get on and after the potsdam meeting truman wrote i can deal with stalin the americans agreed that stalin had the right to dismantle factories in eastern germany and move them to russia and could arrange the government of poland as he chose.
there were many reasons for these concessions.
most important when the fighting in europe ended the soviet army was in eastern europe and the american army was not.
truman knew that the american people had no stomach for maintaining an army in europe after the war.
until the last day of the potsdam meeting truman was not sure that the atomic bomb would work.
finally with war still raging in the pacific truman wanted the soviets to keep their promise to attack japan once the war in europe was over.
in the year that followed the end of the war however both sides hardened their positions.
in february and march 1946 new tensions flared.
in a speech on february 9 stalin said that the only key to future world peace was for monopoly capitalism to be replaced by communism around the world.
supreme court justice william douglas called stalins speech a declaration of world war iii a week later george kennan a senior diplomat in the american embassy in moscow sent what came to be known as the long telegram to the u s state department.
this widely distributed document called the soviet government an oriental despotism in which communist ideology was merely a fig leaf covering tyranny at home and rapid expansion abroad.
kennan told his state department superiors that the soviet union was a political force committed fanatically to the belief that with the united states there can be no permanent modus vivendi accommodation between disputing parties that it is desirable and necessary that the internal harmony of our society be destroyed the international authority of our state be broken he suggested that the united states should adopt a policy of containment acknowledging soviet influence where it existed but taking all necessary steps to ensure that the influence did not spread into new areas of the globe.
containment of soviet communism would come to define u s foreign policy for a long time.
243 containment the policy of resisting further expansion of the soviet bloc through diplomacy and if necessary military action developed in 1947 48.
chapter 24 the world the war creati 24 1 24 2 243 iron curtain a phrase coined by former british prime minister winston churchill in 1946 when describing the post world war ii division of europe into two hostile segments.
truman doctrine president harry truman s statement in 1947 that the united states should assist other nations that were facing external pressure or internal revolution.
two weeks later winston churchill no longer in office but still a revered war hero gave a speech as trumans guest at westminster college in missouri in which he said from stettin in the baltic to trieste in the adriatic an iron curtain has descended across the continent.
from what i have seen of our russian friends and allies during the war i am convinced that there is nothing they admire so much as strength and there is nothing for which they have less respect than weakness especially military weakness.
the image of an iron curtain dividing europe became one of the central images of the cold war.
the call for military strength to counter soviet strength became the foundation of a massive arms race on both sides of the iron curtain.
not everyone in the united states agreed that a cold war with the soviet union was inevitable.
three senators issued a statement saying mr.
churchills proposal would cut the throat of the big three without which the war could not have been won and without which the peace cannot be saved former vice president henry wallace by then secretary of commerce insisted that it was important for the united states to allay any reasonable russian grounds for fear suspicion and distrust privately truman called these critics of churchills speech the american crackpots association as 1946 came to an end more americans were coming to the conclusion that stalin was an evil dictator and the soviet union could not be trusted.
truman decided that his administration needed to speak with a single voice and dropped wallace and secretary of state james byrnes from the cabinet replacing the latter with george marshall who was u s chief of staff during the war.
a year later truman also sponsored a reorganization of the nations military forces in which the previously separate cabinet level war and navy departments were merged into a single department of defense that was responsible for all military matters.
truman was quickly concluding that the end of world war ii did not mean the end of the need for u s military strength.
meanwhile in early 1947 greece was in the midst of a civil war between its government and communist forces and turkey was resisting soviet demands for greater control of access to the eastern mediterranean and the middle east.
great britain which had been providing support for both governments said it could no longer afford to do so.
truman marshall and marshalls deputy dean acheson agreed that the united states needed to step in to take britains place in supporting resistance to communism in the region.
if the containment policy meant anything it certainly meant stopping soviet moves into places like greece and turkey.
the truman doctrine made it clear that containing communism would be at the bedrock of u s foreign policy.
needing the support of a reluctant congress truman appeared in person and said i believe that it must be the policy of the united states to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures in june the administration announced plans for massive economic aid to western europe.
the winter of 1946 47 had been the worst in years.
by spring europe was running dangerously low on coal and food.
people were cold hungry and desperate.
secretary of state marshall used a harvard commencement speech to tell the world marshall plan the european recovery program 1949 which provided u s economic assistance to european nations in large part to keep them out of the soviet union s sphere of influence.
our policy is directed not against any country or doctrine but against hunger poverty desperation and chaos we know that in this trying period between a war that is over and a peace that is not yet secure the destitute and oppressed of the earth look chiefly to us for sustenance and support until they can again face life with self confidence and self reliance.
the speech was partly true.
the humanitarian goals a campaign against hunger poverty and desperation were real.
but the marshall plan as it came to be called was also directed against one country and its doctrine.
people in the united states and the soviet union knew that the goal was to stop soviet expansion in western europe.
698 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 congress funded 13 34 billion in u s aid for europe between 1948 and 1952.
people were fed economies recovered and western capitalist democracies were established.
stalin saw the truman doctrine and the marshall plan as a direct assault.
some americans notably the now out of office henry wallace also thought it was a needless provocation.
the soviets quickly solidified the power of a pro soviet regime in hungary and arranged a pro soviet coup in czechoslovakia in february 1948.
then in june 1948 the soviet union closed off american british and french access to berlin.
before world war ii ended the soviet union britain the united states and france had agreed that each of them would assume military authority not only in a different quadrant of germany but also within a different quadrant in the city of berlin even though berlin itself was deep inside the soviet quadrant.
the result was a divided germany and a divided berlin a precarious situation especially for the former capital city see map 24 2.
the soviets saw berlin as a useful pressure point in the cold war.
by closing off western access to the city they could challenge the truman doctrine and the marshall plan.
when they blocked all rail and highway access to berlin in the spring of 1948 truman decided to support the city with an airlift.
in the days and weeks that followed the berlin airlift sent hundreds of u s airplanes every day to templehoff airport in the western sector of berlin.
the city was well supplied and west berlin withstood the siege.
eventually in may 1949 the soviet union relented and reestablished access to berlin.
nevertheless by the beginning of 1949 the iron curtain that churchill had described was more firmly in place than ever and the cold war which had been developing since 1945 was a reality.
24 2 berlin airlift in 1948 and 1949 food and supplies delivered by air into berlin to keep the city attached to western europe.
1949 the soviet atom bomb and the fall of china just as the crisis in berlin was coming to an end the u s senate ratified american membership in the north atlantic treaty organization nato by an 82 to 13 vote in july 1949.
fearing a soviet invasion of western europe 12 nations led by the united states and britain created the nato alliance in which each member agreed to treat an attack on any one from any source though only one source was feared as an attack on all.
there would be no repeat by any country of nazi germanys attacks on the nations of europe one after another.
the nato treaty was the first time in history that the united states agreed to such a peacetime partnership.
virtually nonstop flights brought vital supplies to the city of berlin and sustained it during its isolation from june 1948 until may 1949.
chapter 24 the world the war ci i h map 24 2 a divided germany.
with the end of world war ii american british french and soviet forces each controlled a portion of germany and a portion of the german capital city of berlin as well as temporarily austria.
the arrangement would soon lead to a new crisis.
700 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 ib members of nato 1949 m88 members of warsaw pact 1955 hi nonaligned counties d participants in the marshall plan 1947 1952 year first atomic device was tested by that country map sa wvided europe.
as the cold war escalated countries within nato and those within the warsaw pact with few neutral nations made up the new europe.
chapter 24 the world the war o oi in 1955 when the federal republic of germany or west germany was created out of the merged british french and u s occupation zones and admitted to nato the soviet union formed the warsaw pact a military alliance in eastern europe specifically designed to counter nato with the same guarantees of mutual assistance for its members all of whom were under tight control by the soviet union.
nato and the warsaw pact would be more powerful entities in the coming decades than the united nations see map 24 3.
two further events in the fall of 1949 sped the growth of cold war sentiment in the united states.
first in august the russians exploded their own atomic bomb.
then soon after the announcement of soviet nuclear capacity the government of the u s wartime ally chiang kai shek was defeated by chinese communists.
the creation of the communist peoples republic of china under the leadership of mao tse tung and the flight of chiangs government to the island of taiwan was a huge blow to american pride even though the united states continued to recognize the taiwan based government as the official voice of china until the 1970s.
chiang s government had been an important symbol to americans since the japanese invasion of china in the 1930s and the united states had spent almost 3 billion to help chiang since the end of world war ii.
americans had tended to ignore the corruption and inefficiency of chiangs nationalist government.
an internal u s state department paper written in august 1949 just before the fall of chiangs government said the unfortunate but inescapable fact is that the ominous result of the civil war in china was beyond the control of the government of the united states however many americans in congress in the media and around the country were convinced that the united states had somehow lost china and that the truman administration was at fault.
it was a sour time in a country which was not used to losses.
the cold war at home joseph mccarthy and a new red scare as americans tried to make sense of the cold war the soviet manufacture of an atomic bomb and the communist takeover in china some in congress and beyond looked for internal enemies.
many politicians were worried about maintaining the security of the united states but some in congress sought political gain by fomenting a new red scare similar to the one that had followed world war i see chapter 21.
on january 21 1950 alger hiss a former state department official who had been with fdr at yalta and who helped organize the united nations was accused of having been a spy for the soviets in the 1930s.
one week later klaus fuchs an atomic scientist was arrested in london and accused of turning over nuclear secrets to the soviets.
fuchs implicated several americans including david greenglass greenglasss sister ethel rosenberg and her husband julius rosenberg.
and little more than a week after the arrest of fuchs wisconsin senator joseph mccarthy gave a speech in wheeling west virginia in which he claimed to have a list of active communist party members who worked for the federal government.
people began to suspect communist infiltration everywhere.
the nation was in for 5 years of fear and suspicion.
reality was more complex than the picture of widespread subversion implied.
although the communist party in the united states was tiny thousands of americans had considered communism as an alternative to the nations battered economic system in the 1930s.
in addition during world war ii the soviet union was the americas close ally in the fight against nazi germany.
before 1945 no one could have anticipated that helping the soviets would be such a serious crime later in the decade.
like many state department officials alger hiss was from the highest social strata making him an ideal choice for those who wanted to whip up class resentment as well as anticommunism.
when hiss was accused of passing state secrets to the soviets he insisted on testifying under oath in front of congress a move that opened hiss to a charge of libel and even though he was never convicted of espionage he was eventually convicted of lying under oath to congress and served 3 years in prison.
more recently available documents make it clear that hiss had indeed probably been a communist in the 1930s but when politicians like republican representative karl mundt of south dakota said that the conviction proved that the united states had been run by new dealers fair dealers misdealers and hiss dealers they were lumping an awful lot of other people who had never even flirted with communism in the same category.
mundt s comment did prove that in many parts of the united states 702 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 senator joseph mccarthy lectured widely on the communist menace.
although he gave few details he successfully created great fear.
in this image he exhibits a photograph that he claims is evidence of communist infiltration during a senate investigation in 1954 deep resentment of the new deal and of the eastern elite was alive and well and could easily be linked with each other and both could be linked with fears of the growing international influence of communism in the late 1940s.
greenglass and the rosenbergs were investigated in 1950 and charged with being soviet spies and with passing on atomic secrets to the soviets in 1951.
greenglass worked at the top secret manhattan project and julius rosenberg was a wartime engineer and both had access to highly secret data.
they were also jewish and even though americans were horrified by the holocaust anti semitism was alive and well in the united states in 1950.
just as hiss suffered for his east coast elite status greenglass and the rosenbergs suffered for their jewish background.
in the end greenglass served a long prison term.
ethel and julius rosenberg who always maintained their innocence were executed in 1953 the only americans ever executed under the 1917 espionage act.
in the 1990s when soviet archives were opened and when another one of the accused coconspirators morton sobell admitted that he had indeed been a spy it seemed clear that at least julius if not ethel had been soviet spies.
it was also clear that in the atmosphere of 1950 and 1951 it was virtually impossible for them to get a fair trial.
senator joseph mccarthy was not the first elected official to try to make political gains by stirring up the fear of communism in fact he came late to the process but he stole the leadership from all the others.
he had been searching for a new political issue on which to build his reelection campaign in wisconsin and in february 1950 he thought he had found it when he heard the national reaction to a speech in which he said i have here in my hand a list of 205 a list of names that were made known to the secretary of state as being members of the community party who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in the state department mccarthy was far more interested in his own fame than in actually finding communists.
his senate colleagues knew him as a pathological liar who had lied about his military service he said he had flown 30 combat missions when he had flown none his limp was not from shrapnel as he claimed but from a fall and he embarrassed them.
he drank heavily fanned the flames of homophobia and attacked both republicans and democrats whom he thought were soft on communism nevertheless few were willing to challenge mccarthy while the country was caught up in the fear of communism.
mccarthy said the government is full of communists he also said that achesons predecessor george marshall had lost china.
for those who believed that only a conspiracy could have led to the growth of communist influence around the world mccarthy was the perfect voice.
in june 1951 he told one audience how can we account for our present situation unless we believe that men high in this government are concerting to deliver us to disaster.
this must be the product of a conspiracy a conspiracy on a scale so immense as to dwarf any previous such venture in the history of man.
only treason in high places could account for the nation s troubles as mccarthy described them.
mccarthy never did name the names on his list and the numbers kept shifting in different speeches but he ruined careers and frightened many into silence.
his pop ularity seemed to protect him.
in may 1950 a gallup poll showed that 84 percent of americans knew who mccarthy was and 39 percent believed that his attacks were chapter 24 the world the war cre house committee on un american activities congressional committee 1938 1975 that investigated suspected nazi and communist sympathizers.
good for the country.
few political leaders were willing to challenge him.
however in june 1950 maines republican senator margaret chase smith and six colleagues issued a declaration of conscience saying that mccarthy was using the senate as a publicity platform for irresponsible sensationalism.
still he continued for 4 more years.
when he became president in 1953 eisenhower did not challenge mccarthy directly but helped those who wanted to undermine him.
in 1954 edward r murrow perhaps the most respected journalist in the country did an expose on mccarthy on his see it now program on cbs television.
both the senate declaration and the cbs program hurt mccarthys reputation but it was only when mccarthy decided to probe for communists in the u s army that he met his match.
as the army s attorney joseph welch grilled him mccarthy lashed out at a young attorney who was assisting welch accusing him of being a communist because he was a member of the left leaning national lawyers guild.
welch exploded until this moment senator i think i never really gauged your cruelty or your recklessness the hearing room burst into applause.
after that on december 2 1954 the senate voted to condemn mccarthy by a vote of 67 to 22.
he continued to serve out his term until his death in 1957 but he was a beaten man and no longer a force in national politics.
mccarthy was hardly the only leader of the red scare of the late 1940s and early 1950s.
j edgar hoover who had been head of the federal bureau of investigation fbi since 1924 and a participant in the governments attack on radicals after world war i cultivated a reputation as the nations top crime fighter especially after fbi agents killed john dillinger public enemy number one during prohibition.
but hoover also cultivated a role as a leading anti communist seeking to expose what he claimed was communist influence in the government universities religious groups and later civil rights organizations.
he collected files on hundreds of americans from members of congress to union officials.
although president truman complained about hoover insisting we want no gestapo or secret police he did not stop hoovers search for subversives.
other politicians realized that the search for communists could lead to electoral success.
the house committee on un american activities huac became a powerful forum for those who used the fear of communism to pursue other agendas.
one of its members john rankin a democrat from mississippi linked communism jews and civil rights workers saying of the civil rights movement this is part of the communistic program laid down by stalin approximately 30 years ago.
remember communism is yiddish.
i understand that every member of the politburo around stalin is either yiddish or married to one and that includes stalin himself a young republican representative from california richard m nixon used huac to build a national reputation investigating hiss looking for communists in the government and extending the search into the entertainment industry and education.
while some in the entertainment world quickly cooperated with huac many fought back.
judy garland one of the nations most popular stars since her childhood role in the wizard of oz pleaded before every free conscience in america is subpoenaed please speak up frank sinatra asked once they get the movies throttled how long will it be before were told what we can say and cannot say into the radio microphone.
if you make a pitch on a nationwide radio network for a square deal for the underdog will they call you a commie.
are they going to scare us into silence undeterred huac continued with its hearings.
many witnesses refused to testify on the fifth amendment grounds that they could not be compelled to testify against themselves.
ten actors known as the hollywood ten took the more difficult route of claiming that the hearings threatened their first amendment rights of free speech.
the 10 and others were blacklisted and had their careers ruined in spite of efforts by the committee for the first amendment led by humphrey bogart lauren bacall katherine hepburn and danny kaye to protect them.
704 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 thinking historically looking at the art of the postwar nation f.
2 u i j 24 2 in his book the unfinished city new york and the metropolitan idea historian thomas bender wrote of the radical transformation of the arts after world war ii intellectual historians have failed to grasp the variety of artistic and critical work that characterized the 1940s partly because concerns of the cold war era gave precedence to certain ideological themes and political trends.
bender argues that it is also important to pay attention to the remarkable creativity and critical discourse in the fields of painting and sculpture photography architecture music and dance.
as bender observes while many americans were focused on the cold war others were using the arts to ask different questions about american life especially as people came to terms with the threat of nuclear disaster after world war ii.
often artists were pointing to the confusions some said pointlessness of contemporary thinking as much or more than they were making overt statements about one political ideology or another.
james agee himself a very well known author was the film critic for the nation magazine in the late 1940s.
in a 1948 review he wrote several of the best people in hollywood grew noticeably during their years away at war the man who grew most impressively i thought as an artist as a man in intelligence and in an ability to put through fine work against difficult odds was film director john huston his first movie since the war has been a long time coming but it was certainly worth waiting for.
the treasure of the sierra mad re is a bout as near to folk art as a highly conscious artist can get i doubt we shall ever see a film more masculine in style or a truer movie understanding of character and of men.
as a generation of young men returned from the fighting of the war and took up their day to day lives in the civilian workforce some worried that perhaps they had left their masculinity behind on the battlefields.
artists like the film director john huston addressed these fears.
while the films of the late 1940s and early 1950s were like al films meant to entertain they also helped some in the audience think through some of their greatest hopes and fears.
the abstract artist jackson pollock painted convergence in 1952.
like most abstract art the complex work leaves it to the beholder to make meaning of the lines and colors the artist offers.
source thomas bender unfinished city new york and the metropolitan idea new york new york university press 2002 pp.
135 136 james agee the treasure of the sierra mad re the nation january 31 1948.
thinking critically 1.
historical interpretation in your opinion what can a period s art tell us about its politics.
what sort of political ideas might one see in an abstract painting or a film about masculinity.
constructing an argument how would you explain the emergence of abstract art in the era of the atomic bomb after world war ii in place of the much more realistic paintings of the 1930s.
t j many labor unions purged communist members.
aspiring new leaders used the accusation of communist influence to push aside older leaders.
the united electrical workers union was replaced by a new union of electrical workers because the united electrical was considered to be communist and was expelled by the american federation of labor.
civil rights organizations including the urban league the congress of racial equality and the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp purged communist members.
many school districts and 21 states required loyalty oaths from teachers.
in 1948 the university of washington fired three professors when they refused to answer questions about the communist party.
some 31 professors were ultimately fired from the university of california under similar circumstances.
and the american federation of teachers the leading union of elementary and secondary teachers voted that communists should not be allowed to be members or teach in the nations schools.
chapter 24 the world the war crei i not everyone was caught up in the red scare hysteria.
philip murray president of the congress of industrial organizations one of the nation s largest unions wrote to president truman in 1947 to protest that government policy did not ensure due process for accused employees.
secretary of the treasury john snyder protested the governments loyalty review board in 1948.
george kennan who had played an important role in launching the cold war added a somber note in his memoirs what the phenomenon of mccarthyism did was to implant in my consciousness a lasting doubt as to the adequacy of our political system i could never recapture after these experiences of the 1940s and 1950s quite the same faith in the american system of government and in traditional american outlooks that i had despite all the discouragements of official life before that time.
not everyone shared kennans pessimism but many felt that american democracy itself had been wounded by the tactics of people like mccarthy.
war in korea on june 25 1950 to the surprise of u s leaders the army of north korea attacked south korea.
korea was a part of the world to which u s planners had paid very little attention.
but it was the place where the cold war turned very hot.
with the japanese defeat in 1945 the victorious allies determined to honor korean hopes for independence.
u s military authorities used the same formula as they had for germany a divided military occupation that was meant to be temporary.
military planners agreed that the soviet army would occupy korea north of the 38th parallel north korea and that u s forces would occupy the southern half of the peninsula including the old capital of seoul south korea until a permanent plan for national unification could be achieved.
it would be a long wait.
the united states backed a new government led by the 75 year old syngman rhee who was conservative charming fiercely independent as well as corrupt and dictatorial.
the soviets backed an even more dictatorial 31 year old communist kim il sung.
both rhee and kim were committed to korean unification but on very different terms.
between the end of world war ii and 1950 constant clashes between the two governments cost perhaps 100 000 koreans their lives.
then in 1949 and 1950 a crisis developed.
in 1949 the soviet delegate to the united nations jacob malik began boycotting the un security council because that body continued to give the nationalist chinese government of chiang kai shek the un vote even though the communist government ruled mainland china.
ihe protest meant that the soviet union could not veto security council resolutions at a crucial moment.
at the same time the truman administration worried that the united states was spread too thin and seeing korea as of only marginal significance withdrew the u s military leaving rhees government on its own.
a year later in 1950 in a speech he later regretted secretary of state dean acheson described the u s defensive perimeter in asia in a way that did not include either korea or taiwan.
stalin and the north korean dictator kim il sung assumed that the united states was not prepared to defend south korea.
kim pressed stalin to approve an attack and stalin agreed though he warned kim i f you get kicked in the teeth i shall not lift a finger it was all the permission kim needed.
on june 25 100 000 north korean troops supported by tanks artillery and planes invaded the south.
the communist leaders had misread u s intentions.
truman viewed the korean invasion through the prism of british and french inaction in the face of nazism.
he was determined to maintain the truman doctrine of containment of communism anywhere in the world.
with the soviets absent acheson appealed to the united nations security council and got a unanimous vote in favor of un action to stop the north koreans.
the korean war was called a un police action although nearly all of the fighting was done by u s and korean troops.
706 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 public opinion polls showed solid support for american action and people as diverse as republican governor of new york thomas dewey and liberal henry wallace both of whom had run against truman in the 1948 presidential election supported truman.
congress appropriated 10 billion.
truman ordered general douglas macarthur then commander of u s.
troops occupying japan to take command in korea and troops were rushed to korea.
meanwhile the north koreans kept coming.
by september 3 months after the war began u s and south korean forces controlled only a small section of southeast korea around the port of pusan known as the pusan perimeter.
slowly however the u s forces were built up and supplies brought into korea.
american planes bombed north korean troops heavily.
the bombing wreaked havoc on communist supply lines but also destroyed rice fields.
perhaps half the invading north korean army were killed or wounded in the first 2 months of the war and most of the north korean tanks were disabled.
two to three million korean civilians 10 percent of the prewar population of korea died during the war either from bombing or from starvation because of lost rice crops.
in september 1950 under macarthurs command the u s and un forces made a surprise amphibious landing at inchon on the west coast of korea close to the 38th parallel.
the communist forces were cut off from their supplies and captured or forced to retreat.
the tide of war suddenly turned and in less than a month the americans advanced from the small perimeter to retake south korea see map 24 4.
for macarthur the initial victory was only the beginning.
he insisted and truman agreed that the moment had come to unify the whole korean peninsula under syngman rhee.
the un with the soviets still boycotting agreed and macarthurs forces began moving north closer to the chinese border at the yalu river.
macarthur was confident that he could win the war and be home by december.
when truman asked about the chance of a chinese intervention mac arthur responded very little he was wrong.
by late november as macarthurs army continued north a huge chinese army attacked them.
the chjnese have come in with both feet truman said.
this time it was the americans that had long drawn out supply lines.
they were ill prepared for the freezing cold of a korean winter.
the chinese wore warm padded clothing had fought for years in similar territory and were adept at terrifying hand to hand night fighting when american planes and troops could not see them.
the fighting in november and december of 1950 was brutal.
soldiers were killed as they slept or froze in the winter cold.
the retreats were frightful.
the u s army seventh infantry division lost 5 000 troops one third of its force in a 3 day retreat over mountainous roads as the chinese attacked from every angle.
by january 1951 the line dividing the two armies was well south of the 38th parallel.
the war settled into a bloody stalemate.
for truman the defeats in korea at the end of 1950 were a diplomatic and a political disaster.
republicans now saw him as weak.
some urged the use of atomic weapons on china.
general macarthur whom truman despised had strong republican support.
macarthurs fellow senior officers had their own opinions.
when general eisenhower was asked if he had met macarthur he responded not only have i met him 1 studied dramatics under him in early 1951 macarthur bypassed truman and tried to get congressional support for a wider war.
truman had had enough.
with support from the joint chiefs of staff he fired macarthur who had been a hero to many.
army chief of staff general omar bradley was more concerned with europe and fearful of a land war in asia.
bradley said korea was the wrong war at the wrong place at the wrong time and with u s troops bogged down in the snow and cold of korea found the war far r difficult to fight than had been expected.
chapter 24 the world the war crea china u.
m north korea mil south korea north korean forces united states united nations forces chinese forces capitals map 24 4 the korean war.
at the beginning and end of the korean war the peninsula was divided into two nations at the 38th parallel.
however between 1950 and 1953 the dividing line moved many times as indicated.
the wrong enemy the new commander in korea general matthew ridgway stabilized the defense lines and arranged better support and supplies for the troops.
the chinese and american governments became resigned to a partial victory.
neither wanted a larger war no matter what the two korean governments thought.
battles for places the american troops called heartbreak ridge or no name ridge described how those on the ground thought about what they were doing.
armistice negotiations began in the summer of 1951 but stalled over the fact that many chinese and north korean prisoners did not want to be returned home.
it would take 2 more years and the election of a new u s president before the final armistice was signed in july 1953.
more than 36 000 americans were killed in the war many times more korean and chinese troops and probably 3 million korean civilians.
the final armistice line was not far from where the prewar line had been near panmunjom.
sixty years later korea is still a tense and divided place.
24 2 quick review how did changing attitudes toward and experiences with the soviet union between 1945 and 1949 contribute to major changes in u s foreign policy.
708 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 politics 1948 and 1952 explain political developments that led to the elections of truman and then eisenhower as cold war era presidents.
when harry truman became president in april 1945 few americans knew much about him.
many expected truman to merely serve out the term to which roosevelt had been elected.
truman decided otherwise but he had a lot of time and a lot of responsibility to manage before any thought of reelection loomed.
riding a tiger truman s first term as war and foreign policy dominated trumans first months in office truman said he felt like he was riding a tiger.
the liberal wing of the democratic party included new deal activists such as secretary of commerce henry wallace and secretary of the interior harold ickes who never trusted truman viewing him as a product of missouri machine politics who had been forced on fdr by the conservative wing of the party.
truman reciprocated the distrust.
looking ahead to the postwar world truman told clark clifford one of his key advisors i don t want any experiments.
the american people have been through a lot of experiments and they want a rest from experiments but truman was not proposing any sort of warren harding normalcy on september 6 1945 just 4 days after the japanese surrender truman proposed legislation that would implement fdrs economic bill of rights expanding the federal role in public housing public utilities job creation and national health increasing the minimum wage offering social security benefits to more people while also making the fair employment practices commission permanent.
it was a sweeping agenda delighting liberals and dismaying conservatives.
southern segregationists filibustered the fair employment bill that would have continued fdrs executive order ensuring that employers with federal contracts could not discriminate among employees on the basis of race and kept it from reaching a vote.
other bills were watered down by congress.
congress turned trumans effort to launch a national system of health insurance into the hill burton act that benefitted doctors and hospitals and private medical insurers but did not guarantee health insurance.
while there was democratic as well as republican opposition to trumans domestic agenda the presidents single most powerful opponent was ohio senator robert taft the son of the former president known to many as mr.
republican taft not only opposed trumans agenda but also pushed legislation that reduced taxes forcing cuts in government programs and persuaded congress in 1947 over trumans veto to pass the taft hartley act that lifted many of the protections organized labor had enjoyed since the passage of the wagner act in the 1930s.
taft was not alone.
the republican party was strong following world war ii.
as truman understood many people in the united states were tired of experiments just as after world war i many americans simply wanted to be left alone.
in the 1946 midterm elections republicans took control of both houses of congress.
but harry truman was a fighter more of a fighter than some expected.
his goal was to win a full term in his own right and elect a democratic congress in 1948 goals many thought unrealistic in 1946.
the 1948 election a four way contest in planning his campaign for 1948 truman sought to maintain the new deal coalition that had elected roosevelt four times and even sought to expand it.
he wanted to have a large plurality among white blue collar workers immigrant groups farmers and poor people.
he made special efforts to court african americans and jews.
in 1946 he appointed a presidents committee on civil rights and its report released in october 1947 led him to propose an antilynching law a permanent fair employment commission and laws against poll taxes and discrimination in transportation.
243 when the republican congress failed to pass these and other pieces of legislation truman called them the do nothing congress under pressure from civil rights leaders truman overruled the objections of some of the nations highest ranking military officers and ordered the desegregation of the nations armed forces in 1948.
it would take several years before the last segregated regiments were phased out but the process was underway for a dramatic change from the segregated military of world war ii.
truman also favored the establishment of an independent state of israel.
on this issue there was deep disagreement within the administration.
secretary of state marshall threatened to resign if the united states gave support to israel and most leaders of the state army and navy departments opposed recognizing the new nation.
they feared that the united states would permanently alienate the arab world jeopardize the smooth flow of oil to the united states and europe and create a situation that would remain tense and untenable.
those on the white house staff tended to support creation of a jewish state in the middle east.
trumans own reading about the holocaust and middle eastern history led him to support israel.
he got and occasionally resented considerable pressure from american zionists.
thirty three state legislatures passed resolutions favoring the establishment of a jewish state.
truman responded to one anxious state department official i have to answer to hundreds of thousands who are anxious for the success of zionism.
i do not have hundreds of thousands of arabs among my constituents on may 14 as the last british forces left palestine zionists proclaimed the independent state of israel.
at trumans direction the united states immediately recognized the new government.
to the surprise of many israel was able to defend itself successfully against an arab attack and secure its borders and its existence.
trumans policies from fair employment to his support for israel also had an impact on american voters.
while many african americans were moving into the democratic party and most jewish voters were prepared to support truman after his may 1948 decisions the road to nomination and election that year was not easy.
many new dealers in the democratic party still hoped for a more liberal or a more popular candidate.
when it became clear that truman would win the nomination and invite senate leader alben barkley to be his running mate henry wallace former vice president and commerce secretary bolted and set up the progressive party to defeat truman end the cold war and return the country to what he saw as the roosevelt legacy.
then when truman supported a convention platform plank supporting civil rights introduced by minnesota senator hubert humphrey at the democratic convention 35 delegates from alabama and mississippi walked out of the convention waving confederate flags and proceeded to nominate south carolinas governor and future senator j strom thurmond to run against truman.
these dixiecrats were a serious threat to a party that always counted on the solid south to ensure national electoral victories.
the republicans sensing that this was their year especially with the divisions in the democrat ranks nominated governor thomas e dewey of new york the 1944 standard bearer with california governor earl warren as his running mate.
the team seemed to have everything going for it and ran a cautious campaign designed to avoid mistakes.
unfortunately for the republicans they were too cautious and dewey was too stiff.
alice longworth theodore roosevelts daughter called him the little man on the wedding cake the wallace campaign never took off and gained little support though it may have denied truman the majority in a few crucial states especially new york.
the thurmond campaign got virtually no support outside of the deep south though it did carry the electoral votes of four states alabama louisiana mississippi and south carolina.
truman waged a very tough and spirited campaign against the do nothing congress and the wall street reactionaries as he campaigned people started yelling give em hell harry he had solid support from organized labor and farmers and held most of the new deal coalition together.
still the republicans led by dewey were confident of victory.
but when the votes were counted truman won receiving 24 179 345 votes to deweys 21 991 291 and 303 electoral votes to dewey s 189.
thurmond won 39 electoral votes.
wallace none.
710 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 as he began his new term in january 1949 truman called his agenda the fair deal.
the truman fair deal included repeal of the taft hartley act support for family farmers a more progressive income tax federal aid to education an increase in the minimum wage national medical insurance as well as another try to broadening social security and expanded civil rights.
in his inaugural address truman also called for more u s technical assistance to developing countries.
technical assistance became known as point four because it was the fourth point in trumans speech.
even though the democrats controlled both houses of congress in 1949 virtually none of the fair deal legislation passed.
southern democrats made sure there was no movement on civil rights organized labor did not have enough support to overturn the taft hartley act urban representatives saw little value in spending federal tax money on farmers and the american medical association made sure that there was no national system of medical insurance such as most western european countries adopted after world war ii.
point four foreign aid passed but the appropriations were small and the resulting technical assistance generally insignificant.
much of trumans second term was focused on the war in korea which the congress was willing to fund and the ongoing red scare which truman did little to oppose.
many were confident of a republican victory in the 1948 election including the editors of the chicago tribune who published this erroneous early edition over which the eventual winner harry s truman delighted to gloat.
a war hero becomes president in a belated slap at franklin roosevelt the republican congress passed the 22nd amendment to the constitution prohibiting any president from serving more than two terms and a majority of states ratified the amendment.
the amendment did not apply to the sitting president and truman considered seeking a third term.
when he was defeated in the first primaries by estes kefauver a crusading senator from tennessee however truman decided that two terms was enough and dropped out of the race.
in spite of his spirited come from behind race in 1948 and his later reputation as a tough decision maker truman was not a widely popular president.
the most popular person in the united states in the early 1950s was dwight david eisenhower known to everyone as ike.
born in 1890 and raised in abilene kansas by pacifist parents eisenhower had attended west point seeing it as a free education for a career in engineering.
instead he became a long term officer in the peacetime army between the wars moving slowly through the ranks.
he was still a colonel when world war ii began but was then promoted rapidly and commanded the allied force that defeated nazi germany.
he probably could have had the presidential nomination of either party in 1948 but opted to become president of columbia university and then commander of nato forces in europe in 1951.
he managed to convey a disinterested above the fray persona.
some who knew him better saw another side.
general george patton said ike wants to be president so badly you can taste it while eisenhower had served as a senior military commander under democrats roosevelt and truman and tended to agree with the anti communist wing of the democratic party on foreign policy matters he was a fiscal conservative and the new deal and fair deal programs offended his sense of the proper role of the federal government.
if he was going to run it would be as a republican.
liberals within the republican party including the 1944 and 1948 standard bearer thomas dewey and massachusetts senator henry cabot lodge were desperate to find an internationalist candidate who could stop the republican front runner senator taft an isolationist in foreign policy and a conservative on domestic issues.
they courted eisenhower who remained coy.
however primary voters made it clear that they preferred ike to taft ike defeated taft 46 661 to 35 838 in the march new hampshire primary even though he was still at nato headquarters in europe and did not campaign.
after fair deal the name president harry truman gave to his policies to continue and extend many of the new deal s domestic policies.
chapter 24 the world the war 24 j that primary the momentum was hard to stop and eisenhower was nominated by the republicans in the summer of 1952 a bitter loss for taft and his supporters.
eisenhower asked california senator richard m nixon to be his running mate.
although the two were not close and never were nixon brought balance to the ticket.
ike almost dumped nixon at one point in the campaign because of charges that nixon had a private campaign fund donated by wealthy californians.
nixon gave what became known as his checkers television speech for its maudlin promise to keep the family dog named checkers even though the dog had been a gift.
the speech was a success and nixon stayed on the ticket.
for the rest of his career even after his own presidency nixon celebrated the day of the speech.
at the age of 38 nixon was considered young while ike at 62 was considered old.
nixon had made his name with his search for communists when he was a member of the house un american activities committee.
in addition he was from the west coast while ikes strongest support was in the east.
the democrats nominated illinois governor adlai stevenson.
like eisenhower stevenson was a strong cold warrior and a known internationalist who had been one of the founders of the united nations.
he had a reputation as an honest politician in a state where democrats were often corrupt.
he was more conservative than truman on most domestic issues especially race and he selected alabama senator john sparkman as his running mate in part to ensure that there would be no dixiecrat walkout in 1952.
stevenson was also very popular with many liberals mostly because of his intelligence and wit.
one said that his speeches were simply gems of wisdom and wit and sense unfortunately for stevensons vote getting this skill mattered more to the partys intellectual leaders than to many in the working class black urban coalition that had been key to the election of roosevelt and truman.
the campaign was the first in which television played a major role.
the republicans made effective use of short tv spots that carried brief comments by ike along with his famous smile.
ike also promised a nation that was desperately tired of the war i shall go to korea though it was unclear what he would do there.
in november ike won 55 percent of the vote and carried the electoral college 442 to 89 winning even florida tennessee texas and virginia states that had voted democrat for decades.
the republicans won small majorities in congress.
eisenhower fulfilled his campaign promise and went to korea.
early in his term he was able to conclude the peace treaty that had eluded truman.
korea remained divided but the conflict ended.
ike intended to create what he called modern republicanism he was a determined internationalist who kept the united states active in the un and nato.
under ike there would be no return to 1920s style isolationism.
he was determined to balance the federal budget and not likely to launch major new programs but not roll back the major new deal initiatives either.
he once said should any political party attempt to abolish social security unemployment insurance and eliminate labor laws and farm programs you would not hear of that party again in our political history he dismissed the conservative wing of the republican party saying of the conservative california senator william knowland in his case there seems to be no final answer to the question how stupid can you get with eisenhower s election a new republican administration was prepared to maintain many of the new deals domestic policies and trumans cold war internationalism.
individuals changed but surprisingly little policy changed after the inauguration.
nevertheless as the great depression and world war ii receded and a new generation grew up with no memory of that difficult past and as many americans experienced unprecedented prosperity the culture began to change.
the 1950s were staid to some surprisingly novel to others and full of surprises for most.
243 quick review aside from their political parties how different were truman and eisenhower as candidates and as presidents.
712 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 conclusion the experience of world war ii had a profound effect on american culture in the decade that followed the war.
the federal government offered generous benefits to returning veterans allowing a whole generation of young men to attend college to buy homes and to live comfortable middle class lives.
men and women anxious to leave the war behind married quickly and had children a lot of children.
the population soared in what was called a baby boom.
in the postwar era the living patterns of americans changed drastically.
many middle class white americans left the cities for homes in newly created suburban communities.
at the same time the rate of migration of southern blacks to the urban centers of the north exploded.
many black migrants moved into city centers because they were excluded from suburban developments.
latinos from puerto rico and mexico moved to american cities notably new york and los angeles.
the economic gains achieved during the war continued throughout the postwar period made possible in part by the position of the united states as the only remaining economic superpower in the world.
consumers who had more money than ever purchased goods produced by american manufacturers achieved new levels of economic security and affluence buying automobiles televisions and electric appliances in the postwar economy.
the end of the world war ii also brought on new attempts at international cooperation.
in an effort to create political and economic stability and a lasting peace the united nations the international monetary fund and the world bank were ushered into being.
while enjoying the remarkable prosperity of the postwar era more and more americans became deeply concerned about the soviet union and the spread of communism.
the containment of communism became the bedrock of u s foreign policy in the truman administration.
by 1952 both the united states and the soviet union possessed hydrogen bombs and the possibility of mutually assured destruction set off a cold war between the two countries that would last 40 years.
in europe the cold war was institutionalized in the western led north atlantic treaty organization founded by the united states and great britain and the eastern warsaw pact led by the soviet union.
americas uneasy relationship with the soviet union resulted in a second red scare within the united states itself.
fueled by the fiery rhetoric of senator joseph mccarthy and others americans began to suspect communist infiltration everywhere and many personal and professional lives were ruined by accusations of treason espionage and communist party membership that often had little basis in reality.
in 1950 the american policy of containment was tested when north korea attacked south korea.
the united states with support from the united nations took up the defense of south korea even after a huge army from communist china attacked u s forces in the region.
after fierce fighting the outcome of the war was ambiguous.
the united states and china signed an armistice that left korea divided much as it had been since the end of world war ii.
with the election of a new president dwight eisenhower in november 1952 the nation that was tired of the war in korea settled into what many hoped would be a new era of peace and prosperity even as they continued to fear the soviet union and the mushroom cloud of atomic destruction.
chapter review how did the actions of the united states after world war ii reflect its new posi tion as a world superpower.
chapter 24 the world the war crea chapter 24 chapter review 24 1 the united states in 1945 describe the new technology living patterns and political arrangements in the united states that resulted from world warll.
review questions 1.
contextualization how did advances in science and technology change everyday life for americans in the 1950s.
cause and effect what explains the rapid growth of suburbs in the 1950s.
constructing an argument why did the rate of african american migration to the north explode after world war ii.
comparison compare and contrast the migration of african americans and latinos in the 1950s.
what similarities and differences do you note.
comparison compare and contrast the anticommunist hysteria relating to world war i with the hysteria that followed world war ii.
what similarities and differences do you note.
historical interpretation why was the korean war a turning point in the cold war.
politics 1948 and 1952 243 explain political developments that led to the elections of truman and then eisenhower as cold war era presidents.
review questions 8.
cause and effect how did trumans policy initiatives during his first term impact the election of 1948.
historical interpretation why was eisenhowers election a turning point in american politics.
the cold war begins 24 2 analyze the coming of the cold war tensions with the soviet union and mccarthyism at home.
review questions 5.
cause and effect why did relations between the united states and the soviet union deteriorate so rapidly after world war ii.
714 partvill fears joys and limits 1945 1980 25 complacency and c 1952 1965 only the arrival of federal troops assured the integration of little rock high school in 1957.
chapter objective dwight eisenhower was the u s supreme commander in europe when harry truman became president in the spring of 1945.
in that role he worked for truman as he had for roosevelt.
but when eisenhower decided to enter the republican race for the white house and attacked truman and the democrats during the campaign the relationship between the two men was deeply strained.
between eisenhowers election victory in november 1952 and inauguration in 1953 the outgoing truman administration had little to do with the new one.
nevertheless once in office eisenhower made surprisingly few changes to trumans policies.
the republican eisenhower ended the war in korea mostly with a veiled threat to use atomic weapons and surprisingly solidified core new deal policies and the cold war.
eisenhowers was a reassuring presence and many considered his 8 years in office to be a time of complacency and stability in national life.
however the era was also one of extraordinary change.
new technology most of all television changed the culture.
dissent from the dominant complacency was found in many places most of all among the young and the more than 10 percent of americans who were of african origin.
the modern civil rights movement began in the 1950s.
the perceived stability and the many real changes of the 1950s are the focus of this chapter.
demonstrate an understanding of how different aspects of the 1950s from the seeming complacency of eisenhower s time to the growing civil rights movement reshaped the united states.
eisenhower s america america s world explain the continuation of the cold war under a new republican administration.
a culture on the move explain the impact of cultural and technological changes on the country.
race and civil rights analyze the growth and impact of the civil rights movement between 1954 and 1965.
25 1 25 2 25 3.
chapter 23 living in a 23 1 significant dates 1939 september 1 nazi germany invades poland great britain and france declares war on germany winter 1939 40 phony war 1940 april may hitler invades denmark norway holland belgium luxembourg then france july battle of britain begins september america first committee launched united states negotiates destroyer for bases deal with britain congress institutes military draft november fdr elected for third term 1941 january fdr proposes lend lease effort and four freedoms june a philip randolph threatens march on washington fdr creates fair employment practices commission october uss kearny attacked reuben james sunk december 7 japanese attack on pearl harbor 1942 march japanese internment begins april may bataan and corregidor surrender may pacific battle of coral sea june naval battle of midway island august u s attack on guadalcanal november kaiser shipyards produce liberty ship in 5 days 1943 january churchill in casablanca june u s treasury begins withholding taxes july invasion of italy begins november fdr meets churchill and stalin at teheran 1944 june 6 d day allied invasion of europe october macarthur returns to philippines november fdr elected to a fourth term 1945 february u s troops attack iwo jima april 12 fdr dies harry s truman becomes president may germany surrenders war in europe is over august united states drops atomic bombs on hiroshima and nagasaki japan surrenders world war ii ends 23 1 preparedness and isolation 1939 1941 explain support for and opposition to the growing u s support for britain and growing tensions with japan.
when germany attacked poland in september 1939 britain and then france declared war on germany.
europe was at war.
neither japan nor the united states intervened.
after the rapid german defeat of poland that fall the winter of 1939 40 was known as the phony war since there was so little fighting.
poland disappeared split between nazi germany and the soviet union.
britain and france waited for an attack they knew would come and the war did not stay phony.
the battle of britain at the beginning of 1940 hitler hinted at peace initiatives then in april invaded denmark and norway and quickly defeated both.
on may 10 germany unleashed its blitzkrieg lightning war on holland belgium and luxembourg bombing rotterdam into rubble and sending in airborne and ground troops.
all three countries surrendered.
on may 14 1 800 german tanks crossed the border into france overran the maginot line see chapter 22 which turned out to be useless and turned toward paris.
italy joined germany declaring war on france on june 10.
on june 22 1940 france surrendered.
for the next several years germany directly governed northern france including paris while a puppet government led by the aging french world war i hero marshall philippe petain governed the southern part of france known as vichy france from a capital in the town of vichy.
by the summer of 1940 hitler was the master of europe see map 23 1.
only great britain stood against germany.
as the german forces rushed toward paris they attempted to cut off a retreat by french and british armies.
but 338 000 british french and allied troops were evacuated from the beaches of dunkirk leaving nearly all equipment behind.
in a radio broadcast the new british prime minister winston churchill promised we shall go on to the end but he added britain would hold out until in gods good time the new world with all its power and might shall step forth to the rescue and the liberation of the old it was a rescue that churchill and roosevelt tried hard to assure over the next 18 months.
after the defeat of france hermann goering nazi air chief announced the fuhrer has ordered me to crush britain with my luftwaffe and he tried hard.
bombers attacked british coastal fortifications airfields and then in september 1940 began the terror bombing of london.
the blitz as the british called it eventually killed thousands of residents of britains capital 6 000 in october alone.
edward r murrow the voice of the columbia broadcasting system cbs based in london gave americans nightly reports that london is burning the small british air force fought back.
churchill begged roosevelt for more help.
roosevelt set about finding ways to provide it.
moving toward lend lease legislation every step that roosevelt took brought hostility from neutrality advocates.
senior officers within the u s military worried that sending arms to britain would undermine u s defenses.
secretary of war henry h woodring was committed to a fortress america strategy arming this country and ignoring the rest of the world.
no one opposed roosevelts support for britain more than charles lindbergh a hero from his 1920s flight across the atlantic.
in october 1939 lindbergh said an ocean is a formidable barrier even for modern aircraft the u s ambassador in london joseph p kennedy predicted that britain would quickly fall.
654 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 norway finland lake ladoga leningrad atlantic ocea n spain sweden ireland north recat sea uh eat denmark britain estonia lake peipus netherlands london bordeaux balearic islands corsica vichy sardinia it.
5 yuqoslaw z t rumania partitioned belgrade bucharest april 1941j s a.
serbia bulgar a flt h a r s finfifl r luxembourg france paris occupied government.
a general s of a polanef lemberg budapest hungaryj moscow soviet union e kiev ukraine sea of azov sea m d libya fid sicily cyprus.
hl axis states and annexed areas e a i i axis allies i i axis occupied i i sudetenland j mvv dr map 23 1 nazi europe 1941.
this map shows the extent of nazi control of europe.
when one adds vichy france and its territory in north africa it is clear that hitler basically controlled the continent between great britain and the soviet union russia.
egypt m republican leaders in congress opposed any intervention and they had a lot of public support.
in july 1940 students at yale university supported by midwestern business leaders formed the america first committee.
most america first supporters saw the new war as an extension of the last one simply an intra european battle for power and colonies.
some sympathized with the nazis or hated jews.
most distrusted roosevelt.
roosevelt argued with the isolationists in congress ignored his ambassador in london as someone who has been an appeaser and always will be an appeaser and thought lindbergh was a nazi.
he promoted military officers who supported his efforts and sidelined others.
in 1940 fdr replaced isolationist secretary of war woodring with longtime internationalist republican henry l stimson who had been secretary of war in tafts administration and secretary of state for president hoover.
roosevelt also added frank knox another republican internationalist as secretary of foe navy.
america first committee committee launched in 1940 that argued for american neutrality and for staying out of world war ii.
chapter 23 living j rldatwar 655 23 1 destroyers for bases an agreement between the united states and great britain to exchange obsolete navy destroyers for british bases.
arsenal of democracy a phrase coined by franklin roosevelt for the materials needed by britain in its fight with nazi germany.
four freedoms freedoms announced by president roosevelt in december 1940 that became a rallying point for the causes the united states would fight for.
in the fall of 1940 fdr concluded a destroyers for bases deal which circumvented congressional restrictions on selling ships to britain by trading obsolete ships to britain in exchange for 99 year leases on a string of british navy bases.
he pressured the navy to declare ships obsolete and defended the deal as a way to strengthen americas defenses.
however he also worried that he had exceeded his constitutional authority and his opponents worried even more.
as war raged in europe the november 1940 presidential election loomed.
roosevelt broke precedent going back to george washington and sought a third term.
the democrats after some grumbling mostly by supporters of vice president john garner nominated roosevelt.
the republicans wanting to avoid having an isolationist candidate nominated a corporate attorney and utility company executive wendell willkie an ardent opponent of the new deal who did not disagree with roosevelt greatly on foreign policy though he did denounce the destroyers for bases deal as the most arbitrary and dictatorial action ever taken by any president in the middle of the campaign roosevelt asked congress to institute a military draft so the country could have a trained army ready in case of war.
many opposed the draft but when a reporter told willkie that if you want to win the election you will come out against the proposed draft willkie responded i would rather not win the election than do that the draft became law on september 16 and with willkies stance and the appointment of stimson and knox to the cabinet the issue of isolationism was neutralized until late in the campaign.
just before the election polls showed that a majority of prospective voters preferred willkie unless war was coming in which case they wanted roosevelts steady hand.
on election day they chose the steady hand and fdr won a third term.
only a month after the election roosevelt received an urgent message from churchill spelling out just how desperate things were for britain and making clear that the moment approaches when we shall no longer be able to pay cash for shipping and other supplies in a fireside chat just after christmas in 1940 roosevelt said if great britain goes down all the americas would be living at the point of a gun the only alternative he told his radio audience we must be the great arsenal of democracy a week later fdr proposed lend lease legislation which would loan war materials to the british for the duration of the war.
the president insisted we cannot and we will not tell them that they must surrender merely because of present inability to pay for the weapons which we know they must have in the same speech roosevelt also described larger purposes for american action which was he said to secure four freedoms the first is freedom of speech and expression.
the second is freedom of every person to worship god in his own way.
the third is freedom from want.
the fourth is freedom from fear lend lease act legislation passed in 1941 for a program through which the united states loaned military equipment to britain and other world war ii allies for the duration of the war.
roosevelts four freedoms were very popular.
lend lease was much less popular.
isolationists like montana senator burton wheeler said that the plan will plough under every fourth american boy newspapers like the chicago tribune the new york daily news and the washington times herald all editorialized against the plan.
nevertheless the congress that had passed so many neutrality acts in the 1930s approved the lend lease act by a 60 to 31 vote in the senate and a 317 to 71 vote in the house.
britain would get the aid that churchill wanted.
the military preparation in 1940 and 1941 ended the great depression.
spending 7 billion on lend lease efforts and an additional 13 7 billion on the expansion of the u s military up from 2 2 billion in 1940 provided a huge stimulus to the economy far larger than any stimulus tried during the new deal.
nearly a million young men were drafted by early 1941 and new jobs opened everywhere virtually ending unemployment.
new or redesigned federal agencies brought business leaders into the government to manage the huge conversion to a war oriented economy see figure 23 1.
656 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 250 figure 23 1 after 1940 the nation s unemployment rate went from almost 15 percent to fewer than 2 percent for most of the war while gross national product more than doubled from 100 billion to 200 billion.
while the united states geared up to serve as the arsenal of democracy hitler suddenly attacked his erstwhile ally russia in june 1941.
while there was no love lost in the united states for communist russia most americans knew that if the nazis defeated russia it would mean disaster.
missouri senator harry s truman said he would not mind it if both sides lost but he also said i dont want to see hitler victorious under any circumstances the united states extended lend lease aid to the russians.
lend lease aid to britain brought the united states close to war with germany.
german u boats sank ships carrying goods to britain at five times the rate that new ships could be built.
the united states began patrolling the western atlantic guarding ships as far as greenland before turning them over to the british navy for escort to britain.
in august roosevelt and churchill met in newfoundland planned ways to work together and issued the atlantic charter that included a somewhat vague commitment to national self determination for other countries nonaggression and the establishment of a wider and permanent system of general security planting the seeds of what became the united nations.
meanwhile patrolling u s navy ships ran into conflict with german submarines.
in october 1941 a u boat attacked the u s destroyer kearny killing 11 sailors the first u s casualties of the war.
roosevelt said america has been attacked later that month a submarine sank the uss reuben james killing 115 sailors.
war did not seem far off growing tensions with japan while the united states focused on europe tensions were also building in the pacific.
the united states wanted to avoid a two ocean war and sought peace with japan.
however a combination of stubborn if inadequate support for china and a lack of careful attention did not make for an effective foreign policy.
the roosevelt administration provided modest lend lease support for chiang kai sheks government and allowed individual u s pilots to join the flying tigers a volunteer air corps organized by colonel claire chennault to fight for china but continued to allow the metal and oil exports on which japan depended.
657 chapter 23 living in a world at a new generation of younger japanese leaders especially the war minister hideki tojo wanted to ensure national glory and signed a formal alliance with nazi germany and fascist italy.
nazi puppet governments in france and holland gave japan badly needed access to rice rubber and most important oil from dutch and french colonies in asia.
japan launched the greater east asia co prosperity sphere to free asia from the colonial powers and to consolidate japanese control.
when japan landed troops in french indochina in july 1940 the united states finally cut off metal and aviation gasoline shipments but not oil which they saw as the last bargaining chip.
as 1941 began japan sent a new ambassador to the united states kichisaburo nomura.
nomura and u s secretary of state cordell hull sought a way to reduce hostilities but failed.
by midsummer hard liners in japan had won the support of emperor hirohito.
in october tojo replaced the moderate fumimaro konoye as prime minister of japan.
the new government was determined to go to war.
the united states had broken the secret japanese code and knew that war was coming.
but they did not know where perhaps an attack on american bases in the philippines or on the british colonies in asia both of which were warned to prepare for attack.
in fact the japanese military sent a huge fleet 4 000 miles across the pacific to attack the united states itself at pearl harbor.
japanese admiral takijiro onishi warned that a direct attack on u s soil would make the americans insanely mad he said that while japan would have the advantage in a short war in a longer war the u s industrial capacity and its large supply of oil the fuel of modern war meant that japan would have a very hard time of it.
but japans leaders were confident of a quick victory.
when japan did attack on december 7 the location was a greater surprise than the fact of the attack itself.
but japans attack on hawaii solidified american public opinion.
even the staunchest opponents of preparedness including charles lindbergh now supported going to war.
quick review how did the united states move from an isolationist stance to one supporting the war effort.
how did the attitudes of the government and the people differ.
23 2 mass mobilization in a society at war analyze the war s impact on widely diverse groups of americans who fought supported the war effort at home or otherwise lived through the war years.
for the people of the united states the attack of december 7 1941 changed everything.
before the war ended in 1945 16 million americans served in the armed forces and 405 399 died in combat.
all americans had their lives changed by the war.
at the beginning of the war half of white americans and 90 percent of black americans lived in poverty.
the war provided a job for everyone and wartime jobs vastly expanded the size of the nations middle class.
americans moved around a lot during the war.
the military brought rural and urban americans together in units that faced the same fears and hopes.
far less often it brought people of different races together since the military of world war ii remained segregated not only by race but also by gender.
as the war progressed the great depression became a distant memory.
new prosperity and new knowledge but also the terrible losses of a major war and new fear about distant parts of the world became central to peoples lives.
earl ba es early losses 1941 1942 he spri s f 1m1 s r washington between british and proclaimed a hero the navy continued to limit american officials known by the code name abc 1 or american british conversation african americans to non combat roles through number 1 resulted in an agreement that in the event of a two front war which out the war.
everyone hoped to avoid the united states would focus first on joining britain to 58 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 defeat germany.
as u s army chief george c marshall explained collapse in the atlantic would be fatal collapse in the far east would be serious but not fatal within hours of the december 7 attack on pearl harbor japan also attacked u s bases in the philippine islands the aleutian islands off alaska as well as guam and wake islands in the mid pacific.
within days japanese pilots and troops were in the british colonies of malaysia and burma french indochina the dutch east indies and independent thailand.
to some the japanese were liberators freeing them from the hated european and american colonial authorities.
the japanese had been preparing well and were a superb fighting force.
british hong kong and american guam and wake islands surrendered within a week.
in february 1942 singapore surrendered to the japanese with 85 000 crack british troops now prisoners of war.
american and british navy forces lost the battle of java sea and the dutch east indies and their rich oil fields fell to japan.
in april and may of 1942 after holding out for months against impossible odds the last u s troops on the islands of bataan and corregidor in the philippines surrendered.
ben steele a young rancher from montana who had volunteered for service remembered that during the 99 day defense of bataan the americans constantly faced starvation.
after news spread that the commander in the philippines general douglas macarthur had left for australia steele and the others knew that only two things can happen to us now were going to be dead or were going to be prisoners of war after surrendering the american and filipino troops from bataan were forced to march 66 miles to a railroad junction where they were transported to prison camps.
ihe march came to be known as the bataan death march.
the japanese captors overwhelmed by the numbers had been taught to hate american devils.
if a prisoner fell he was kicked and if he did not move killed with a bayonet.
if prisoners desperately thirsty in the hot sun moved off the line to get water they were shot.
the surviving defenders of bataan and corregidor spent more than 3 years as japanese prisoners.
by the middle of 1942 japan controlled the western pacific from the far north to australia which remained in british hands.
three days after the united states declared war on japan hitler and mussolini declared war on the united states.
it was an odd move on their part.
germany italy and japan were allies based on treaties they had signed with each other in 1936 and 1937 but if germany and italy had held back in declaring war on the united states fdr would have been under great pressure to focus the war only on japan leaving britain still isolated.
german and italian declarations of war allowed fdr to keep the focus on the atlantic which he believed was essential.
the three nations at war with the united states germany italy and japan were known as the axis as opposed to the allied forces of the united states great britain and the soviet union joined by exiled french troops who called themselves the free french and forces from china and a number of other nations that allied with them.
even though the primary american focus was on europe u s and british forces won a partial victory in the pacific in the battle of the coral sea in may 1942 when they stopped a japanese advance to port moresby papua new guinea.
then in june 1942 the japanese attacked u s forces on midway island.
but u s intelligence officers broke the japanese code and knew that the attack was coming.
in addition u s pilots were learning new maneuvers that allowed direct attacks on japanese ships.
the japanese force that was supposed to take the island lost four of its six aircraft carriers and all of its planes and pilots.
u s forces also captured a japanese zero airplane then the most modern in the war and used it to build the u s navy s new hellcat plane which could out maneuver the zero.
the hellcats began arriving in the pacific in 1943.
despite the successes winning the war in 1942 was far from a sure thing.
germany and japan both had very strong hands.
german submarine commander karl donitz began sinking coastal shipping vessels in january 1942.
new york chapter 23 living in a world at war 23 1 23 2 selective service system federal agency that coordinated military conscription the draft beginning in world war ii.
and other coastal cities refused to turn their lights off and the submarines used the bright city lights to target shipping.
in 3 months the germans sunk 216 ships half of them tankers with essential oil for britain.
burned out ships littered the american beaches.
in the summer of 1942 german forces were besieging the soviet union while their planes bombed britain.
the german submarine fleet shifted from the u s coast to atlantic convoys hitting them especially hard in midocean where little help was possible.
in july 1942 a convoy of 34 allied ships headed for the russian ports of murmansk and archangel was attacked in the norwegian sea and 23 of the 34 ships were sunk.
german admiral donitz was confident and the americans british and russians fearful that the allied forces simply could not continue in the face of such losses.
japan controlled the whole of the western pacific see map 23 2.
in august 1942 u s forces invaded the tactically important island of guadalcanal in the solomon islands and renamed its airfield henderson field.
a counter invasion from japan came close to success.
the reporter john hersey staying with the troops on the island told readers the uniforms the bravado the air of wearing a knife in the teeth these were just camouflage.
the truth was all over their faces.
these were just american boys.
they did not want that valley or any part of its jungle.
they were ex grocery clerks ex highway laborers ex bank clerks ex schoolboys t hey had joined the marines to see the world or to get away from a guilt or most likely to escape the draft not knowingly to kill or be killed.
but there they were.
with navy support the marines on guadalcanal held their position.
the japanese forces were beaten back until in february 1943 in a move they seldom made during the war the japanese abandoned guadalcanal.
men in the military volunteers and draftees as the war began young men quickly found themselves in uniform.
sixteen million men had registered for the draft when the war began more soon after and others volunteered in anticipation of an expanding draft.
the draft was administered by the selective service system through 6 443 local draft boards that decided who was eligible for various deferments for married men for those with children for those in crucial war work that were granted less and less often.
lloyd kilmer began life on a dairy farm but was working as a bellhop at a hotel in rochester minnesota when he heard the news of pearl harbor.
six months later kilmer enlisted in the army air corps and flew combat missions over europe until he was shot down in june 1944.
u s troops liberated his prisoner of war camp in april 1945.
growing up in the immigrant neighborhood of east boston massachusetts during the depression al fossett ascribed his success on the high school track team to pretending that he was running after something to eat.
when war came he was stationed in british india where he served as a gunner on planes that flew supplies from india to beleaguered chinese forces.
woodrow w crockett was born in texarkana arkansas and joined the army as a private in 1940.
in 1942 he was assigned to the tuskegee airmen an african american unit that achieved considerable distinction in world war ii.
he flew 149 combat missions during the u s invasion of italy and received the distinguished flying cross.
most of those who served were white males like kilmer and fossett.
the great depression shaped their childhood and they liked the food and security of the army even when they were frightened.
only a minority were enthusiastic about serving while most were willing to do a job they believed needed to be done.
in the process they met a greater diversity of people than any previous generation of americans and saw more of the world and its people.
660 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 soviet n r 500 1 000 kilometers map 23 2 japanese power in the pacific.
in the early months of world war ii japan extended its reach through much more of the pacific region from the aleutian islands off alaska to borneo and new guinea in the south pacific.
guadalcanal aug 1942 feb 1943 j new x hebrides br.
z fiji xc br.
coral new caledonia m sea br.
u s air strikes major battles allied advances allied air offenses japanese territory at surrender farthest extent of japanese control 1942 i allied nations i l neutral nations limit of japanese control after pearl harbor deferments alternative service and war work not everyone served in the military.
the selective service allowed local draft boards considerable discretion.
throughout most of the south draft boards which were nearly all white showed a deep aversion to putting black men in uniform and giving them guns with the result that they had to dip much deeper into the pool of white men offering whites few deferments.
congress allowed young men to complete college so that as one draft board member reported fathers in their middle thirties were being inducted from their stores garages and other businesses while they saw younger single men sitting in classrooms.
a november 1942 law the tydings amendment exempted agricultural workers from the draft.
men in key war industries and some who would not fight for religious reasons were also sometimes exempted.
other americans found themselves in new jobs they had never before imagined.
charles briscoes family left the dust bowl for california where he learned sheet metal work.
in 1940 he took a job at boeing aircraft in wichita kansas building the supersecret b 29 long range bomber.
briscoe remembered we knew the b 017s and b 24s didnt have the range to get to japan.
we had to have the b 29 to win the war and get the men home from over there at 14 ed powers was too young for the military but chapter 23 living in a world at war 21j i i t 23 2 111 3 1 1 21 he joined his father who was too old to serve in patrolling their hometown to be sure that everyone was honoring the blackout to avoid a german bombing.
joseph bullock was among the 43 000 conscientious objectors who in the words of selective service regulations by reason of religious training and belief is conscientiously opposed to participation in war in any form the largest number of cos as they were called some 25 000 served as noncombatants in the military providing first aid to troops under extraordinarily dangerous conditions or behind the lines logistical support.
those who for religious reasons could not support the war effort in any form were allowed to work in civilian public service.
bullock and the 12 000 cps men worked on forestry projects planting trees and building roads or staffing mental hospitals.
they received no pay had to cover their own expenses and did not receive veteran benefits at the end of the war.
a final group of some 6 000 refused out of conscience to have anything to do with the selective service system and these men were sent to federal prison.
some of them like david dellinger became lifelong antiwar activists.
in some areas cos were treated with respect in others they met deep hostility.
harry van dyck remembered being told you goddamn cos should all be shot after the war bullock was told that he could not teach sunday school because his wartime service made him an inappropriate role model for christian children.
when 40 percent of the 21 year olds who signed up for the first draft registration in late 1940 then got married general hershey announced that he would consider that recent marriages might have been for the purpose of evading the draft when the draft was expanded to include married men most fathers were still exempted leading one young couple to name their new child weatherstrip because he kept his father out of the draft.
however as the need grew fathers were also drafted and by 1945 nearly a million fathers were in the service.
women in military service early in the war there was some talk of conscripting women if not for the military then for wartime industrial work.
in the end however the united states unlike great britain or the soviet union left it up to individual women to decide whether they wanted to serve.
each of the branches of the military enlisted women in special noncombat units that freed men for combat the u s army established the womens auxiliary army corps or waacs later the auxiliary was dropped and they became the wacs the young women begin their service as wacs during world war ii.
662 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 u s navy created the women accepted for voluntary emergency service or waves the army air corps set up the womens auxiliary service pilots or wasps the coast guard launched the womens reserve of the coast guard nicknamed the spars and the marines organized an unnamed womens branch.
some 350 000 women compared with over 15 million men served in uniform during world war ii.
claudine scottie scott remembered her freshman year at the university of kansas in the fall of 1940 as a fun and exciting time but by the following year the world had become a much more serious place.
scott volunteered for the waves and was assigned to the joint chiefs of staff to deliver the log of fighting going on all over the world to the white house every day.
she was at the white house and saw president roosevelt on the day of the allied invasion of europe in 1944 but her focus was on the fate of her boyfriend who was part of the invading force.
he was wounded but returned home and they were married in the veterans hospital in richmond virginia.
martha settle grew up in norristown pennsylvania.
as an african american she experienced racism within the war manpower commission.
she applied and was selected by mary mcleod bethune for one of the few officer slots allowed to african american wacs.
margaret ray grew up in indiana and was recruited into a small elite unit of wasps within the army air force that handled domestic military flying so men could be freed up to fly overseas.
here i was this farm girl ray remembered and it was so exciting mary louise roberts became a nurse with the army.
she commanded a field operating room for troops during the landings in casablanca north africa in 1943 and on anzio beach in italy in 1944.
rosie the riveter and her friends just before the attack on pearl harbor 12 million women in the united states held jobs a dramatic increase from the depths of the depression.
middle class white women tended to be teachers nurses social workers or secretaries.
in the course of the war more than 6 million more women entered the workforce.
some 2 million women went to work in previously all male defense plants where they sometimes made up half of the workforce.
women also constituted a quarter of the workers in the converted auto industry that was producing tanks and trucks.
on the west coast 500 000 women worked in the aircraft industry and 225 000 in shipbuilding.
they made more money than most women had ever made.
they took on hard jobs that before the war people thought only men could handle or from which tradition law and all male unions had excluded them.
but even during wartime women were often relegated to the lower rungs of the industrial order while men took on the highest skilled highest paying jobs.
drilling rivets was high skill and high pay work and in spite of the rosie the riveter name and public relations posters far more women worked in routine production jobs.
women working in industrial plants had to develop a new fashion style that provided room for safe movement including pants which made movement much easier than a skirt and short hair which was essential around dangerous machinery.
in addition they had to develop a tough attitude in the face of catcalls and wolf whistles.
delana jensen made 155 millimeter howitzers for the army.
she was hired when the plant was still not sure whether women could handle the work but within months she was training men.
it was exacting work and had to be perfect within 1 1 000th of an inch.
she liked the denim coveralls and remembered we were living in a special time and place.
there was an energy in the air and in the people.
we were wanted and needed and important to the war effort.
i women working at the douglas aircraft plant in long beach californj gender diversity was common as women often constituted half of tl labor force in the industrial plants.
racial diversity was less common.
chapter 23 living in a world at war iu american voices kathy ogrady what did you do in the war grandma f n 1995 kathy o grady interviewed her grandmother katherine o grady who remembered the war as a time when women wanted to work in war related industries.
the pay was much better than in other jobs and being of service to the nation mattered as did a new found sense of freedom.
many like o grady looked back on their prewar lives as a time when they were much more naive than they were later on.
in 1939 i lived in east providence rhode island i worked at gibson s a soda fountain at the bus stop on westminster street.
i was very busy.
servicemen from all over used to come in.
i made 15 for a 48 hour week.
i bought my own clothes paid my own expenses car fare whatever i wanted and i d go to the movies.
if you had a five dollar bill then you were very wealthy.
i met my husband while i was working at gibson s.
he had a construction job building an air base up in newfoundland.
when pearl harbor broke out he came back home and we got married.
all the fellows had gone into the service.
his brothers were all gone.
all the men were leaving.
my husband had a deferment because his job was considered important to the defense and we had a 9 month old son.
but he wanted to go so badly that he quit the job he was shipped out to okinawa.
he was a seabee and worked in the construction battalion which builds bases.
the seabees would go ahead of the marines to make the landing and do all that.
he went from one island to the other across the pacific after my husband went into the seabee s i quit my job at gibson s and went to work in a woolen mill lister s which before the war was just a normal routine job.
when the war started they needed wool very badly so this was considered a service job.
in other words it was important.
at the mill the government used to send out all the purple heart soldiers to talk to us and tell us that we couldn t take time off and pushed all this patriotism on us i think i got 27 a week so it did pay more.
the soldiers needed woolen blankets.
at the time all servicemen were issued their clothing their blanket their bedroll the whole bit.
the blankets that came home after war had traveled all over the world we were very proud of our work because it meant that we were doing our part after the war things changed because women found out they could go out and they could survive.
they could really do it on their own.
that s where i think women s lib really started.
source an oral history of rhode island women during world war ii downloaded from 30 2012 thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis in what ways did the war change katherine o grady s life.
historical interpretation what clues does the document provide about the long term impact of the war on the place of women in american society.
marginalization in a democracy the march on washington and the war at home in 1940 african americans and latinos continued to be excluded from the new prosperity.
three out of four african americans still lived in the rural south the majority still sharecroppers.
most latinos lived in poverty in the urban or rural southwest.
even those who had moved from farms to small towns or cities saw themselves passed over as wartime production picked up.
in 1940 the brotherhood of sleeping car porters perhaps the most powerful black led organization in the united states asked the government to avoid discrimination in the expanding armed forces.
after a philip randolph long time president of the brotherhood of sleeping car porters and walter white the executive secretary of the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp met with president roosevelt later that year they believed they had a friend in the federal government especially given eleanor roosevelts commitment to civil rights.
the rapidly expanding war industries were less friendly.
when the president of north american aviation announced we will not employ negroes he spoke for many whites in management and on the shop floors of the companies.
then in late 1940 the war department announced its policy not to intermingle colored and white enlisted personnel in the same regimental organization randolph felt betrayed and he meant to do something about it.
664 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 randolph proposed a massive march on washington initially thinking that 10 000 blacks would come to washington dc to demand that the government protect their economic rights.
as word spread randolph raised the number to 50 000 and then to 100 000.
he insisted that this event would be an all black march.
there are some things negroes must do alone he said.
the march was called for july 1 1941.
as it became clear that the march might be a powerful and embarrassing event many people within the administration began to panic.
they challenged randolphs patriotism how could he do such a thing with war imminent.
what will they think in berlin.
randolph s response was oh perhaps no more than they already think of america s racial policy.
friends within the administration tried to persuade randolph to postpone the march but he persisted.
the only grounds on which the march could be called off he said would be a government order with teeth in it that would truly protect the economic rights of african americans in the new industries.
randolph won.
on june 25 1941 roosevelt signed executive order 8802 to provide for the full and equitable participation of all workers in defense industries without discrimination because of race creed color or national origin the order created the fair employment practices committee later commission to enforce the policy.
it was the order with teeth in it the march was called off.
some called executive order 8802 an economic emancipation proclamation.
executive order 8802 was enforced unevenly but sufficiently enough to make a real difference.
sybil lewis was a maid in oklahoma being paid 3 50 a week before the war.
she was hired at lockheed aircraft in los angeles at 48 per week.
she was paired with a white woman from arkansas and though they certainly had their differences lewis remembered that they learned to relate to each other in ways that we never experienced before not all encounters were as positive.
white workers went on strike at a western electric factory in baltimore maryland demanding segregated restrooms.
in a factory in mobile alabama shipyard workers rioted over the promotion of a black welder.
riots also took place in detroit and new york city in 1943.
twenty five blacks and nine whites were killed in a june riot in detroit and six blacks were killed in another riot in new yorks harlem.
as news of these clashes spread army bases around the world also exploded as segregated white and black units clashed in england and in the united states.
latinos also faced exclusion and violence.
the most obvious symbol of mexican american resistance to white culture were gangs known as pachucos or zoot suiters for the exaggerated clothing a long suit coat with baggy pants that came in at the ankles that symbolized their defiance of social norms.
during wartime frugality when most people were channeling money and resources toward the war effort the zoot suits also seemed an unpatriotic extravagance.
in june 1943 white servicemen in various boot camps in the los angeles area took out much of their own frustration by attacking the nearby latino population especially the zoot suiters.
police for the most part looked the other way.
the zoot suit riots spread elsewhere until fdr intervened to stop the violence mostly because he had been courting mexico as a wartime ally.
in spite of riots and discrimination and they were very real world war ii also gave african americans latinos and american indians new opportunities.
because of the wartime labor shortages and federal enforcement efforts many who had previously been excluded got jobs in industries previously closed to them.
others became more politically active and more would do so once the war ended.
fair employment practices committee federal agency established in 1941 to curb racial discrimination in war production jobs and government employment.
zoot suit riots race riots in june 1943 primarily centered in los angeles in which american military personnel attacked latinos.
23 1 23 2 233 234 japanese internment in an era when many americans sacrificed much including their lives other americans especially japanese americans saw their most basic freedoms undermined by wartime hysteria.
the immigration legislation of 1924 had prohibited immigration from japan.
as a result the japanese population in the mainland united states comprised some chapter 23 living in a world at war while some latinos faced hostile rioters in places like los angeles others like these mexican american soldiers served in the u s military and believed that the war was the beginning of their successful civil rights movement.
120 000 people of japanese descent split between some 40 000 issei or first generation immigrants who had arrived before 1924 and were by law aliens ineligible for citizenship and twice as many younger nisei or american born japanese who were american citizens.
a majority of the issei were over the age of 50 by 1941 while many nisei were under 18 and largely quite americanized.
the small japanese issei and nisei community had remained relatively isolated.
most supported themselves by small truck farms or nurseries providing fruits vegetables and garden supplies all along the pacific coast.
in the immediate aftermath of the pearl harbor attack there was little overt hostility toward japanese americans.
the usually conservative los angeles times editorialized that the japanese were good americans born and educated as such speaking of the nisei general john l dewitt head of the u s army on the west coast said an american citizen after all is an american citizen in addition u s attorney general francis biddle wrote that he was determined to avoid mass internment and the persecution of aliens that had characterized the first world war all would quickly change their minds.
while there were 120 000 people of japanese ancestry living on the u s mainland in 1941 there were 200 000 japanese living in hawaii almost half of the population of the islands.
after the attack on pearl harbor the federal government declared a state of martial law and suspended basic rights in hawaii.
several hundred japanese were arrested as suspected spies and saboteurs.
but the entire economy of hawaii would have collapsed if the japanese community had been interned and there would have been no place to put them and no one to guard them.
the situation for the japanese on the west coast was very different.
their treatment dramatically contrasted not only the situation in hawaii but also the way that german and italian communities in the united states were treated.
unlike during world war i the german and italian communities were not subjected to mass discrimination during world war ii.
there were arrests of individuals suspected of activities supporting the countrys enemies and given the strength of the nazi movement within the united states prior to the war there were individuals that the government had reason to watch.
all noncitizens from germany and italy were labeled enemy aliens when the war began but fdr ordered the attorney general to cancel the designation in the fall of 1942 just before election day.
when some accused japanese americans of spying fbi director j edgar hoover said that such charges were utterly without foundation.
nevertheless leaders of the california grower shipper vegetable association representing large scale agriculture did not like the competition of the small japanese american truck farms and one association leader declared we might as well be ho nest its a question of whether the white man lives on the pacific coast or the brown man respected journalists including walter lippmann and westbrook pegler pushed for removal.
pegler wrote the japanese in california should be under armed guard to the last man and woman right now and to hell with habeas corpus until the danger is over and by early 1942 general dewitt who had first said an american citizen is an american citizen was saying the japanese race is an enemy race and the racial strains are undiluted a few very few white voices like the tiny committee on american principles and fair play defended the rights of japanese americans.
with public opinion running 666 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 photographer dorothea lange who had taken iconic images during the great depression captured the pride and tragedy of this japanese family waiting to be taken from their homes to a relocation center.
so strongly in favor of removal president roosevelt signed executive order 9066 on february 19 1942 ordering the war department to create military areas from which any and all persons may be excluded the order did not specify which areas or which persons were to be excluded but the result was that people of japanese ancestry were ordered out of most of the three west coast states.
initially japanese issei and nisei in america were allowed to move to the midwest or the east.
the rest of the country like hawaii was not covered by the internment order.
some 15 000 people voluntarily moved before general dewitt ordered an end to such moves in late march.
after that people of japanese ancestry were ordered to report to assembly centers including the santa anita racetrack in southern california and the tanforan racetrack in san bruno near san francisco.
yamato ichihashi a stanford professor described santa anita as mentally and morally depressive families who had lived in their own homes managed their own businesses in some cases like ichihashi had been involved in rich professional lives were suddenly in armed camps living in stables that had recently held horses and kept behind barbed wire under the watch of armed guards.
the instructions were to bring only what they could carry no pets and no cameras.
forced out of their homes and into the temporary relocation centers some 100 000 issei and nisei were then moved a second time to 10 relocation camps scattered through sparsely inhabited regions of the west.
the first to open was at manzanar on a dried up lake bed between the coastal mountains and the higher sierra nevada range.
in this desert location summer temperatures were often above 100 degrees while the winter was freezing.
each family had a 20 by 20 foot uninsulated cabin.
for most of the internees the next 3 years were a time of enforced idleness while the rest of the country worked harder than ever.
some young men volunteered to join the all japanese units fighting in europe and served with distinction while their families waited for them in the camps.
other young men offended at being asked to foreswear allegiance to an emperor they had never cared about refused any form of service and were held as virtual prisoners at tule lake california.
some of the japanese community challenged the process of internment.
gordon hirabayashi remembered hearing of the order to report to the camps and thinking t was confronted with a dilemma do i stay out of trouble and succumb to the status of second class citizen or do i continue to live like other americans and thus disobey the law he disobeyed the law and challenged it in court.
in its first ruling on the legality of internment the u s supreme court threw out hirabayashis challenge and he served chapter 23 living in a world at i internment camps during world war ii map 23 3 internment camps.
japanese internment camps were located in isolated areas in many parts of the united states.
japanese internment a federal government policy implemented by executive order through which japanese americans were forced to enter internment camps.
time in a prison camp.
although justice frank murphy supported the courts unanimous opinion in the case he used the occasion to write that the japanese internment was the first time in history that the federal government had sustained a substantial restriction on the personal liberty of citizens of the united states based upon the accident of race or ancestry while noting the parallels with what nazi germany was doing to jews.
a second set of cases known as korematsu v united states then began to move through the courts.
in late 1944 after the presidential election and as korematsu v united states was about to be decided the war department declared that the original military necessity was now over and that those of japanese ancestry were free to return to their homes.
when the court announced its decision it again sidestepped the specific issue but as hugo black wrote in the majority decision all legal restrictions which curtail the civil rights of a single racial group are immediately suspect as those who had lived in the camps returned to the west coast they found that their homes and businesses were long gone and that they had been excluded from the prosperity of wartime america.
while the losses of those interned were estimated at 400 million congress provided 37 million in reparations in 1948.
only decades later congress voted 20 000 for each surviving internee and in 1998 president bill clinton awarded the presidential medal of freedom to fred korematsu.
quick review which groups gained the most from the united states involvement in world war ii.
which groups on the home front were hurt by the war.
23 3 industrial strength industrial prosperity analyze u s industrial strength and productivity and its impact on the outcome of the war and on american society.
americas wartime ally soviet dictator joseph stalin understood the key role the united states would play in world war ii.
even though the soviet union supplied far more soldiers and suffered almost 20 times as many battlefield deaths stalin said ihe most important things in this war are machines.
the united states is a country of machines it was an accurate analysis.
668 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 a month after the united states entered the war roosevelt told congress it will not be sufficient for us to produce a slightly superior supply of munitions to that of germany japan and italy.
the president said the united states needed to provide crushing superiority of equipment in any theater of the world war roosevelt insisted that the united states produce 60 000 airplanes in 1942 and 125 000 more in 1943 plus 120 000 tanks 55 000 antiaircraft guns and 16 million tons of merchant shipping.
few thought it could be done but the goals were met.
wartime production several factors led to the extraordinary u s output in the machinery of war in 1942 and 1943.
compared to the rest of the world the united states was a manufacturing giant even in the 1930s and the united states had huge supplies of iron ore coal and oil.
in 1937 the united states produced 4 8 million automobiles while germany produced 331 000 and japan only 26 000.
moreover at that point in 1937 perhaps half of all u s manufacturing plants were idle and a very large part of the u s labor force was out of work.
it would not take long once the country put itself on a war footing for the unemployed to go to work the plants to start up and those already in operation to shift from peace time to war focused production.
the war production board the government agency charged with ensuring that the country produced the war materials needed quickly prohibited the manufacture of automobiles for private use and limited other civilian manufacturing after the nation went to war.
on february 10 1942 auto workers in detroit held a little ceremony for the last cars coming down the line then began rebuilding the machinery to make tanks and trucks.
aircraft plants especially the giant boeing and lockheed plants on the west coast and fords willow run aircraft plant near detroit started to turn out planes.
shipyards went to three shifts.
the united states also had an attitude toward manufacturing that greatly helped its success.
german armaments minister albert speer told hitler that he was worried because it was the americans not the germans who knew how to act with organizationally simple methods and therefore achieved great results while germany was stuck with an outmoded tradition bound and arthritic organizational system at the beginning of the war germany made 425 different kinds of aircraft 151 kinds of trucks and 150 different motorcycles all to exacting precision standards.
the americans made far fewer models accepted lower standards and got things done a high volume output that far surpassed allies or enemies.
perhaps the best example of american industrial productivity was the liberty ship the workhorse of the merchant marine that kept britain russia and later u s forces in the pacific supplied throughout the war.
the liberty ships were all built to the same standard 440 feet long with a cargo hold that could contain 330 freight cars 440 tanks or 3 4 million c rations.
when the first liberty ship the patrick henry was christened on december 30 1941 just after the pearl harbor attack it had taken 355 days just shy of a year to build.
six months later in june 1942 it took 105 days to build a liberty ship and in november 1942 working around the clock workers built the robert e peary in less than 5 days.
one engineer called the liberty ships the model t of the seas and president roosevelt called them ugly ducklings but they did the job.
henry kaiser created a huge new industrial facility in richmond on san francisco bay where tens of thousands of workers of different races and from every part of the country many of whom had never worked in any industry before built these ships.
the highly specific jobs of mass produced ship building in which each worker repeated one small task over and over again took much less skill than had the jobs of elite shipbuilding workers in the past but new workers loved the opportunities the yards provided and the finished ships just kept coming.
the huge increase in american industrial activity was not without its problems.
early in 1942 the government took several steps to control inflation and costs.
the office of price administration announced a general maximum price regulation in chapter 23 living in a world at war 233 23 2 233 23j april that made the prices of goods and services in march 1942 permanent.
known as general max the regulation did help control costs and inflation.
the national war labor board negotiated a settlement between union and management at bethlehem republic youngstown and inland steel companies that limited wage increases to cost of living.
known as the little steel agreement the u s steel company was big steel the agreement became a norm throughout american industries.
although there had been several strikes in the months just before the war most of organized labor took a no strike pledge for the duration of the war in return for a government policy that required industries to maintain labor contracts and union membership.
wartime prosperity in spite of restrictions on wage increases more americans were employed and earned more money than ever before in their lives or the nations history during world war ii.
wartime rationing limited some goods.
people needed ration stamps to purchase their monthly allotment of meat coffee tires and gasoline and new cars were simply not available.
housing was very hard to find thus many lived in cramped quarters while extended families often moved in together.
nevertheless americans who could remember the great depression found themselves with previously undreamed of opportunity.
laura briggs a young farm woman from idaho remembered we and most other farmers went from a tarpaper shack to a new frame house with indoor plumbing and a hot water heater it was just so modern we couldnt stand it a shipyard worker in portsmouth virginia said i felt like something had come down from heaven.
i went from forty cents an hour to two seventy five an hour t he war completely turned my life around by december 1944 macys department stores reported the highest volume of sales in their history.
national leaders worried about a combination of prosperity and complacency.
one pentagon officer said that americans have never been bombed they have little appreciation of the horrors of war in december 1943 fdr told his cabinet that he sometimes thought one of the best things that could happen would be to have a few german bombs fall here to wake us up but other than isolated and utterly unsuccessful enemy efforts to fire on the oregon coast and new yorks long island the continental united states was never bombed or shot at which was a dramatically different experience from that of britain or russia or of course italy germany and japan.
letters home from those doing the fighting were censored and even if they had not been many soldiers did not want to discuss the horrors of war.
sometimes complacency had a high cost.
when two inmates escaped from auschwitz and brought stories of the holocaust to the united states many simply refused to believe that such things were possible.
in the summer of 1943 given detailed reports of the nazi death camps supreme court justice felix frankfurter simply responded i am unable to believe you it was simply too horrible to contemplate.
the degree to which traditional anti semitism played a role in some peoples responses to the news about nazi death camps the degree to which people such as frankfurter simply could not believe what they were hearing and the extent to which other urgencies of the war led people to focus elsewhere has been debated ever since the war.
for whatever reason or probably many reasons few americans took the stories of the emerging holocaust seriously until the end of the war demonstrated their awful truth.
initially the administration wanted to raise taxes to pay most of the wars cost immediately but in the end taxes covered about 45 percent while loans covered the rest.
nevertheless taxes increased significantly during the war.
the revenue act of 1942 raised 7 billion in new taxes.
in 1939 only 4 million of the richest americans paid income tax.
the 1942 law brought 13 million new tax payers into the system.
the government also began payroll tax withholding in 1943 requiring employers to deduct taxes and pay them directly to the government before issuing paychecks.
the rapid increases in wages and job opportunities coupled with continued appeals to patriotism limited objections to the new and much higher levels of taxation.
670 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 ihe government also borrowed money.
low cost series e bonds were sold allowing many americans to save some of what they were earning and contribute to the war effort.
larger loans were also forthcoming.
commercial banks increased their holdings in u s government debt from 1 billion in 1941 to 24 billion in 1945 in spite of all the borrowing and spending the united states emerged from the war as the one remaining economic powerhouse in the world as the economies of all the other economic leaders suffered much more from the war.
quick review how was the american experience during world war ii different from that of people in europe and asia.
winning a world war north africa europe asia the pacific 1943 1945 23 4 explain the course of the war leading to victory in europe and then the pacific.
while many americans prospered during world war ii for those in the military especially those in combat world war ii was a combination of long waits boredom and occasional moments of sheer terror pain and heroism.
the war in europe 1943 1945 in late 1942 the russians insisted that it was time for their western allies to open a second front and attack germany and german occupied france directly to take the pressure off of russia.
but churchill remembering the terrible british losses of world war i would not agree.
instead britain and america kept bombing germany and allied troops landed at oran algeria in november 1942 to attack german forces in north africa a huge diversion as far as stalin was concerned but it was the beginning of some victories that lifted spirits among the allies.
in january 1943 roosevelt went to casablanca in north africa to meet with churchill becoming the first president since wilson to travel outside of the western hemisphere and the first since lincoln to visit u s troops in the field.
they agreed on several things that they would continue to bomb germany that after north africa they would invade italy not the coast of france and that while the united states would continue to supply britain and russia a third of new forces and supplies would go to the pacific.
at a press conference at the end of the meeting fdr also said that the allies would accept only unconditional surrender from germany italy and japan there would be no intermediate peace negotiations.
then in february 1943 the russian army and the russian winter defeated the nazi troops at stalingrad and the tide of war began to change.
the russian army known as the red army which had been retreating and defending went on the offensive.
the german wehrmacht the military machine that had been undefeated in europe since 1939 started retreating.
in the summer of 1943 american and british units began the attack on what was known as fortress europe the nazi controlled territory at the heart of the continent.
on july 10 1943 u s canadian and british forces having sent coded messages that lured the germans and italians into defensive positions on the northern part of the sicily instead landed on the south coast of the island.
u s forces under general george patton made rapid progress across the island taking palermo on the north coast on july 22.
the effort was bolstered by welcoming crowds who helped them and shouted down with mussolini italys king victor emmanuel iii dismissed mussolini and had him arrested but german units in italy continued to fight.
allied forces continued a long slow and bitter battle up the italian peninsula attacking salerno in september 1943 sustaining a ng battle around monte cassino making a fresh landing on the beaches at anzio outside of rome in january 1944 and finally taking control of rome itself in june 1944.
23 1 i 23 2 233 23 4 chapter 23 living in a woj 671 world war ii in europe 1811 axis powers bill areas under axis control may 1941 bb allied powers i i neutral axis forces allied forces u s s r allied forces u s and british major battles map 23 4 the war in europe.
early in the war nazi forces had attacked france and then the soviet union but as the tide of war turned soviet forces moved across much of eastern europe and into germany itself while u s and british forces attacked nazi forces in north africa italy and finally france and germany.
672 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 while the red army rolled west from russia into poland and eventually germany and while american and british forces won battles in north africa and italy american pilots joined their british counterparts in what became round the clock bombing of germany.
the british had begun bombing german military targets first in france and then as the planes got better in the ruhr valley of germany itself.
precision bombing in real wartime conditions was exceedingly difficult so the british simply tried to destroy the morale of the german civilians especially industrial workers by bombing wherever they could what some called terror bombing.
when the americans joined the war they initially found the terror bombing to be abhorrent but they worked out a compromise the british would bomb at night bombing wherever they could and the americans with more sophisticated equipment could bomb specified targets during the day.
the first u s bombers began their attacks in august 1942 and by january 1943 hundreds of u s bombers began penetrating german airspace hitting industrial targets like the german city of bremen.
the losses of pilots and crews were staggering.
six hundred americans were killed in the summer of 1943 16 percent of those who flew missions.
one pilot remembered his terror when being attacked by german messerschmitt 109s the plane shook with the chatter of our guns as other planes were hit we had to fly through their debris when a plane blew up we saw their parts all over the sky.
we smashed into some of the pieces.
one plane hit a body which tumbled out of a plane ahead.
a crewman went out the front hatch of a plane and hit the tail assembly of his own plane.
his body turned over and over like a bean bag tossed into air.
and still the crews kept flying.
in november 1943 president roosevelt left the united states for a second time flying to cairo egypt for a third meeting with prime minister churchill and then on to tehran iran for his first meeting with stalin which churchill and the nominal chinese leader chiang kai shek also attended.
fdr was intrigued to meet stalin in person.
at cairo fdr also tried to persuade churchill that britain must renounce its colonies in india burma malaya and hong kong and promise them independence after the war as the united states was doing with the philippine islands.
churchill was a great wartime leader in britain but he was equally a lifelong british imperialist and he was not about to be persuaded.
the tehran conference included discussions of the war in china.
in addition stalin kept up the pressure for the united states and britain to invade france as quickly as possible and promised to join the war against japan once the war in europe was won.
the conference was also a test of the personal chemistry between stalin and fdr.
although the u s president was confident of his own skill in persuading people he confessed i couldnt get any personal connection with stalin u s.
ambassador to russia averell harriman described stalin as someone of high intelligence with a fantastic grasp of detail and shrewdness stalin harriman said was better informed than roosevelt more realistic than churchill in some ways the most effective of the war leaders.
at the same time he was of course a murderous tyrant stalin wanted an absolute promise that the united states and britain would start the invasion of germany code named operation overlord in the spring of 1944.
and he wanted to make sure that others knew as he had told josef tito who was leading a communist uprising behind german lines in yugoslavia whoever occupies a territory also imposes his own social system.
the red army stalin assured everyone would not pull back from the lands it was seizing from germany.
operation overlord was set for may 1 1944.
in the meantime u s and british planes kept bombing germany and germany occupied france 6 000 bombing runs during 1 week alone in february 1944 to make it difficult for german forces to prepare for an invasion that they knew was coming.
although roosevelt had become convinced as early as 1942 that the nazis were killing lews the planes did not bomb the nazi death camps or the rail lines to auschwitz.
u s planners simply could not bring themselves to believe that anything like the scale of the holocaust was happening in spite of the fact that by 1944 they had clear evidence 211 232 233 23 4 operation overlord u s and british invasion of france in june 1944 during world war ii.
chapter 23 living in a world at world war ii in europe ess axis powers isi areas under axis control may 1941 allied powers i i neutral axis forces allied forces u s s r c allied forces u s and british major battles l s v but as the tide o wa tumetsoviet fo rce s mov 32 attacked france and then the soviet un n while u s and british forces attarkpd m f across much of eastern europe and into germany itself u 5.
british forces attacked nazi forces in north africa italy and finally france and germany.
672 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 while the red army rolled west from russia into poland and eventually germany and while american and british forces won battles in north africa and italy american pilots joined their british counterparts in what became round the clock bombing of germany.
the british had begun bombing german military targets first in france and then as the planes got better in the ruhr valley of germany itself.
precision bombing in real wartime conditions was exceedingly difficult so the british simply tried to destroy the morale of the german civilians especially industrial workers by bombing wherever they could what some called terror bombing.
when the americans joined the war they initially found the terror bombing to be abhorrent but they worked out a compromise the british would bomb at night bombing wherever they could and the americans with more sophisticated equipment could bomb specified targets during the day.
ihe first u s bombers began their attacks in august 1942 and by january 1943 hundreds of u s bombers began penetrating german airspace hitting industrial targets like the german city of bremen.
the losses of pilots and crews were staggering.
six hundred americans were killed in the summer of 1943 16 percent of those who flew missions.
one pilot remembered his terror when being attacked by german messerschmitt 109s ihe plane shook with the chatter of our guns as other planes were hit we had to fly through their debris when a plane blew up we saw their parts all over the sky.
we smashed into some of the pieces.
one plane hit a body which tumbled out of a plane ahead.
a crewman went out the front hatch of a plane and hit the tail assembly of his own plane.
his body turned over and over like a bean bag tossed into air.
and still the crews kept flying.
in november 1943 president roosevelt left the united states for a second time flying to cairo egypt for a third meeting with prime minister churchill and then on to tehran iran for his first meeting with stalin which churchill and the nominal chinese leader chiang kai shek also attended.
fdr was intrigued to meet stalin in person.
at cairo fdr also tried to persuade churchill that britain must renounce its colonies in india burma malaya and hong kong and promise them independence after the war as the united states was doing with the philippine islands.
churchill was a great wartime leader in britain but he was equally a lifelong british imperialist and he was not about to be persuaded.
the tehran conference included discussions of the war in china.
in addition stalin kept up the pressure for the united states and britain to invade france as quickly as possible and promised to join the war against japan once the war in europe was won.
the conference was also a test of the personal chemistry between stalin and fdr.
although the u s president was confident of his own skill in persuading people he confessed i couldnt get any personal connection with stalin u s.
ambassador to russia averell harriman described stalin as someone of high intelligence with a fantastic grasp of detail and shrewdness stalin harriman said was better informed than roosevelt more realistic than churchill in some ways the most effective of the war leaders.
at the same time he was of course a murderous tyrant stalin wanted an absolute promise that the united states and britain would start the invasion of germany code named operation overlord in the spring of 1944.
and he wanted to make sure that others knew as he had told josef tito who was leading a communist uprising behind german lines in yugoslavia whoever occupies a territory also imposes his own social system.
the red army stalin assured everyone would not pull back from the lands it was seizing from germany.
operation overlord was set for may 1 1944.
in the meantime u s and british planes kept bombing germany and germany occupied france 6 000 bombing runs during 1 week alone in february 1944 to make it difficult for german forces to prepare for an invasion that they knew was coming.
although roosevelt had become convinced as early as 1942 that the nazis were killing jews the planes did not bomb the nazi death camps or the rail lines to auschwitz.
u s planners simply could not bring themselves to believe that anything like the scale of the holocaust was happening in spite of the fact that by 1944 they had clear evidence t 23 4 operation overlord u s and british invasion of france in june 1944 during world war ii.
chapter 23 a world at war 673 233 d day june 6 1944 the day of the first paratroop drops and amphibious landings on the coast of normandy france in the first stage of operation overlord during world war ii.
an iconic picture of some of the first american troops wading ashore on the beaches of normandy france on d day june 6 1944 to complete the conquest of nazi germany.
674 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 of the reality.
questions remain about why with so many bombs being dropped some better effort was not made to stop the trains going to those camps.
everyone agreed that the americans would lead the invasion of western europe.
roosevelt passed over several other army officers and appointed general dwight d eisenhower to lead the attack.
born in texas and raised in abilene kansas eisenhower better known as ike to everyone had spent his entire career in the peacetime army.
he had been promoted to the rank of colonel months before the united states entered the war in 1941.
ike had a unique ability to get people to work together and do so with good cheer skills that would be needed in the utmost to coordinate the american british and french forces involved in the invasion of europe.
the buildup in britain in 1943 and early 1944 was huge with 150 000 u s soldiers arriving every month.
the british called these american troops overpaid oversexed and over here but welcomed them not only for what they were about to do for the liberation of europe but also for the supplies of cocoa canned meat candy bars tobacco and even toilet paper that they had.
finally with the tides right and a break predicted in the weather eisenhower decided that june 6 was the time to go and so the day became known as d day 1944.
one young soldier elliott johnson remembered on the morning of june 6 we took off.
i can remember the morning.
who could sleep i was on an lst a landing ship tank an armada of 6 483 vessels of all sorts of descriptions made the brief seasickness inducing trip across the english channel to land on several beaches in normandy code named utah omaha gold juno and sword under intense german shelling and rifle fire.
units of the u s 82nd and 101st airborne divisions parachuted behind the german lines to break communications between the germans on the beach and their commanders.
in the confusion of the invasion most allied troops were also cut off from their commanders and had to make their own decisions.
troops landing on omaha beach on d day had to use grappling irons to reach the tops of the cliffs facing them suffering large losses.
once they got off the beaches and over the cliffs british and u s troops got stuck on hedgerows long lines of tightly planted bushes 5 to 10 feet wide that farmers in normandy had used instead of fences and that now provided far better protection for german troops than planners had estimated.
slowly the troops broke past the initial defenses.
general omar bradley reflected this thin wet line of khaki that dragged itself ashore held its ground and then started moving inland.
johnson remembered the odd scenes of battle now on my way down the road i saw on my right these dead german boys.
on my left going across the field is a french peasant leading a cow cradling its head in his arms protecting it with his body as much as possible.
he had come back to get his cow leading it away from all the noise and death johnson and the rest kept moving.
american forces moved quickly to take control of the french towns of brest lorient and st nazaire and then moved on to paris which they liberated on august 25 1944.
a tank force under the command of general patton headed straight for the rhine river and germany itself.
german troops fought hard but they were outnumbered as more troops came across the channel.
by november the allied forces were at the rhine river and the border of germany.
in december hitler ordered one last desperate blitzkrieg and eight german divisions roared out of the ardennes forest to surround american troops in a bulge in the allied line near the village of bastogne belgium.
when the germans called on the surrounded american forces to surrender their commander general anthony c mcauliffe responded with one word nuts when the german officer who received the message didnt understand it a translator explained that it meant go to hell with the help of tanks ordered north from paris the allied forces defeated the germans in the so called battle of the bulge and u s forces began moving into germany.
as americans moved across germany they discovered the full reality of the nazi death camps.
russian units liberated the first camps early in 1945 and then in april u s forces liberated buchenwald with 20 000 prisoners.
u s soldiers described the horror of the smell and seeing the bodies stacked up in piles.
just before the army arrived prisoners seized control of buchenwald thinking correctly that the nazi guards might well try to kill all of them to hide the evidence of what had been going on.
u s forces later liberated dora mittelbau flossenburg dachau and mauthausen camps while british and soviet forces liberated others.
in many of the camps the liberating armies found prisoners on the brink of starvation and weakened by disease.
they also found piles of corpses human bones cremation ovens and ample other evidence of the horrors that had actually taken place.
the nazis had systematically killed 6 million jews and another 6 million people gypsies homosexuals people with disabilities and others they considered inferior humans.
allied troops kept moving east and red army troops moved west.
while armies marched the bombing of germany continued including a controversial joint u s british bombing of the city of dresden germany in february 1945 in which the resulting firestorm killed perhaps 25 000 people.
the russians were soon within miles of berlin itself.
u s troops finally crossed the rhine river in march and the elbe river in april while the russian army attacked berlin.
on april 30 in a berlin bunker 55 feet underground with russian troops directly above hitler shot himself.
a week later admiral donitz who had replaced him ordered all german units to cease operation.
the war in europe was over.
roosevelt s death truman s leadership just days before the war in europe ended on april 12 1945 president franklin d roosevelt died.
roosevelt had led the united states longer than any president ever had or ever would.
and suddenly he was gone.
in the last year of his life roosevelts health was terrible.
his blood pressure was dangerously high his hands shook and he found it hard to stand even with his leg braces.
few of those closest to him were surprised when he died on a short vacation at warm springs georgia.
nevertheless the news was devastating.
months earlier in november 1944 roosevelt had been elected to a fourth term in office.
unlike the third term he made it clear early on that he wanted to see the war through to the end.
his republican opponent was the reformist young governor of new york state thomas e dewey but more americans wanted continuity in a time of war.
roosevelt defeated dewey by a comfortable margin winning 53 percent of the popular vote and 432 electoral votes to deweys 99.
the november 1944 election had brought one important change however.
in 1940 roosevelt had turned to his trusted confidant agriculture secretary henry a wallace to serve as vice president.
by 1944 though many in the democratic party worried that roosevelt might not live out the next term thought wallace was too liberal and convinced roosevelt and the nominating convention to find another candidate.
the compromise candidate was missouri senator harry s truman.
truman had served in the army in world war i tried unsuccessfully to open a clothing store in kansas city and then worked his way up in the democratic political machine of his home town.
he was elected to the senate in 1934 and strongly supported the new deal.
in his second senate term he led a committee looking into war profiteering.
he had been vice president for less than 3 months had seldom met with fdr and did not know many of the highest level government secrets including the development of the atomic bomb when on the afternoon of april 12 1945 he stood in the white house cabinet room and took the oath of office as president of the united states.
it would be truman not roosevelt who would lead the nation in the final months of the war and the crucial years after it.
as u s forces discovered the full extent of nazi death camps americans came face to face with the terrible reality.
this 23 year old czech victim of the nazi camp at flossenburg germany was found by the 97th division of the u s army.
chapter 23 living in a world at war 675 american voices alvin kernan a bluejackets odyssey in world war ii 23 4 ivin kernan went on to a successful academic career at princeton and yale but in 1940 he was a 17 year old looking for opportunity.
he found it serving in the pacific from pearl harbor to the japanese surrender.
his is a story of furious battles and long waits experiencing fear bravery boredom joy and most of all gratitude for surviving.
for many who fought world war ii was not a grand campaign against fascism but a battle to keep going and survive.
in the winter of 1940 41 i stood in the deep snows of the mountains of southern wyoming and realized that it wasn t going to work seventeen years old no job no prospects i knew how to do only one thing the same thing all inland mountain boys do go to sea still eager to work with airplanes i considered it a stroke of good luck that i had been assigned to torpedo squadron 6 part of the air group on the uss enterprise cv 6 one of three carriers in the pacific fleet i was brought down to earth that afternoon by being put on the anchor chain work detail.
life on board ship is a constant battle with rust in which the weapons are the chipping hammer the wire brush red lead and gray paint hard work dirty tiring hot and totally unrewarded on the morning of december 7 1941 the captain came on the public address system to announce that pearl harbor had been bombed and that we were now at war with the japanese.
i didn t worry about being killed but i did wonder how long i was going to have to stay in the navy now.
we all disliked the japanese and the germans in a general kind of way not really knowing much about them each sailor was given postcards to send home two with the printed message.
am well and will write soon and another two with i am wounded and will write details as soon as possible.
we joked that there should be a third message i am dead.
death lived on an aircraft carrier operating in wartime conditions a thoughtless step backward on the flight and hanger decks where the planes were turning up led to decapitation and gory dismemberment by a propeller.
planes went out on patrol and were never heard from again.
in october 1942 a little after 0900 the public address system broke the quiet of the ship with an announcement from the bridge enemy aircraft at fifty miles and closing.
in the ordnance shack just below the flight deck we could see nothing only listen feel the vibrating steel deck and slide back and forth with the steep turns that came in quick succession as i started back across the flight deck the guns began firing again as a single diver bomber made a run on us.
i lay flat on the deck covering as much of my body as possible with my tin hat trying to work my way into it and thinking for the first time that i was likely to die and resenting it feeling that at nineteen i really hadn t had a chance to do most of the things people do and vowing to do them if i survived.
from that moment to this life has seemed a gift overtime in a way and all the more enjoyable for it august 13 1945 they tell us that the war has ended.
there was nothing to do to celebrate and i felt nothing absolutely nothing no exhilaration no triumph no anticipation of going home not even the simple pleasure of having survived.
source alvin kernan crossing the line a bluejacket s odyssey in world war ii new haven yale university press 2007 thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis why did kernan join the military.
how did he respond to the outbreak of war.
contextualization how would explain kernan s lack of emotion upon hearing that the war was over.
what light does his response shed on the nature of the fighting in the pacific.
the war in the pacific 1943 1945 while the war in europe was over the war in the pacific was far from over and u s troops were preparing for what they knew would be a horrific invasion of japan itself.
after the successful seizure of control of guadalcanal in the solomon islands in february 1943 commanders made the decision to skip some japanese held islands leaving their troops isolated and instead island hop toward their main objective.
u s forces moved slowly but surely toward japan.
the defeats of 1942 seemed further behind.
american factories produced machine guns ships and airplanes at an extraordinary rate far faster than japan could match and enough to supply forces in the pacific even as the war in europe remained the priority until it was won.
the war in the pacific was brutal.
american troops came up against japanese soldiers who would fight to the very last.
the japanese lived by a code that prohibited 676 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 map 23 5 the war in the pacific.
early in the war japan controlled a huge area around the western pacific and only a long series of sea and island battles turned the tide.
the imperial japanese armys field service code said never give up a position but rather die and there were no instructions for surrender.
the japanese troops knew that the americans would always have more food more armaments and more back up but they were confident that their loyalty and fighting spirit was enough to make up for all of that.
from bombers based on midway and on henderson field on guadalcanal from aircraft carriers and in battles on sweltering beaches u s troops kept moving.
they attacked tarawa and makin islands in the gilbert islands in november 1943 and then turned them into bases for further movement.
in the first 6 months of 1944 u s marines took kwajalein eniwetok truk and saipan.
on saipan more than a thousand chapter 23 living in a world at war 677 islands but by communicating in the native navajo language were able to establish a means of communication that the japanese expert at breaking american coded messages were never able to understand.
manhattan project the effort using the code name manhattan engineer district to develop an atomic bomb during world war ii.
japanese civilians and soldiers jumped to their deaths from rocky cliffs rather than surrender.
in air battles during june u s forces flying new and much better planes virtually decimated the japanese air force.
u s submarines cut off the shipment of oil from indonesia to japan.
u s commanders did not stage a landing on an island until navy ships had bombarded an island for some time while planes dropped bomb after bomb.
once an island was secure the seabees the navy term for uniformed construction workers moved in and with amazing speed built airfields shelters and bases.
in june 1944 the united states began a campaign to retake the philippine islands.
in october the american and japanese navies engaged in one of the largest sea battles in history involving 282 ships and over 200 000 sailors off of leyte island.
the u s fleet was victorious in spite of the continuing strengths of the japanese navy and the use of suicide kamikaze planes basically planes that were used as bombs.
general macarthur who had left corregidor under cover of darkness in early 1942 waded ashore facing carefully located cameras on october 20 1944 and announced people of the philippines i have returned.
the hour of your redemption is here in spite of macarthurs heroics the japanese were able to reinforce luzon the main island of the philippines and major battles during the first 3 months of 1945 took place before the united states secured control of its former colony.
manila the city that young service men had considered a paradise in 1941 was now a city of rubble.
in some of the fiercest fighting of the war u s marines seized iwo jima island in february and march 1945 moving ever closer to japan itself.
the attacks on iwo jima and those on some of the earlier islands were aided by navajo code talkers who relayed messages in the navajo language a code the japanese were never able to break.
iwo jima was tiny only 4 5 miles by 2 5 miles but u s control of its airfield and radar meant that u s bombers going to japan had a much shorter flight.
after a long navy bombardment marines landed on the beach at iwo jima on february 19 and sank into the volcanic sand.
in spite of the bombardment the japanese forces on the island were still strong and fierce hand to hand combat followed the landing.
the japanese refused to surrender and many died at the hands of new u s flamethrowers that literally incinerated them.
associated press photographer joe rosenthal took his famous photo of the marines raising the flag on mount suribachi on february 23 but the fighting went on for another month.
of the 21 000 japanese defending the island over 20 000 died in combat.
the battle for okinawa in april to june of 1945 was equally brutal some 70 000 japanese troops and 100 000 okinawan civilians as well as almost 8 000 americans died there.
by june 1945 with the war in europe over and after intense fighting in the pacific the u s forces in the pacific were close to a landing on japan itself.
but it never happened.
the atomic era begins while armies and navies clashed a small team of u s scientists had begun work in 1942 on a top secret venture code named the manhattan project.
enrico fermi won the nobel prize for physics in 1938 and used the prize money to leave fascist italy for new york.
in march 1939 fermi warned that recent research including his own in atomic physics pointed to the potential development of a new form of weapon.
when fermi went to the u s navy department a receptionist announced theres a wop outside the officers who received him were not much more interested.
but some of the worlds best known physicists many of whom were jewish refugees from nazi germany 11 german jewish refugees would eventually win the nobel prize were determined that the u s government needed to act before the nazis.
a group drafted a letter to president roosevelt which was signed by their most well known and respected member albert einstein and delivered in the fall of 1941.
after considering the letter and the report on nazi research roosevelt said simply this requires action and action top secret action it got.
678 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 the manhattan project began under a stadium at the university of chicago where the first chain reaction was achieved in december 1942.
then under the scientific direction of physicist robert j oppenheimer and the military oversight of general leslie groves the work moved to the isolated town of los alamos new mexico where it was easier to keep it secret.
the scientists bent all of their efforts to beating germany in the development of the bomb that they now knew they could build.
ironically part way through the war germany suspended further research on atomic warfare because of the cost and because hitler considered atomic physics to be jewish physics.
however the americans did not know that and kept going.
in oak ridge tennessee tva dams provided the power for the extraction of u 235 a form of uranium and at hanford washington other new deal dams the bonneville and grand coulee drove the plants that squeezed plutonium out of uranium.
with those ingredients the engineers at los alamos could build their bomb.
over 2 billion dollars was spent on the project and 150 000 people were involved though only a tiny percentage had any idea of what they were working on.
the danish physicist niels bohr who had once said that the united states could not produce an atomic bomb unless you turn the united states into one huge factory reviewed the work in 1945 and said you have done just that they had.
on july 16 1945 oppenheimer and his team tested the first bomb in the nevada desert.
that evening they sent a top secret telegram to president truman operated on this morning.
diagnosis not yet complete but results seem satisfactory and already exceed expectations truman who had been briefed in april understood fully.
while people in the postwar era have debated the morality of using something of the power of the atomic bomb few in the administration seem to have had any doubts about it.
by 1945 the war had come to a point where the actors would use any weapon they could.
as scientists developed the atom bomb regular bombs were doing their work on japan.
boeing b 29s were dropping tons of explosives on japanese cities.
the fire bombing of tokyo in february and march 1945 killed almost a million people and left 8 million homeless far more than either atomic bomb.
still there was something unique in the use of a single bomb harnessing the power used in the sun for warfare.
on august 6 1945 air force colonel paul tibbets piloted a b 29 named the enola gay that took off from recently captured tinian island.
the plane carried a single bomb that was dropped on hiroshima killing 40 000 people instantly and this picture of nagasaki gives some sense had previously been a large urban area.
r chapter 23 living in a world at war as word spread of the japanese surrender huge crowds celebrated from san francisco to new york city.
similar crowds celebrated in london paris moscow and beijing.
most people breathed a huge sigh of relief.
the most terrible war in modern history was over.
few knew what the postwar world would look like.
on september 2 the u s battleship missouri sailed into tokyo bay.
a japanese delegation came on board to sign the instruments of surrender while an advance unit of u s sailors and marines landed to begin the occupation of japan.
it was a short somber ceremony.
a new era had begun.
quick review how did u s strategy differ in europe and the pacific.
why were these differences necessary.
what was the key to u s success.
conclusion by the end of 1939 europe was once again at war.
both great britain and france had declared war on germany shortly after the german invasion of poland.
by june 1940 france had surrendered to a sustained german assault.
now britain stood alone against fascism.
at the same time tensions mounted between the united states and japan.
even those americans who suspected that a war was coming hoped to avoid a war with germany and japan at the same time.
british prime minister winston churchill asked the united states for assistance in resisting germany but president roosevelt was hampered by both the neutrality legislation of the 1930s and by public opposition to involvement in another european conflict.
through a series of complex maneuvers roosevelt managed to provide some military aid to britain however full scale u s involvement in world war ii would not come until the japanese attack on pearl harbor in december 1941.
during the war 16 million americans served in the armed forces including 350 000 women.
as the country shifted from peacetime to wartime industrial production jobs were plentiful and americans experienced unprecedented prosperity.
even during this time of rapid industrial expansion racial and ethnic discrimination continued.
african americans and latinos though many served in the military were often marginalized.
ethnic hostility on the home front also resulted in the internment of 100 000 japanese americans living on the west coast.
by contrast the principle of equal opportunity regardless of race creed color or national origin was upheld by executive order 8802 which prohibited defense contractors from refusing to integrate their labor forces.
many people from previously marginalized groups were able to find new opportunities during the war and others returned from the war determined to resist future discrimination.
during the course of the war the soviet union russia which had originally been allied with germany was then attacked by germany.
after fierce fighting in the russian winter russian forces began to counterattack against germany from the east while british and american forces attacked from the west first in north africa and italy and later directly into france and germany.
after years of fighting nazi germany was eventually forced to surrender in april 1945 just after roosevelt died in office.
after the german surrender the united states under the leadership of harry s truman who had ascended to the presidency after roosevelts death focused on the war in the pacific and in august 1945 truman made the controversial decision to drop two atomic bombs on the japanese cities of hiroshima and nagasaki which became the first two cities in the world to be leveled by atomic blasts.
japan surrendered bringing world war ii to a close.
in september 1945 the world entered a new era as it had only a few times in history.
chapter review why was world war ii a life altering event on both personal and national levels.
682 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 chapter 23 chapter review 23 1 preparedness and isolation 1939 1941 explain support for and opposition to the growing u s support for britain and growing tensions with japan.
review questions 1.
contextualization why did so many americans oppose u s involvement in the war in europe.
how did roosevelt justify his efforts to aid britain.
cause and effect what factors contributed to the japanese decision to go to war with the united states.
23 2 mass mobilization in a society at war analyze the war s impact on widely diverse groups of americans who fought supported the war effort at home or otherwise lived through the war years.
review questions 3.
synthesis what steps did the united states take to create a mass army in the early years of the war.
comparison compare and contrast the roles of young men and young women in the war effort.
construct an argument in your opinion why were japanese americans and japanese immigrants interned while german and italian americans were not.
23 3 industrial strength industrial prosperity analyze u s industrial strength and productivity and its impact on the outcome of the war and on american society.
review questions 6.
historical interpretation what factors contributed to the extraordinary u s military production during world war ii.
cause and effect how did increased industrial production affect the lives of ordinary americans during world war ii.
23 4 winning a world war north africa europe asia the pacific 1943 1945 explain the course of the war leading to victory in europe and then the pacific.
review questions 8.
historical interpretation what tensions between the allies were revealed at the conferences in casablanca cairo and tehran.
comparison how did the fighting in europe during world war ii differ from that in world war i.
how would you explain the differences you note.
constructing an argument in your opinion was trumans decision to use atomic bombs against japan justified.
why or why not.
chapter 23 living in a world at war 61 fears joys and limits 1945 1980 part outline.
chapter 22 living in han 625 significant dates the coming of the great depression 1929 stock market crash 1930 smoot hawley tariff sets off an international tariff war worsening worldwide depression 1932 reconstruction finance corporation bill signed by president hoover bonus marchers evicted from washington d c franklin d roosevelt defeats hoover for president 1933 banks close around country fdr inaugurated declared a bank holiday first fdr press conference and fireside chat volstead act amended to legalize beer civilian conservation corps and national recovery administration social security act and national labor relations act wagner act pass congress roosevelt is reelected defeating alfred landon roosevelt s court packing plan proposed and defeated explain the coming of the great depression and the initial response to it.
the great depression was a worldwide crisis.
the crash of the american stock market was but one of many causes of the economic catastrophe.
people lost their jobs in japan.
in chile mineral exports the mainstay of its economy collapsed leading to joblessness and the government which lost tax income could do little.
in germany already suffering from a precarious economy industries went bankrupt and millions of workers were laid off.
industrial production collapsed in great britain leading to hunger marches by the unemployed.
jobs disappeared in canada.
and in the united states the combined impact of the stock market crash which had an impact worldwide the continuing farm depression and the rapid decline in industrial production led to national paralysis.
626 1935 1936 1937 the great crash october 1929 and the coming of the great depression speculative booms and busts had occurred regularly in economies and continue even in modern times as people allowed prices to rise far beyond value and then the inevitable crash in prices came.
in the 1600s dutch investors were caught up in speculation in tulip bulbs and in the 1720s english investors lost fortunes in what came to be known as the great south sea bubble.
in the mid 1920s many americans began to buy florida real estate that later became worthless.
the great crash of 1929 was a prime example of this phenomenon.
the u s economy did well in the 1920s and it would have been strange if the value of stocks had not gone up.
stocks after all are merely partial ownership in a company so a share of stock purchased on the new york stock exchange for a company u s steel or general electric for example is a share in the ownership of that company.
if the company makes a sufficient profit dividends are paid to shareholders.
if a company increases in value the value of each share increases.
however if a company does poorly or a lot of people start to worry that a company will do poorly shares will probably decrease in value.
the stock market is in theory a place where people who want to sell a share of stock meet people who want to buy one and agree on a price the price of the most recent sale of stock is then listed as the current value of the stock.
during the 1920s stock prices generally rose with some modest downturns between 1924 and 1928.
toward the end of 1928 especially after herbert hoovers election victory in november the stock market started going up much faster.
many people including president elect hoover as he later wrote in his memoirs were worried that the prices were showing all the hallmarks of a speculative boom.
still people continued to buy stocks.
the radio corporation of america known on the stock market simply as radio was a relatively new company that had never paid a dividend.
radio sold for 85 a share at the beginning of the year and the price rose to 420 a share by the end of the year.
stock prices are reported simply as whole numbers so radio sold for 85 and 420.
other companies followed the same course dupont began the year at 310 ending at 525 department store giant montgomery ward began at 117 ending at 440.
at the height of the market in september 1929 still without distributing a single dividend radio was selling for 505.
as people saw the chance to make money they also borrowed money to buy stocks a process called buying on margin.
if a person could invest 85 in radio and a year later have a stock worth 420 why not borrow enough to buy ten shares for 850 and fairly quickly reap 4 200.
and brokers were more than happy to lend the money.
buyers were expected to use their own money for 25 percent to 50 percent of the value of a stock but could easily borrow the rest.
early in the 1920s perhaps a billion dollars of loans were provided to cover stock purchases by the end of 1928 those loans reached six billion dollars.
part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 in the spring of 1929 the outgoing president calvin coolidge reported that the economy was absolutely sound and stocks were cheap at current prices the more cautious hoover who understood economics better than his predecessor believed instead that the growing tide of speculation was not merely a problem but was indeed a crime yet worried that his saying so might cause a devastating loss in confidence.
by september 1929 a respected economist roger babson warned sooner or later a crash is coming and it may be terrific.
factories will shut down he predicted and men will be thrown out of work.
the speech precipitated a drop in stock prices but the so called babson break lasted only for 1 day.
most economists thought babson was wrong.
stock prices kept going up through the spring of 1929 and then in the summer they skyrocketed.
from the beginning of june to the end of august westinghouse stock went from 151 to 286 general electric from 268 to 391 and u s steel from 165 to 258.
at the sight of those kinds of profits most investors simply forgot about the warnings.
the market reached its high point on the day after labor day in 1929.
there was a small downturn in september and by october everyone started to worry.
then in late october speculation turned to panic as stock prices just kept falling.
tuesday october 29 known as black tuesday was the worst single day in the history of the stock exchange.
crowds formed all up and down wall street.
contrary to contemporary rumors and latter day myths there were no suicidal leaps from windows though a few speculators did die by their own hand on that and the following days.
most quietly watched their life savings disappear as prices continued to fall.
in the months and years that followed stock prices continued to fall.
on november 11 the new york times industrial average closed at 224 a drop by half from 452 from september.
the worst possible news was followed by even worse news as prices kept falling through 1930 1931 and 1932.
by july 1932 the new york times reported the dow jones industrial average as 58 a little more than a tenth of what it had been only 3 years earlier.
value it seemed had simply disappeared from american businesses.
ihe loans that had enabled many to buy stock on margins made things worse.
when the value of a stock fell to the actual percentage the buyer had invested 50 percent or 25 percent the stock broker who had arranged the loan would notify the owner that he or she had to produce more money to pay off the loan or else the stock would be taken over by the broker and sold to recoup the loan.
since many investors had put all their savings into the stock market they had no funds to cover such calls and were wiped out.
even if the market later rallied they had no investment left.
in addition the brokers often were not able to sell the stock in time to protect the loan either so brokers lost money too.
the stock market crash was far from the only problem with the nations economy in 1929.
at the same time basic underpinnings of the american economy including banking manufacturing farming and international trade were also surprisingly fragile.
when the economy came apart it came apart thoroughly.
a sizable number of americans perhaps as many as half farmers farm workers and sharecroppers american indians living on reservations factory workers widows and the elderly had been living on the edge of poverty throughout the boom.
22 1 222 223 in early 1932 u s army troops and local police attacked the bonus marchers camp within sight of the u s capitol building.
the attack on former soldiers who had come to washington from all parts of the united states seeking pensions from congress infuriated many and further undermined hoover s reputation.
hoovervilles shantytowns sarcastically named after president hoover in which unemployed and homeless people lived in makeshift shacks tents and boxes.
hoovervilles cropped up in many cities in 1930 and 1931.
bonus army a protest movement of world war i veterans in 1932 demanding early payment of service bonuses not due until 1945 to help them through the great depression and to provide a stimulus for the economy.
in 1930 before even the initial impact of the depression 60 percent of american families had a total income of less than 2 000 per year which was then considered the poverty line.
between 1929 and 1932 farms across the country were foreclosed on and more would have been had not armed groups of farmers banded together to prevent the sales.
factories which had been overproducing now closed and workers lost their jobs.
one out of four people in the united states was out of work by 1932.
many were living in shanties and others rode the rails as stowaways or waited in bread lines.
in the winter of 1932 33 the nations banking system started to collapse as banks that had also invested in stocks or offered mortgage loans on property that was now worthless failed and state governors announced bank holidays in their states to stop further failures.
the hoover years 1929 1933 herbert hoover had been president for only 7 months when the stock market crashed.
given his background hoover seemed the ideal president for a moment of crisis.
as a trained engineer who had helped feed a starving europe during world war i and served as secretary of commerce he understood economics moreover he was far more flexible than coolidge.
as the economy worsened hoover called on people to engage in voluntary collective action asking business leaders to keep wages and prices up asking bankers to pool resources to help weaker banks encouraging farmers to form cooperatives and keep excess crops off the market.
he cut taxes and supported federal public works such as construction of dams bridges and hospitals to stimulate the economy.
after 1932 he reluctantly agreed with a democratic congress to create the reconstruction finance corporation to provide funds to keep banks and railroads from bankruptcy as well as the emergency relief and construction act to lend money to states for relief and public projects.
as the economy worsened however hoovers call for voluntary solutions seemed weak.
farmers were reluctant to cut back on their crops if their neighbors would simply fill the gap.
bankers were too worried about staying solvent to bail out other banks.
the reconstruction finance corporation never invested enough to save all the banks that needed saving.
hoover tried but failed to negotiate a reduction in the reparations that were wrecking the german economy and thus undermining u s trade with europe.
then in 1930 congress passed the smoot hawley tariff a disastrous move that was designed to protect american industries by raising the cost of imported goods but resulted in a trade war as other nations also raised their tariffs in return leading to a huge decrease in international trade with devastating results.
despite the dire circumstances hoover though no orthodox conservative could not bring himself to support further government intervention and debt.
perhaps it was simply hoovers bad luck to preside over the beginning of the depression.
people would have blamed him no matter what he did.
when he tried to restore confidence by announcing that the fundamental business of the country that is production and distribution of commodities is on a sound and prosperous basis things just kept getting worse and people lost confidence in him.
when homeless families built communities of shacks they called them hoovervilles.
when out of work veterans marched to washington as the bonus army to demand a pension he ordered the army to disperse them and people called him heartless.
when he had lost his bid for reelection and tried to get the incoming administration to cooperate on a plan for the banking crisis in early 1933 roosevelt ignored him.
hoovers was an unhappy presidency in an unhappy time.
22 1 quick review how did the fragile economy of the 1920s combined with the stock market crash create a dire situation for the american people.
what actions did the hoover administration take to address the situation.
what other actions could hoover have taken.
628 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 the new deal explain the goals and results of the new deal and the responses to change on the part of diverse americans.
in the desperate situation that the united states faced in 1932 probably the most desperate economic moment in american history most thought that whoever won the 1932 democratic nomination would win the election.
after all the crisis had occurred under the leadership of previous republican presidents.
among the democrats a1 smith entered the race again along with speaker of the house of representatives john nance garner former cabinet member newton baker and new york governor franklin delano roosevelt.
roosevelt won the nomination on the fourth ballot and breaking precedent flew to the democratic national convention in chicago to accept the nomination in person on july 2 1932 where he promised a new deal for the american people coining the phrase by which his administration would be known.
he selected garner to be his running mate and promising a new deal for the american people while offering very few specifics defeated hoover by a landslide in the november election carrying 57 percent of the vote and 472 electoral votes.
in the long months between the election in november and the inauguration on march 4 1933 the u s economy kept getting worse.
the date of the inauguration was later changed by the 20th amendment to the constitution so that every president after roosevelt was inaugurated on january 20 after a much shorter wait.
the number of unemployed workers and evicted farmers kept growing.
in addition the banking system the heart of the nations economic structure faltered and more banks closed.
banks that had given loans to buy stocks now held worthless paper since the loans could never be repaid.
banks that had given loans to farmers now owned worthless farm land or were blocked from foreclosure by angry farmers.
as more banks failed people began to take their money out of the remaining banks.
a run on a bank as a large number of withdrawals all at once was known could put any bank out of business because no bank simply kept deposits in its vaults but rather invested the money.
in 1930 1 352 banks closed in 1931 2 294 more went out of business and in 1932 another 1 453 failed.
in november 1932 nevadas governor proclaimed a bank holiday temporarily closing all banking before more banks got into trouble.
iowa followed in january then michigan maryland oklahoma indiana ohio arkansas and arizona in february.
sixteen more states closed banks at the beginning of march and finally on march 4 illinois and new york home to the nations largest banks in chicago and new york city declared a bank holiday.
on that day at noon with most banks closed and most economic activity in the country at a standstill franklin roosevelt was inaugurated to replace herbert hoover as president.
the brain trust and the first 100 days at his inauguration the new president told the nation that it must not shrink from honestly facing conditions in our country today.
and he was blunt about what those conditions were saying only a foolish optimist can deny the dark realities of the moment.
yet our distress comes from no failure of substance.
plenty is at our doorstep but a generous use of it languishes in the very sight of the supply.
primarily this is because the rulers of the exchange of mankinds goods have failed through their own stubbornness and their own incompetence have admitted their failure and abdicated.
but in that same address he also insisted on his firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself nameless unreasoning unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance given the nations situation many could think of quite a few things to fear but roosevelt made it clear that he was ready to act to address the crisis and that alone gave people optimism for a time.
new deal a term for the programs and legislation developed during franklin roosevelt s administration aimed at ending the great depression.
times 629 chapter 22 livingj.
i i area served by tva electrical power tennessee river valley watershed i principal tva dams g tva power plants map 22 1 the range of the tva.
thetva ortennessee valley authority built dams that controlled flooding and brought electric power to thousands of americans living in one of the most poverty stricken parts of the nation along the length of the tennessee river.
the indian new deal the new deal was a time of extraordinary change for many americans including american indians.
like other new deal initiatives the changes began during the hoover years.
in 1928 lewis meriam led a study of federal indian policy.
meriams team conducted the first large scale examination of the impact of the 1887 dawes act see chapter 16.
in his report the problem of indian administration miriam was blunt writing the work of the government directed toward the education and advancement of the indian is largely ineffective and the provisions for the care of the indian children in boarding schools are grossly inadequate meriam called for moving the education of indian children to their home and tribal context which was done.
roosevelt appointed social worker john collier as commissioner of indian affairs.
collier came to office determined to right some of the wrongs that had been done and by june 1934 he had convinced congress to pass the wheeler howard act also known as the indian reorganization act.
two years later in 1936 congress extended the same rights to native alaskans.
this law was the beginning of what came to be known as the indian new deal indian new deal.
under the indian reorganization act the government recognized a series of policy changes including the the legal rights of indian tribes not done since 1887 including tribal right to hold indian reorganization act ofj 934 that reservation lands.
tribes adopted constitutions and formed governments.
tribes not strengthened indian tribal government of the federal government were given the right to decide on tribal membership not the reservations.
an easy issue after generations of relationships between whites and indians.
for most tribes the indian new deal was a fresh start.
632 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 table 22 1 major new deal laws and agencies agency law year launched or passed purpose what happened.
ii emergency banking act 1933 initial action to save the nation s banking system replaced later the same year by i glass steagall act fdic federal deposit insurance corporation created by glass steagall act 1933 fdic to guarantee bank deposits restore consumer confidence in banks glass steagall act to separate commercial and investment banking banks with guaranteed deposits could not speculate in stock market fdic still operating guaranteeing bank deposits glass steagall separation of commercial and investment banking repealed in 1999 aaa agricultural adjustment administration 1933 subsidize farmers to restrict production and boost farm prices declared unconstitutional in 1936 replaced with farm subsidies in 1938 that still continue home owners loan corporation and farm credit administration 1933 provide home and farm loans to refinance mortgages temporary emergency measures tva tennessee valley authority 1933 build dams to stop flooding and generate electricity still operating fera federal emergency relief administration i 1933 provide funds for state and local relief agencies temporary emergency measure nra national recovery administration 1933 protect prices wages and employment with codes for business a major new deal agency declared unconstitutional in 1935 pwa public works administration authorized by the nra 1933 stimulate economy by building schools hospitals dams etc.
continued until 1943 when replaced by wartime construction ccc civilian conservation corps 1933 employ young men to plant forests build roads etc.
continued until 1943 employing 2 5 million men when wartime jobs eliminated unemployment sec securities and exchange commission 1934 regulate the stock market still operating indian reorganization act 1934 launch indian new deal much still in force fha federal housing administration 1934 provide home loans still operating wpa works progress administration 1935 provide large scale construction jobs building schools parks post offices continued until 1943 when replaced by wartime construction social security administration i 1935 support retirement pensions through payroll tax still operating national labor relations board created by wagner act 1935 provide new rights for union organizing and free union elections partially repealed by taft hartley act in 1947 nya national youth administration 1935 provide jobs and support to students officially part of the wpa closed in 1943 federal work study component still operating fair labor standards act 1938 ensure minimum wage and maximum hours still operating with wage raises from time to time indicates a program enacted during the first 100 days of roosevelt s administration.
african americans the depression and fdr s black cabinet the great depression hit african americans especially hard.
many who had moved to northern cities were still on the bottom of the economic ladder and were often among the first to lose their jobs.
as business failed and the need for goods and services declined african american jobs declined precipitously.
in 1934 a government survey estimated that 17 percent of whites but 38 percent of blacks were out of work.
most new deal agencies were designed to help both blacks and whites but in some cases discrimination was built into the policies and in other cases policies that should have been fair were implemented by people who were not.
the nra which set mini mum wages for jobs set low minimum salaries in laundry services tobacco production chapter 22 living in hard times 633 mary mcleod bethune was a leader in fdr s black cabinet and through her friendship with eleanor roosevelt an influential voice across the administration but she was also an influential educator and organizer in her own right.
and other fields where there were large numbers of black workers.
agricultural adjustment administration payments often helped landlords but were not passed on as they should have been to help tenant farmers or sharecroppers.
in the civilian conservation corps which provided jobs for unemployed young people originally only males some 200 000 african american boys and young men did get jobs and work experience but the ccc maintained rigidly segregated camps.
the federal home owners loan corporation was designed to give loans to blacks and whites but local officials of the federal housing authority often decided that blacks were a poor risk and so denied loans to them.
nevertheless many african americans made significant gains during the great depression.
recognizing that aaa payments were being withheld african american sharecroppers organized the southern tenant farmers union to demand payments.
african american voters began to shift political allegiance from the party of lincoln to the democratic party because they were attracted to roosevelts new deal policies and especially eleanor roosevelts active support as she visited black communities advocated for black civil rights and courted african american voters.
blacks began to win elections to state legislatures.
in 1928 chicagos oscar depriest was elected to the u s congress the first black since reconstruction.
black votes helped defeat candidates who opposed antilynching bills.
early in his administration roosevelt created what came to be known as the black cabinet a shifting and informal group.
roosevelts white secretary of the interior harold l ickes former president of the chicago branch of the naacp and eleanor roosevelt enlarged the size and power of the black cabinet.
robert l vann editor of the pittsburgh courier served as special assistant to the attorney general and william h hastie dean of the law school at howard university served as a legal advisor to the department of the interior.
robert c weaver who in the 1960s would be the first african american in the cabinet advised the department of the interior.
perhaps the most prominent member of the black cabinet was mary mcleod bethune.
bethune was head of a school for girls in daytona florida that would become bethune cookman college.
during the 1920s bethune became president of the national association of colored women which advocated for a federal antilynching bill and for support for black women in attending training programs and college.
frustrated by what she saw as the conservatism of the nacw she launched the more aggressive national council of negro women in 1935.
at eleanor roosevelts urging bethune was appointed as the director of the negro division of the national youth administration nya where she channeled some of the nyas considerable resources toward creating jobs for african american youth.
bethune used her position and her friendship with eleanor roosevelt to organize a federal council of negro affairs to ensure that blacks in and out of the administration spoke with one voice.
when secretary of war henry l stimson called a conference on women and the war effort in 1941 and failed to invite black women she wrote to him we are not humiliated.
we are incensed bethune was not going to be ignored.
black cabinet an informal network of high level african american officials and advisors to the roosevelt administration who worked together to influence government policy.
the dust bowl and the okie experience unlike the many farmers who faced troubles in the 1920s wheat farmers of oklahoma kansas and the texas panhandle often prospered during that decade because even when the price of wheat fell they could always plow more land and plant more wheat.
as the depression worsened however the plains farmers faced a unique crisis.
eventually the ever expanding production of wheat caught up with the farmers.
the wheat harvest in the fall of 1931 was the most bountiful in history.
farmers had been planting more land and it was exceedingly fertile.
the result was that far more wheat was produced that fall than could possibly be consumed.
europe like the united states was in a depression.
wheat exports and wheat consumption were down.
the price paid for wheat fell so low in 1931 that farmers lost money on every 634 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 bushel produced.
many vowed not to plant in 1932 and probably a third of the great plains farmers faced foreclosures for debt or back taxes.
then a different disaster struck.
starting late in 1932 and continuing in 1933 1934 and 1935 farms across the great plains simply blew away.
year after year the dust storms continued but the worst storm came on sunday april 14 1935 known to those who lived through it as black sunday.
the day began sunny and windless.
then in the afternoon the wind picked up and what looked like a purple or black wall started blowing in from the northwest.
jeanne clark remembered that she had been outside playing when she heard a panicked call from her mother to come inside.
before she could get to the house the storm hit.
it was like i was caught in a whirlpool clark said.
all of a sudden it got completely dark.
i couldnt see a thing that one storm took 300 000 tons of soil from the great plains and deposited it hundreds of miles away twice as much soil as had been dug out of the panama canal.
clark remembered the terrible coughing that followed.
a doctor said she had dust pneumonia and might not survive.
clark did survive but others mostly children and old people died from the dust storms.
before the end of the 1930s more than 250 000 people two thirds of the plains population simply left what had become known as the dust bowl see map 22 2.
dust and drought.
j931 1939 dust bowl t i drought area route 66 migration route to california map 22 2 the dust bowl.
overp anting and plowing of xx x sihway orms that destroyed agricultural communities in dust bow refugees sought a new jfe jn from chicago to los angeles became the route by y california agriculture.
chapter 22 living in hard times 635 after 1910 scores of white settlers with high hopes had come to the great plains and built farms in the last frontier encouraged by the government.
since the land was so dry the government also doubled the homestead allotment to 320 acres.
the weather could be terribly hot in the summer and cold in the winter but the soil was rich.
a few old timers and ranchers said god didn t create this land around here to be plowed up but farmers plowed and grew crops on land that had previously grown only grass.
in the 1930s however there was a prolonged drought and the wells had to be dug deeper to find any water.
the soil started to dry up and then the wind which always blows hard on the plains started to carry the soil away.
cattle suffocated from the dust.
people rubbed vaseline in their nostrils to protect them and the red cross gave out respirator masks at school.
people stuffed wet towels and sheets into cracks in doors or windows only to see their houses filled with dust anyway.
as the new deal administration began to grapple with the dust bowl crisis agricultural agents arrived in the region in 1934 offering up to 16 a head for the remaining cattle which were either shot on the spot or shipped to a slaughterhouse in amarillo texas.
the government offered payments averaging 498 for a promise not to raise a wheat crop the following year.
the ccc tried to build demonstration projects to reclaim the land.
the reclamation projects did not work.
the 498 paid off old debts but hope of a more bountiful year in 1935 or 1936 seemed remote.
farmers and townspeople began departing in 1934 and before long a region and a way of life one that was less than a generation old simply disappeared.
most people who left the dust bowl moved to california.
in the midst of a national depression they became migrant farm workers hired hands on the farms of californias central valley where they were given the derogatory name of okies on the assumption that they were all from oklahoma.
for many californians the okies were desperately poor intruders in a state whose own economy was suffering terribly.
photographers working for the farm security administration fsa took their pictures carey mcwilliams a young california lawyer wrote factories in the fields describing their plight and one of the countrys best known writers john steinbeck immortalized their experience in the grapes of wrath.
tom joad the hero of steinbecks novel defined what it meant to be an okie okie use to mean you was from oklahoma.
now it means youre scum.
dont mean nothing itself its the way they say it nevertheless for the characters in steinbecks novel and for thousands of real life migrants it was also a term of pride and of grim determination.
longtime residents of californias central valley feared the okies.
mexican and filipino agricultural workers worried for good reason that white dust bowl refugees would take their jobs.
a preference for those who were native born led many california farmers to give jobs to whites during the great depression leaving longtime employees without work.
moreover the california growers a powerful political bloc were happy to have more competition for jobs in the fields and to pit ethnic groups against one another other.
mexican american and filipino farm workers too often ignored by traditional unions had created their own unions.
in 1933 before the arrival of most dust bowl refugees 47 500 agricultural workers were involved in 37 different strikes in californias rich central valley.
some 5 000 mostly mexican american workers were involved in the partially successful el monte berry strike in june 1933 and a larger cotton strike that fall.
by the late 1930s up to 10 workers were applying for every job in the california fields and a field hand who made a dollar per day was doing well.
probably half of those working in the california fields were okies while the other half were longtime workers who were mexicans or filipinos.
the unions were divided by ideological differences as well as by splits between the newly arrived refugees and those who had been in the fields for a generation.
despite the efforts of california farm workers to build unions in the field few strikes were very successful.
california agribusiness was strong and got stronger part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 636 during the 1930s.
the associated farmers of california that was founded in 1934 had resources and power far beyond anything available to the california farm workers.
whatever one s race working in the field was terribly hard work.
dust bowl refugees who had owned their own farms and had viewed the future with optimism who had bought a piano for their living room and a new model t ford for the family now lived in government camps if they were lucky and under bridges if they were not and followed the crops from one farm to another.
most of the dust bowl refugees survived on the margins of society until the new industrial jobs created by world war ii ended the depression for them.
the works progress administration and the artists new deal in april 1935 congress created the works progress administration wpa to institutionalize and expand the new deal.
roosevelt appointed harry hopkins a former settlement house worker and one of fdrs closest advisors to lead it.
the wpas role was to move people from emergency relief the dole as the president called it to temporary government supported jobs and to make the government the employer of last resort.
under hopkinss leadership the wpa provided government funded jobs for 8 5 million americans at a cost of 11 billion between 1935 and 1942.
wpa workers built roads theaters public buildings and in some cases planned communities in every state of the union as well as planted forests laid out new parks and changed the face of the countryside.
providing wpa jobs also provided opportunities for roosevelts political allies usually democrats but in some cases such as new york citys liberal republican mayor fiorello la guardia also republicans to win political favors by handing out the coveted jobs to political supporters.
at the urging of eleanor roosevelt hopkins included jobs for artists in the wpa.
in response to one critic of the artists program hopkins said hell theyve got to eat just like other people in 1935 and 1936 wpa artists painted murals in post offices provided music through symphony orchestras jazz groups appalachian banjo pickers and texas fiddlers staged theater productions of everything from shakespeare to new cutting edge works wrote guidebooks to every part of the united states and recorded the oral histories of former slaves among many other projects.
besides ensuring that many artists were able to eat and practice their craft the wpa art programs left a lasting cultural legacy though not one without criticism.
other federal agencies also hired artists.
rexford tugwell one of the most influential members of the brain trust charged the farm security administration with creating a pictorial sourcebook of american agricultural history between 1935 and 1939 a team of photographers including several who later became famous for their work dorothea lange walker evans and ben shahn roamed the country creating a picture of often hidden rural poverty.
organized labor the committee for industrial organization and the factory floor many labor union leaders were not sure they trusted roosevelt and the new deal in the early years.
however although the primary purpose of the national industrial recovery act of june 1933 was to stabilize prices at roosevelts insistence it also included a clause protecting collective bargaining through unions.
the national labor relations act of 1935 the wagner act sponsored by new york senator robert wagner expanded the rights of union members outlawing unfair labor practices as well as giving workers the right to join a union without getting fired rights to collective bargaining and the right to strike.
for the next decade unions could be relatively sure that the federal government would not intervene in a strike on the side of management as it had done repeatedly in the past.
the wagner act did not create any unions but it did provide a new context labor organizers took the next steps on their own.
223 chapter 22 living in ham ges 637 congress of industrial organizations cio a new labor union that sought to organize industrial workers by industry such as all automobile workers.
striking workers at a general motors factory in flint michigan sit on car seats in front of unfinished automobiles.
the sit down strike created a new form of labor union organizing.
638 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 in 1935 when the wagner act was passed only about 10 percent of american workers were union members mostly in the skilled craft unions of the american federation of labor a f.
within the a f.
of l some of its leaders john l lewis of the united mine workers of america sidney hillman of the amalgamated clothing workers and david dubinsky of the international ladies garment workers union pushed the a f.
of l to organize the unorganized.
lewis and his colleagues wanted industrial unions that would organize a union of all the workers in an industry such as steel or automobiles or textiles as opposed to the craft unions that focused on a single trade carpenters plumbers or electricians.
but the leadership of the a f.
of l would have none of it.
they meant to protect their current members.
lewis hillman and dubinsky created a committee for industrial organization within the a f.
of l when other union leaders within the a f.
of l continued to resist their efforts the committee for industrial organization became the congress of industrial organizations cio a separate union and a competitor to the a f.
of l john l lewis founding president of the cio could be tough arbitrary arrogant and self absorbed.
he also was able to speak to workers as no one since eugene debs and mother jones.
lewis believed that by the 1930s a mighty surge of human sentiment was about to change industrial america.
sometimes the mighty surge got ahead of those who were trying to lead it.
across the country workers even many who had not yet joined a union launched a new kind of strike the sit down strike.
instead of walking off the job and onto the picket lines cio inspired workers simply stopped work and sat down where they were.
in doing so they guaranteed that they could not be replaced by nonunion workers and they were hard to attack without harming the machinery they were guarding.
they were also much more comfortable inside the plant than outside.
it turned out to be a brilliant tactic.
one of the first sit down strikes took place in akron ohio at the firestone tire plant on january 29 1936.
after the workers sat down where they were and the noise of the assembly line stopped one worker said of the silence its like the end of the world the firestone workers stayed where they were for 3 days and won.
the cio reported a surge of telephone calls weve sat down.
send someone over to organize us from september 1936 through the following spring 485 000 workers engaged in sit down strikes.
the cio grew to 2 million members in 6 months.
for most assembly line workers fortunate enough to have jobs in the 1930s the primary complaint was not salary.
as one chevrolet worker told a nra investigator in 1934 of course we make enough to live on while we are working but we dont work enough time workers on assembly lines also complained about constant speed ups on the assembly lines.
in an assembly line industry the pace of the line ruled everything.
at flints fisher body plant a worker said i aint got no kick on wages but i just dont like to be drove on december 30 1936 workers in two general motors units in flint michigan stopped the line and sat down where they were.
the flint sit down strike had begun.
by january 4 1937 workers were sitting in at gm plants in cleveland ohio atlanta georgia anderson indiana norwood ohio and kansas city missouri.
it was the beginning of a long cold winter.
on january 11 the gm management turned the heat off even though it was 16 degrees outside.
police blocked a delivery of food.
a group of about 30 strikers went to the main gate and broke through a police lock to get to supporters outside.
the company called the flint police who fired tear gas.
strikers responded by throwing door hinges bottles and stones at the police.
the united auto workers union uaw called it the battle of the running bulls the wind blew the tear gas back on the police.
the gas and the continuing hail of missiles from the plant infuriated them and they began shooting at strikers and picketers.
amazingly no one was killed.
the young wife of one striker genora johnson who was herself on the picket line remembered i did not know fear.
i knew only surprise anguish and anger everyone strikers and gm management wondered about the ability of the strikers to continue.
most of those engaged in the sit in were not yet union members and few of them had ever been involved in a strike before much less a protracted sit in.
but one remembered it was like war.
the guys with me became my buddies negotiations began in mid january and on february 11a settlement was reached.
general motors recognized the uaws right to represent its members something the company had sworn never to do.
it promised to negotiate in good faith on future contracts and that there would be no punishment of workers because of the sit down.
the union ended the strike.
the united automobile workers journal said of the settlement the greatest strike in american history has been victoriously concluded one striker said it more modestly even if we got not one damn thing out of it other than that we at least had a right to open our mouths without fear opponents of the new deal not everyone celebrated the unions victory over general motors or other results of the new deal.
in july 1934 the du pont brothers pierre irenee and lammot invited a number of business and political leaders including the 1928 democratic nominee al smith to new york to discuss the dangers to investors in the new deal.
the du ponts who also owned a major share of general motors had many reasons to dislike the roosevelt administration.
they and their guests created the american liberty league to oppose the new deal.
irenee du pont said that the family had followed the president in the belief that he was sincere but thought that the so called new deal was nothing more or less than the socialistic doctrine.
al smith once roosevelts mentor told those at a liberty league dinner that he would probably take a walk not participate during the next presidential election and accused roosevelt of handing the government over to dreamy professors and bleeding heart social workers.
a league publication said that the new deal stirred up the dragon teeth of class warfare other members of the american liberty league included john j raskob a former democratic party chair who had been an executive at general motors and the dupont corporation john w davis the 1924 democratic presidential nominee alfred p sloan of general motors and sewell avery of montgomery ward.
herbert hoover declined to join derogato rily calling the league the wall street model of human liberty the national association of manufacturers also became a tough opponent of the new deal.
the association was created before 1900 to coordinate business opposition to labor unions.
with the advent of the new deal leaders of the organization sought to serve the purposes of business salvation and by 1937 were spending 1 5 million a year on radio programs motion pictures bill boards direct mail and speakers attacking the new deal.
while conservative critics of the new deal said that it was driving the country toward socialism roosevelt worried much more about other critics those who thought the new deal was not socialistic enough.
the communist party was always unhappy with roosevelt.
communists dismissed the new deal as mere bourgeois democracy communists created unemployment councils led rent strikes and defended union members and civil rights workers.
although the party was small it was not without influence in the 1930s.
many noncommunists also wanted to push the country further than roosevelt wanted to go.
socialists who were the heirs of eugene v debs socialist party as well as many midwestern progressives who had supported theodore roosevelt in 1912 american liberty league launched in 1934 the group was one of the largest and most well funded of several organizations opposed to the new deal which it considered socialistic.
chapter 22 living in hard times and wisconsin senator robert la follettes bid for president in 1924 talked of a third party challenge in 1936.
a 66 year old californian dr francis townsend proposed a federal pension of 200 per month to any person over 60 years old who would retire from work leaving a job open for someone younger.
the idea spread like wildfire.
a number of candidates were elected to congress in 1934 with townsends support.
in addition there were some 5 000 townsend clubs around the country and 25 million people signed townsend petitions to congress.
while townsends ideas were gaining political traction the muckraking author upton sinclair announced that he would seek the democratic nomination for governor of california in 1934 based on a pledge to end poverty in california epic.
like the townsend movement the epic campaign took off among voters who were impatient with the new deal.
sinclair won the nomination received widespread support though not from roosevelt who saw epic as an effort to confiscate private property and helped shape the national dialogue even though he lost the election.
more influential than townsend or sinclair the radio priest charles coughlin inspired some and frightened others in the early 1930s.
coughlin had been appointed pastor of a small catholic parish in the working class detroit suburb of royal oak in 1926.
catholic auto workers formed the core of his congregation.
coughlin arranged for the local radio station to broadcast his sunday sermons and in 1930 their popularity led to a contract with the columbia broadcasting system to carry him nationally and led the anti catholic kian to burn a cross on his lawn.
as the depression worsened coughlins sermons became more political.
he relentlessly attacked hoover and the nations bankers and he described himself as the voice of the little people the average man who was suffering given the size of his radio audience roosevelt was delighted that coughlin supported his 1932 campaign.
after the election the two met at the white house but coughlin later turned on the new deal.
he accused fdr of having out hoovered hoover and talked of organizing his own political party.
his sermons took on an increasingly anti semitic and isolationist tone and some thought he was starting to sound like the new german chancellor adolph hitler.
in roosevelts mind however the greatest challenge came from louisianas charismatic senator huey p long.
long was a product of the pine woods region of louisiana where poverty the baptist church and political independence flourished.
longs forbearers had supported the union cause during the civil war and eugene v debs during the early 1900s.
in 1928 as al smith was going down to defeat long was elected governor of louisiana after a campaign attacking big corporations especially standard oil.
longs grass roots populism led him to attack the rich and promise opportunity for the poor.
every man a king but no one wears a crown was his campaign slogan.
he raised taxes on oil and gas production built new highways schools and hospitals provided free textbooks and grew very popular and very powerful.
some said that louisiana under long was a virtual dictatorship.
he was elected to the u s senate in 1930.
in washington he showed disdain for democrats as well as republicans called the president frank much to fdrs displeasure and said that all he cared about was what the boys at the forks of the creek think of me ihere were a lot of boys and girls at the forks of a lot of creeks who thought a lot of long.
fdr considered him a dangerous demagogue.
in 1934 long launched what he called the share our wealth society.
long promised a one time grant of 5 000 per family and a guaranteed income of 2 500 twice the 1934 national average as well as educational subsidies for the young and pensions for the elderly specifically designed to attract townsend support all to be paid for by seizing the wealth of the few.
when people said his numbers did not add up that there was not enough wealth to seize even if people wanted to long responded that his followers needed to be prepared for the slurs and snickers of some high ups but he insisted let no one tell you that it is difficult to redistribute the wealth of this land.
it is simple 640 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 while the communists and socialists did not cause roosevelt to worry townsend coughlin and long did.
the president worried about a dictatorship emerging in the united states just as dictatorships had emerged as a result of the depression in italy and germany.
democratic chairman james farley commissioned a poll that showed that a third party ticket led by long could lead to roosevelts defeat in 1936 and perhaps even a long victory if not in 1936 then by 1940.
there was plenty to worry about.
long plans to be a candidate of the hitler type for the presidency in 1936 roosevelt said.
the president reshaped his political agenda to take control of the national dialogue.
the continuing depression and the expanding new deal 1935 1939 during roosevelts first 100 days indeed his first 2 years the new deal consisted of a series of experiments some contradictory some well thought out but all designed to stem the worst of the depression and begin a new course to keep people from starving to put them back to work to get more money into circulation.
in 1935 there was a shift in focus some called it the second new deal it was not a radical change but it did involve greater attention to long term financial security for more americans.
before accepting the job as fdrs secretary of labor frances perkins had insisted that the president promise to back pensions for the aging and unemployment insurance.
in an early meeting roosevelt told perkins i will authorize you to try and if you succeed thats fine it was all the authorization she needed.
perkins had witnessed the tragic triangle shirtwaist fire in new york in 1911 and had led the investigation that followed and helped craft some of the health and safety legislation that emerged from it.
the growth and popularity of the townsend movement gave perkins more political clout than she might otherwise have had.
if a plan could be devised that was financially viable unlike the townsend plan then 1934 and 1935 was the time to get it passed.
roosevelt worried about amassing too much power in the federal government.
he insisted that the states play the lead role in unemployment insurance though he was willing to have a federal role.
but he was adamant all the power shouldnt be in the hands of the federal government.
look just think what would happen if all the power was concentrated here and huey long became president treasury secretary henry morgenthau was determined that any plan be fiscally viable.
but many in the administration thought townsend had a point the country did need to encourage older americans to retire and leave their jobs to younger people.
and perkins was determined to get a bill through congress.
frances perkins the secretary of labor and its prime architect stood behind him.
social security act legislation that established a system of federal old age pensions in effect to the present day.
on january 17 1935 fdr announced plans for a social security program that would protect some 26 million citizens with security against the hazards and vicissitudes of life the proposed bill included a federal tax on employees and employers to fund the retirement system a federal tax to help support a state administered unemployment insurance system and emergency grants to fund the immediate relief of the indigent elderly aid to dependent children and modest support for public health.
since the constitution clearly gave the government the right to tax there was no room for a constitutional challenge to the legislation.
congress passed the social security act 7 months later on august 14 1935.
the proposed social security act included a federal tax on employees and employers to fund the retirement system.
in january 1940 the fifth anniversary of roosevelts speech about the program ida m fuller a 76 year old woman living in vermont received the first social security check.
as roosevelt prepared for the reelection battle of 1936 he also toughened his rhetoric.
in his 1933 inaugural address fdr had criticized the rulers of the exchange of mankinds goods for having failed through their own stubbornness and their own incompetence in 1936 however his speeches took on a harsher tone.
he spoke of his old enemies the bankers and profiteers and condemned their greed and autocracy he said of business leaders they are unanimous in their hate for me and i welcome their hatred american voices frances perkins the roots of social security reflecting on 1935 secretary of labor frances perkins took the lead in creating the social security retirement system still in operation today.
years later she looked back on the work she did.
t he real roots of the social security act were in the great depression of 1929.
nothing else would have bumped the american people into a social security system except something so shocking so terrifying as that depression.
but everything was down.
nobody could get a job.
the grocer didn t employ the young boys to deliver goods any more.
he couldn t afford to.
the grocer himself finally went bankrupt and closed up.
he had given too much credit.
i mean the people who were out of work had credit at the grocery store at first and they could eat but they couldn t pay their bills and finally the grocer couldn t pay his bills and eventually somebody came and sold him out.
it went on like that all the time.
in the spring of 1932 franklin roosevelt had gone out to utah to the conference of governors he made a speech which was full of pleasant hyperbole of one sort or another flattery to various governors but at one point he began to discuss the great problems now facing this country and he spoke about unemployment.
then he said i am for unemployment insurance but not for the dole.
until we heard those words come over the wires i wasn t sure he was going to say he was for unemployment insurance.
i was afraid he was going to say he was against the dole and nothing else it created a great interest and a great enthusiasm among the voters which he was not slow to catch on to.
he had that kind of a mind you know he could feel the public pulse and he cared about the public pulse at any rate we worked all summer it was a terribly hot summer and everybody worked hard all the time and finally we actually did bring forth a report that recommended unemployment insurance and old age insurance but omitted health insurance just because the experts couldn t get through with health insurance in time to make a report on it.
this then was the genesis of the whole bill.
we did a great deal of educating by one kind of propaganda or other chiefly hearings.
senator wagner put it up a bill which he called a model bill and held public hearings in the senate which attracted a great deal of attention from the senators.
we had a number of senatorial committees which we asked to look into this or that.
we got advice.
all these actions were for the purpose not so much of advice as of propaganda that is of education of the public the result was a bill that finally was presented to congress and as you know was debated very briefly and finally we did get the basic bill passed.
source frances perkins the roots of social security speech delivered at social security administration headquarters baltimore maryland october 23 1962 downloaded from january 9 2013 thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis as perkins described it what role did roosevelt play in the development and passage of social security.
what other groups and individuals were important in the process.
constructing an argument do you agree with perkins that without the great depression social security would never have been enacted.
why or why not.
642 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 roosevelt attacked business leaders every chance he got during 1935 and 1936 but he did not actually do very much to hurt them.
nevertheless his rhetoric stole the thunder from coughlin s and long s his legislation especially social security undermined townsends organization and his support for the wagner act created great loyalty among labor unions.
as a result roosevelt amassed great political capital going into the 1936 presidential election.
huey long was assassinated in september 1935.
after his death his share our wealth clubs became the union party which nominated william lemke a congressman from north dakota for president.
the republicans nominated the liberal kansas governor alf landon.
in spite of polls including one by the literary digest that predicted a landon win roosevelt won a stunning electoral victory in november 1936.
he carried 46 of the nations 48 states and a huge plurality of the popular vote.
as he began his second term in january 1937 the president seemed to turn the agenda back to fighting the ongoing depression.
in his inaugural address he said i see one third of a nation ill housed ill clad ill nourished it was a call to action but also an admission that in 4 years the new deal had not accomplished all that it hoped for.
in spite of his extraordinary election victory and the high hopes for more permanent reform it engendered roosevelt accomplished far less in his second term than in the first.
the sense of national crisis was not as great in 1937 and roosevelts own missteps got in the way.
one of fdrs greatest frustrations was the fact that a conservative u s supreme court kept undermining his efforts.
late in his first term the court declared the nra and then the aaa unconstitutional as well as state minimum wage laws.
court challenges to social security and the wagner act were working their way through the lower courts.
he was not sure what would come next.
in early february 1937 after his reelection roosevelt went to congress with a proposal that would allow him to appoint one additional supreme court justice for every member who was over the age of 70 which in 1937 would mean six new justices and similar numbers in the lower courts.
the constitution never mentions a number of justices for the court and the number had fluctuated between five and ten.
fdrs proposal was completely constitutional but politically very unwise.
fdr claimed that the goal was to speed judicial review and reduce the workload of the justices.
everyone knew that in fact there was only one goal to stop the court from overturning the new deal.
to many in congress not only conservatives the court packing bill was a step toward dictatorship.
for some southern senators it would open up the way to civil rights legislation which they always feared might someday emerge from the white house.
montana senator burton wheeler an old progressive who usually sided with the president led the assault claiming that the bill cut down those guarantees of liberty written by the blood of your forefathers the legislation was defeated by the friends of the new deal before its enemies got a chance to join in the debate.
ironically while congress defeated roosevelts plan to expand or pack the supreme court the justices perhaps reading the 1936 election returns shifted ground.
chief justice charles evans hughes and associate justice owen roberts who had both voted against the new deal changed their minds first on a minimum wage law and then on the all important wagner labor relations act which the court found to be constitutional.
the changes in the hughes and robert votes were dubbed the switch in time that saved nine after 1937 although no new justices were added the court stopped declaring new deal legislation unconstitutional.
nevertheless with the defeat of roosevelt s court plan the momentum behind the new deal slowly came to a stop.
divisions in congress engendered by the court plan never healed.
unemployment actually rose in 1937 and 1938 in the depression within a depression which most likely occurred due to roosevelts effort to balance the federal budget by cutting back on the federal spending that was keeping the economy moving.
congress did pass a bill to resurrect parts of the old aaa now that the court seemed more open to it.
a fair labor standards act that chapter 22 living in har eleanor roosevelt could travel many places where her husband could not go.
her visits to migrant camps african american sharecroppers or in this case a coal mine highlighted the needs of many people and gave many faith in her husband s administration.
prohibited child labor and set an hourly minimum wage and a 40 hour work week also passed.
however congress defeated a plan to expand the tennessee valley authority to other regions of the country and a reorganization plan for the executive branch of the government that fdr wanted.
when the president signed the fair labor standards act in june 1938 he was heard to say thats that the new deal it seemed had come to an end even if the depression that launched it would run on for another year or more.
the new deal did not end the great depression.
the economy rebounded only as the united states prepared for world war ii and government spending in preparation for war far outpaced anything that had been spent to prime the pump during the 1930s.
nevertheless the new deal changed the country.
the glass steagall act and the federal deposit insurance corporation stabilized the nations banking system and the ccc and other agencies put people to work who desperately wanted needed jobs.
franklin and eleanor roosevelts optimism gave people hope and the presidents commitment helped keep democratic institutions alive at a time when they were under assault not only in europe and asia but also in the united states.
the federal government since has never shrunk to its pre new deal size when the post office was the largest government agency.
social security and federal regulatory agencies play a continuing role in the economy and in peoples lives.
including women and african americans in more than token positions within any administration is now the norm.
the new deal also inspired a new conservative movement and philosophy as opponents of the new deal especially business leaders began to attack the new government intervention in the economy that the new deal launched.
while historians will long debate the value and the impact of the new deal all agree that the united states was a very different place in 1939 than it had been in 1929.
22 2 quick review was the new deal the best response to the great depression in the 1930s.
what other paths might the country have followed.
644 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 thinking historically critics of the new deal while franklin roosevelt was a very popular president the only one in history elected to the office four times and always by large margins at no time was his administration without opposition especially as he faced the 1936 election.
some opponents thought roosevelt was not moving nearly far or fast enough to use the opportunity presented by the great depression to restructure the american economy others thought he was moving far too quickly and too radically.
among those who wanted fdr to do more louisiana senator huey long told a 1935 audience that he had begged and pleaded and did everything else under the sun to try to get mr roosevelt to keep his word that he gave us.
but long said he had concluded that there was no reason left to trust roosevelt.
h e has promised and promised smiled and bowed there is no use to wait three more years.
it is not roosevelt or ruin it is roosevelt s ruin.
in another speech long was especially clear on the differences asking iowa farmers do you believe in the redistribution of wealth.
and basking in their cheers.
in contrast the new york times for august 23 1934 carried a different story.
with a headline that read league is formed to scan new deal protect rights the newspaper reported a group of prominent democrats joined a few republicans today to incorporate the american liberty league intended according to its incorporators to combat radicalism preserve property rights uphold and preserve the constitution.
for roosevelt s old mentor al smith the new deal was becoming a danger to american liberty.
source new york times august 22 1934 january 10 1935.
thinking critically 1.
constructing an argument in your opinion which set of critics had the stronger argument those on the left who felt the new deal was too timid or those on the right who saw the new deal as a threat to individual liberty and the constitution.
historical interpretation given the vehemence with which roosevelt was attacked from both ends of the political spectrum what might explain roosevelt s substantial and enduring popularity over the course of his four terms in office.
22 3 iy1 22 3 the deep roots of war the united states europe and asia analyze the international impact of the depression german and japanese military expansion and the initial u s response.
while the united states emerged from world war i relatively unscathed much of europe was devastated and the treaty of versailles caused significant lingering pain and anger most of all among the defeated germans.
when a worldwide depression came suffering fear and resentment all planted the seeds of another far greater conflict.
in europe some of the earliest signs of the postwar ill will appeared in italy.
in 1922 the leader of the ultranationalist italian fascist party benito mussolini became prime minister.
il duce the leader as he called himself ruled italy with an iron fist for more than 20 years.
mussolinis dream was to restore italy s ancient glory by building prosperity and reestablishing the ancient roman empire especially in north africa starting with ethiopia.
for germany the 1920s were a terrible decade.
the german weimar republic governed a defeated country.
hyperinflation between 1921 and 1924 made german currency virtually worthless.
shifting government coalitions were not able to create stability especially in the face of the countrys need to pay some 33 billion in repara tions payments that britain and france used to pay their own 10 billion debt to the united states.
in the late 1920s as the worldwide depression worsened the german economy collapsed under the load of debt payments and inflation.
banks closed in germany and austria.
president herbert hoover described the german bank crisis of 1931 as a gigantic explosion which shook the foundations of the world s economic political and social structure anger at the economic and political failure in germany fueled old hatreds and brought a new political party to power in germany.
adolph hitlers nazi or national socialist party grew from a group of street thugs known as brown shirts in the 1920s to a formidable group leading to hitlers election in january 1933 as german chancellor with 44 percent of the vote just before roosevelt became president.
hitler promised that a greatly expanded german nation would provide lebensraum living space for people of german nationality by pushing other peoples slavs and jews out of the way to make room for the master race a month after coming to office on february 271933 the nazi party issued a decree ending free speech and assembly in germany.
they arrested communist deputies in the german parliament giving themselves a solid majority there.
hitler took the title der fuhrer the leader.
later that year just as the united states was implementing the prolabor new deal the nazi government outlawed trade unions and other political parties.
they authorized a new police force the geheime staatspolizei or gestapo to enforce nazi authority.
in 1935 as the u s congress was passing the social security act and the wagner act the nazi parliament passed the nuremberg decrees which took away the citizenship of german jews excluded jews from most professions and the military and made the marriage of a jew and non jew illegal.
in november 1938 in a well orchestrated attack across germany known as kristallnacht or crystal night for all the broken glass crowds attacked jewish stores homes and synagogues while the government arrested some 20 000 jews.
the nazi government then ordered an atonement fine on jews to pay for the cost of kristallnacht closed jewish stores and a short time later confiscated all jewish property.
before long germanys jews and then those in austria czechoslovakia poland and other territories under german control were being forced to wear yellow stars to identify them.
they were packed into tightly controlled urban ghettos and within 2 years the first of them were being transported to slave labor and death camps.
kristallnacht november 9 1938 was a nazi party inspired attack on jewish businesses and synagogues across germany.
it was the beginning of worse to come for jews in nazi controlled countries.
646 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 while the german government was attacking its jewish citizens hitler also renounced the clause in the treaty of versailles calling for german disarmament and began to build a new army.
a year later in march 1936 hitlers army marched into the german rhineland which in the terms of the treaty of versailles was supposed to be kept free of troops.
two years later in march 1938 hitler announced that the independent country of austria was to be known as the german province of ostmark and german troops marched into austria.
on march 14 1938 hitler rode in triumph through vienna welcomed as a hero by many.
hitler did not stop there.
since the sudeten region of czechoslovakia had a large german population though still a minority hitler claimed that they had the right under the treaty of versailles which he otherwise ignored to self determination and should be incorporated into germany.
after a summer of negotiations and with british agreement hitler annexed the sudeten region.
the following spring in march 1939 hitler sent the german army into the rest of czechoslovakia and made a triumphant journey to prague.
as nazi power grew in germany and fascism continued its hold on italy the two countries formalized their alliance with the rome berlin axis treaty of november 1936.
a few months earlier in july 1936 another fascist spanish general francisco franco commander of the spanish army garrison in morocco led an attack on the left leaning and democratically elected republican government of spain.
spain was engulfed in a bloody civil war.
the governments of germany and italy sent planes and troops to aid franco.
the communist government of russia and western governments sent modest aid to the republicans.
but by early 1939 the fascists had won.
spain joined italy and germany forming a powerful fascist bloc.
while fascists were consolidating their power in central europe militarists in japan were also growing in power.
japanese militarism had a strong anti american strain as various american policies from the exclusion of japanese children from san francisco schools in 1906 to the exclusion of all japanese immigrants as a result of the 1924 immigration law sparked continuing anger even as people in the united states forgot those incidents.
in the 1910s and 1920s as japanese power grew japan declared a goal of asia for asians which meant japanese domination of the whole of the western rim of the pacific ocean to replace britain france and the united states as dominant powers.
many asians resented u s control of the philippine islands british involvement in china and burma dutch control of the oil rich east indies and french control of indochina modern vietnam laos and cambodia.
except in china where japanese advances were deeply resented the japanese conquests were often welcomed in the rest of asia.
by the 1930s japan faced the same worldwide depression conditions as other industrialized countries.
japan saw its economic salvation in expansion.
the island nation could not provide enough food for its people and lacked key natural resources such as iron and oil.
if the europeans could have asian colonies its leaders asked why not japan.
in september 1932 japan used an explosion at a japanese owned railway in china as an excuse to send troops into china and they installed a puppet government in the chinese province of manchuria.
then in july 1937 japanese troops captured shanghai the largest city in china and the chinese capital of nanking.
the rape of nanking as the japanese attack was called was a brutal assault.
as many as 300 000 chinese were killed as the japanese army raped beheaded machine gunned and bayoneted civilians.
the chinese government led by chiang kai shek retreated and set up a new capital in the inland city of chungking.
japan renamed the expanded territory in manchuria as the japanese province of manchukuo.
a half a million japanese moved into the territory to farm and govern the subjected chinese population.
at the same time chiangs kuomintang party the nationalists was locked in a bitter civil war with the chinese community party led by mao zedong.
in the face of so much worldwide violence and aggression the governments of great britain france and the united states did virtually nothing while the league of nations proved to be a meaningless barrier to aggression.
the government of france l.
mothers with baby carriages march for peace outside the woolworth building in new york city 1939 isolationism a belief that the united states should keep clear of nearly all involvement with the rest of the world stay neutral and out of any foreign wars.
ordered the construction of the supposedly impregnable maginot line named for war minister andre maginot along the border with germany but did little more.
when hitlers troops in violation of the versailles treaty marched into the rhineland in 1936 hitler wrote privately that tf the french had then marched into the rhineland we would have had to withdraw with our tails between our legs but france did not act.
the desire for peace was equally strong in britain driven by still recent memories of the bloodbath of world war i.
if 420 000 british soldiers could die at the single and inconclusive battle of the somme in 1916 the next generation was determined to avoid war.
in 1933 students at oxford university voted this house will in no circumstance fight for its king and its country in 1935 several thousand young people in britain joined the peace pledge union opposing any british military planning.
when mussolini invaded ethiopia in 1935 britain which then controlled the suez canal could have cut off the italian troops by closing the canal but did not do so.
in spite of pleas from ethiopia the league of nations did nothing.
as late as september 1938 at a conference in munich germany british prime minister neville chamberlain agreed to allow hitlers claim to the sudetenland in exchange for a promise of peace.
chamberlain was greeted with large crowds in london when he returned promising peace in our time in the british parliament however chamberlain was criticized by winston churchill who called the munich agreement a total and unmitigated defeat however in 1938 chamberlain not churchill set british policy.
as france and britain did nothing to stop the fascists most people in the united states were even more determined to keep their distance from any conflict.
during the 1920s and 1930s a significant majority of americans wanted nothing to do with europes or asias problems.
in 1935 george earle the governor of pennsylvania said if the world is to become a wilderness of waste hatred and bitterness let us all the more earnestly protect and preserve our own oasis of liberty minnesota senator thomas schall said more succinctly to hell with europe and the rest of those nations while isolationism was strongest in the midwest many people everywhere agreed.
in april 1935 50 000 world war i veterans marched for peace and laid wreaths on the graves of three members of congress who had voted against u s entry into world war i.
days later 175 000 college students staged a strike for peace.
there were many reasons for the isolationism that was rampant in the united states in the 1930s.
most americans had concluded that the many thousand american soldiers killed in the war had died for no reason.
wilsons dream of a generation of peace sustained by the league of nations was clearly a failure and europeans were once again at each others throats.
writers like john dos passos ernest hemingway and e e.
cummings all wrote novels about the meaninglessness of the first world war and as dos passos said rejection of europe is what america is all about in the mid 1950s a senate special committee known as the nye committee chaired by north dakotas gerald nye concluded that big business had led the united states into the world war.
in 1935 when president roosevelt sought u s entry to the world court the senate rejected the plan.
americans simply wanted nothing to do with the troubles of other nations.
in congress the isolationist and peace sentiment led to the passage of a number of neutrality laws designed to keep the united states out of war.
a 1935 law required an embargo of arms to all belligerents in any war while in a direct slap at woodrow wilsons policies declaring that any american who traveled on a belligerent ship did so at his or her own risk.
in 1936 congress added a proviso that prohibited loans or credit to any nation at war and in 1937 congress explicitly extended the arms embargo to spain.
part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 648 not every american shared the isolationist sentiments of the majority.
in 1936 and 1937 several thousand young americans mostly from various left leaning movements volunteered to fight in spain on the side of the republican government.
volunteers named themselves the abraham lincoln brigade and joined an ill trained and ill equipped but courageous force that fought against the fascists.
in one battle near madrid 120 americans died and another 175 were wounded.
by the beginning of 1939 when the last republican units were defeated president roosevelt himself concluded that neutrality in spain had been a grave mistake as events will very likely prove while the abraham lincoln brigade fought and president roosevelt began to believe that the united states would eventually have to fight fascism in europe most people in the country and the congress continued to believe that they could stay out of all entanglements.
when congress passed the 1937 neutrality act they toughened the prohibition on selling arms to any side and made it illegal for americans to travel on a belligerent ship.
the law also declared that nonmilitary material food clothing and so on could be sold to a nation at war only on a cash and carry basis insisting that there be no loans to belligerents and that all goods bought in the united states had to be taken out of the country in non u s ships.
the neutrality legislation attempted to keep the united states out of a european war but violence in asia was growing.
when japan had attacked manchuria in 1931 president hoovers secretary of state henry l stimson proclaimed the stimson doctrine that the united states would never officially recognize the new regime in manchukuo or any other arrangement imposed on china by force.
the unstated part of the doctrine was that the united states also would not do anything much to enforce its policy.
american public opinion was solidly on the side of china.
the novelist pearl buck author of the good earth published in 1931 and henry luce the owner of the time life publications were both children of missionaries to china and between them did a lot to build public sympathy for china.
in the fall of 1937 a gallup poll showed that 59 percent of americans favored china compared to 1 percent who favored japan in the quest for control of manchuria.
but almost no one wanted to do more than offer sympathy to the chinese.
in december 1937 japanese pilots sank the u s gunboat panay in nanking china.
while americans were angry they were not angry enough to challenge japan.
after the panay was sunk texas congressman maury maverick said we should learn that it is about time for us to mind our own business and a poll showed that most americans agreed with him.
while americans wanted to stay out of war american scrap iron and american oil continued to be shipped to japan strengthening that countrys military.
since there was no formal war between japan and china the neutrality act did not apply and most of the battles in manchuria were fueled with american petroleum and bombs made of american metal.
indeed through the late 1930s and into 1940 and 1941 roosevelt and his cabinet feared not only american isolationists but also the wrath of japan.
if they were to cut off oil shipments they did eventually cut metal shipments they worried that japan would quickly attack the dutch colonies in asia that were the only other potential source of oil for japan.
to keep the peace the united states kept the oil flowing.
in the face of the nazi attacks in germany and then austria and czechoslovakia many jews tried to leave europe.
but leaving was not easy and the strict quotas of the 1924 legislation made immigration to the united states very difficult.
in the 1930s the american jewish congress protested loudly against both the nazi attacks and american immigration policy.
the group urged boycotts of german goods and staged a mock trial of hitler.
roosevelt felt blocked by the immigration laws though he did combine the german and austrian quotas allowing some additional jewish immigration in 1936 and 1937.
britain also allowed modest immigration but resolutely opposed further expansion of the jewish population of palestine then governed by britain under a league of nations mandate.
nazi laws limited the amount famed aviator charles lindbergh was a prominent vocal supporter of american isolationism.
of money a departing jew could take to about 4 an amount that made a potential immigrant a pauper and therefore ineligible for admission to the united states.
after kristallnacht the november 1938 attack on jews new york senator robert wagner and house members edith nourse rogers of massachusetts and emmanuel celler of new york proposed legislation that would create an expanded quota for racial and religious refugees.
however as with china most americans offered sympathy but little more and congress followed public opinion voting the proposal down.
a 1939 poll showed that 85 percent of protestants 84 percent of catholics and even 25 8 percent of jews opposed opening the united states to jewish refugees from europe.
as the nazi attacks on jews escalated european jews became desperate to leave.
in may 1939 the german ship st louis arrived in havana with 930 jewish refugees.
the cuban government refused temporary visas.
the captain of the st louis then sailed up the u s coast well within sight of miami and other american cities while negotiators tried desperately to get the u s state department to allow the refugees to land.
but the state department would not agree and a coast guard cutter was ordered to intercept any st louis passengers who tried to go ashore.
finally in june the st louis returned to europe.
before the war ended perhaps a quarter or more of the passengers had died in concentration camps.
most americans were sympathetic to the plight of jews but anti semitism was also strong in america.
charles lindbergh the aviation hero of the 1920s became an avid opponent of any revision of the neutrality laws or any support for jewish refugees.
lindbergh became a popular speaker at rallies of the america first committee that had been organized in the fall of1940 to keep the united states out of war in europe.
father charles coughlin long an opponent of the new deal began calling it the jew deal for lindbergh coughlin and a significant american following nazism was appealing.
others probably the majority of the supporters of the america first committee simply did not want any part of a war that the united states could avoid.
nevertheless not only isolationism and ignorance but also old hatreds kept the united states from providing the support for europes jews that they so badly needed.
while americans tried to ignore developments in europe and asia in the late 1930s hitler was on the move.
he understood that the faster he acted the greater his chances of success.
once hitler invaded the rest of czechoslovakia prime minister chamberlin who had agreed to an earlier compromise announced that britain was committed to the defense of poland and that if hitlers forces attacked that country his forces would be met with armed resistance.
in april 1939 mussolini invaded albania.
hitler made feints toward poland.
then in august hitler stunned the world by signing a nonaggression pact with joseph stalin the dictator of the soviet union as communist russia was known.
the erstwhile enemies germany and the soviet union with radically different economic systems and ideologies now agreed to the partition of poland.
everyone knew what was coming next.
in the state department one official said that the feeling in the world was like sitting in a house where somebody is dying upstairs very early in the morning on september 1 1939 president roosevelt received a call mr.
president the u s.
ambassador in france said several german divisions are deep in polish territory.
there are reports of bombers over the city of warsaw the president replied it has come at last.
god help us all britain and france followed through on their promise to declare war.
world war ii had begun in europe.
on september 3 roosevelt gave a radio fireside chat in which he said that the united states would remain neutral but e ven a neutral cannot be asked to close his mind or close his conscience the countrys mind was certainly not neutral.
eighty four percent of americans supported britain and france only two 650 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 percent germany.
but a very large majority also wanted to stay out of the war no matter how much sympathy they might have for one side.
after september 1939 more americans led by the president were starting to have grave doubts that staying out of the battle was going to be possible.
quick review considering how the united states was drawn into world war i why might so many americans have favored isolationism in the years leading up to world war ii.
conclusion the stock market crash of 1929 was a dramatic and symbolic end to the prosperity of the 1920s but it was not the first sign that something was very wrong with the u s economy.
throughout the 1920s stock prices had risen dramatically and by the end of 1928 the economy was showing signs of a speculative boom.
experts began to warn that a crash was inevitable but american investors largely ignored these warnings.
finally in october 1929 the bottom fell out of the market.
stock prices crashed and continued to crash for the next 3 years.
the great depression was in full force.
president herbert hoovers response to the nations economic woes moved in the right direction but it was too cautious and failed to alleviate the crisis or restore confidence among americans.
in 1932 he was defeated for reelection by franklin roosevelt who once in office took swiff action to stabilize the nations economy and its banking system extend relief to the impoverished and create jobs for the unemployed.
roosevelt with the backing of the democrats in congress passed nine separate pieces of legislation in his first 100 days as president.
dubbed the new deal his agenda and policies provided important help for some americans but did little for others.
the new deal did not end the depression but it did provide much needed social welfare create jobs shore up the banking system improve working conditions and install protective barriers against future economic downturns.
still the new deal was not supported by everyone and roosevelt faced powerful opponents on the right who believed that the new deal was socialism and on the left who believed that the new deal was not progressive enough.
despite such opposition roosevelt was popular and was reelected in a landslide in 1936.
by the end of the 1930s the violence in europe and asia was demanding more and more attention.
fascists adolf hitler and benito mussolini had seized power in germany and in italy and had begun to threaten other states on the european continent.
similarly japan had begun a campaign of imperialist expansion in asia.
most of this behavior initially went unchecked.
not until 1939 when germany invaded poland did britain and france declare war.
americans disagreed about how to respond to this aggression.
at the end of the decade u s involvement in another major european conflict seemed inevitable to some however others probably a majority wanted to stay out of europes and asias problems despite any sympathy they may have felt for the people in those situations.
chapter review how did the great depression affect the united states both in the 1930s and for the future.
what were the three most significant effects.
chapter 22 living in h 51 chapter 22 chapter review 22 1 the coming of the great depression explain the coming of the great depression and the initial response to it.
review questions 1.
comparison compare and contrast the stock market crash of 1929 with other factors that led to the great depression in the united states and worldwide.
what similarities and differences do you note.
contextualization why did herbert hoover find it so difficult to craft an adequate response to the great depression.
the new deal explain the goals and results of the new deal and the responses to change on the part of diverse americans.
review questions 3.
contextualization why was it so important that roosevelt stabilize the banking system as quickly as possible.
historical interpretation what factors contributed to the growth of organized labor in the 1930s.
comparison compare and contrast the arguments made by roosevelts critics on the left and the right.
why did roosevelt worry much more about his critics on the left than his critics on the right.
construct an argument in your opinion what were the most important accomplishments of the new deal.
what were its greatest failures.
the deep roots of war the united states europe and asia analyze the international impact of the depression german and japanese military expansion and the initial u s response.
review questions 7.
historical interpretation what connection can you make between economic events and the rise of fascist parties to power in germany italy and japan.
contextualization why were so many americans committed to isolationism.
223 652 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 1939 1945 world war ii started out with disaster for the united states after japan attacked the u s navy base at pearl harbor sinking much of the pacific fleet.
it would be a long time before the tide turned.
chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of many aspects of world war ii military tactics mobilization of u s society and the u s economy and the war s impact on diverse american lives.
on the morning of december 7 1941 350 japanese airplanes attacked the sleeping port of pearl harbor hawaii where much of the pacific fleet was anchored and where planes were lined up in close formation to protect them against sabotage on the ground.
in a few short hours 2 500 soldiers and sailors were killed 150 u s airplanes destroyed and five battleships as well as many others vessels were sunk.
it was a devastating loss.
the next day franklin roosevelt addressed congress speaking of the attack as a date which will live in infamy he asked for and was given a declaration of war against japan.
hitler and mussolini then declared war on the united states.
the long wait was over.
with the direct attack on the united states at pearl harbor most isolationists and antiwar voices rallied to the president and the war effort.
every citizen would be touched by the war whether by serving in the military working in war related industries or using ration stamps to buy food.
it had been a long wait during the 2 years in which roosevelt increased support for britain negotiated fitfully with japan and inched toward war.
this chapter traces the story of preparation between 1939 and 1941 and the nations full scale involvement in world war ii from december 1941 to the wars end in august 1945.
preparedness and isolation 1939 1941 explain support for and opposition to the growing u s support for britain and growing tensions with japan.
mass mobilization in a society at war analyze the war s impact on widely diverse groups of americans who fought supported the war effort at home or otherwise lived through the war years.
industrial strength industrial prosperity analyze u s industrial strength and productivity and its impact on the outcome of the war and on american society.
winning a world war north afri europe asia the pacific 1943 194.
explain the course of the war leading to victory in europe and then the pacific.
chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 1890 1919 continuing expansion the splendid little war with spain cuba puerto rico and the philippines 1898 foreign policy foreign adventures 1900 1914 the united states and the great war chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontented time 1919 1929 the prelude the red summer of 1919 the 1920s the exuberance of prosperity the 1920s the conflicts about american ideals harding coolidge and hoover national politics and policies in the 1920s chapter 22 living in hard times 1929 1939 the coming of the great depression the new deal the deep roots of war the u s europe and asia chapter 2 3 living in a world at war 1939 1945 preparedness and isolation 1939 1941 mass mobilization in a society at war industrial strength industrial prosperity a world war north africa europe asia the pacific 1890 1919 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era chapter objective the british luxury liner lusitania shown here in new york harbor during its maiden voyage was sunk by a german submarine with the loss of over 1 100 lives in may 1915 an event that did much to galvanize american public opinion against germany and bring the united states into world war i.
demonstrate an understanding of the ways in which the united states engaged with the world and the impact of that engagement on the people of the united states.
continuing expansion explain continued u s expansion particularly u s acquisition of what would much later be the 49th and 50th states.
20 2 the splendid little war with spain cuba puerto rico and the philippines 1898 i analyze the causes and consequences of the u s war with i spain in 1898.
20 3 foreign policy foreign adventures 1900 1914 explain developments in u s policy in panama asia and mexico between the war with spain and world war i.
0 4 the united states and the great war analyze the causes and consequences of u s involvement in world war i.
566 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 in 1914 all of europe went to war.
president woodrow wilson was determined to stay out of the conflict and campaigned for reelection in 1916 with the slogan he kept us out of war although wilson would not continue to keep the nation out of the european war the man he defeated in the 1912 presidential election former president theodore roosevelt was ready to go to war much sooner than wilson.
as president roosevelt liked to summarize his foreign policy with the proverb speak softly and carry a big stick when europe began what was then called the great war the former president was speaking less and less softly and arguing that the united states should prepare for war and that wilsons neutrality was a sign of personal and national weakness.
roosevelts enthusiasm for a more activist approach to foreign policy was not out of character with his own presidency.
when he became president in 1901 the united states had already acquired alaska hawaii and other islands in the pacific.
many americans wanted more land or at least greater influence around the world.
other than his very active involvement in the acquisition of the panama canal zone roosevelt had been surprisingly cautious in international relations.
he reduced u s involvement in the philippines negotiated an end to war between russia and japan brokered an agreement to soften japans sense of insult at californias anti japanese measures and sought successfully to keep peace with the world.
many of roosevelts strongest political supporters progressive senators like robert la follette and reformers like jane addams adamantly opposed u s endeavors abroad and u s involvement in world war i.
nevertheless although foreign policy is always shaped by many people and many forces presidents roosevelt and wilson were certainly the dominant figures in u s international relations between 1898 and 1920.
their story and the world they and so many others shaped is the subject of this chapter.
continuing expansion significant dates 20 1 explain continued u s expansion particularly u s acquisition of what would much later be the 49th and 50th states.
the geographical expansion of the united states that had continued from the time it declared independence persisted throughout the progressive era.
admiral alfred thayer mahan of the u s navy persuasively laid the foundation for continued expansion in his book the influence of sea power upon history published in 1890.
few books were ever as influential in the development of u s foreign policy.
mahan argued that all great nations in history had great navies that could control the world s oceans and specifically that the u s navy needed to be large enough to be a significant player in the pacific.
he worried that the u s navy was too small and that the lack of u s control of pacific islands limited the nations reach.
the popularity of his book accelerated developments already underway and within a decade the u s navy had been expanded to the third largest in the world while the united states had annexed hawaii and puerto rico in 1898 and had assumed control of samoa the philippine islands and cuba.
not surprisingly some have called the late 1800s the age of u s imperialism.
whether that term correctly describes u s expansion in this era continues to be debated.
certainly thinking in the united states was influenced by the ways britain france and germany were seeking new colonies in africa and the middle east.
many americans did not want their country to be left behind.
some people in the united states agreed with those europeans who insisted that the white race was destined to rule the worlds people.
immigrants or the children of immigrants sometimes wanted the united states to intervene in their old homelands to protect the rights of compatriots.
even so a surprisingly diverse array of americans did not want their country involved in anything beyond its borders.
expansion beyond north america was never without controversy even as the united states became involved around the globe.
u s navy admiral alfred thayer mahan publishes the influence of sea power upon history 1893 united states supports overthrow of hawaiian government but new cleveland administration blocks u s annexation of the islands 1898 hawaii annexed by united states u s war with spain leads to american control of cuba puerto rico and philippine islands 1904 u s support for revolution in panama followed by panama canal treaty 1907 08 gentlemen s agreement with japan limiting japanese immigration to united states 1912 alaska granted territorial status 1914 1917 u s intervention in mexico 1914 world war i begins in europe 1915 british liner lusitania is sunk with loss of american lives 1917 united states enters world war i on side of britain and france 1918 world war i ends 1919 treaty of versailles negotiated including league of nations then rejected by u s senate u s imperialism a term used to describe the u s acquisition of hawaii puerto rico and the philippine islands in 1898.
alaska long before mahan argued for greater u s control of the oceans the united states assumed ownership of the huge russian territory known as russian america or alaska.
in the 1740s vitus bering a danish captain serving the russian navy explored the arctic oceans between asia and north america.
soon thereafter russia had joined britain france and spain in claiming large parts of north america.
a russian gover nor moved to sitka alaska in 1799 to administer russian communities that dotted the coast of what is today alaska canada washington oregon and northern california.
control and management of the vast russian territory was vested in the private russian american company.
russians fished and traded in sea otter skins providing support for the colony and modest returns to russia itself.
the value of alaska to the russian company or government was never great.
tensions with native residents ran deep.
russians exploited native alaskans while western diseases took a heavy toll of the native population.
in response native alaskans massacred russian communities at sitka and nulato.
by 1860 the govern ment was unhappy with the russian american company and worried about defending the long alaskan coast from the british navy.
american settlers in washington territory were learning about the rich fishing whaling and fur trapping that was possible in alaska.
secretary of state seward envi sioned its value and coordinated negotiations to purchase it from russia.
the negotia tors agreed on a price of 7 2 million and on october 18 1867 the russian flag was chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 5 20 1 20 2 hauled down at sitka and the stars and stripes rose in its place.
congress balked at appropriating the funds for the purchase and critics called the whole transfer seward s folly but the nation had gained valuable new territory.
fishing mining the fur trade and indeed the sale of ice to californians made alaska a good investment.
however aleuts sitkas kolosh and other alaskan tribes found that they had only substituted one overlord for another.
u s troops miners and settlers fought with alaskan tribes as they had with native peoples further south.
having purchased alaska the u s government was slow to do much with it.
only in 1884 did congress create any official form of government for what they called the district of alaska.
soon thereafter gold was discovered in the district and the klondike gold rush of the late 1880s expanded the american population of alaska as did 1898 legislation that extended the provisions of the 1862 homestead act to alaska.
finally in 1912 president taft signed legislation giving alaska full territorial status and the elected legislature first met at juneau the following year.
hawaii hawaii s queen liliuokalani was overthrown in an uprising led by american planters.
a century later the u s government apologized to native hawaiians for this illegal act.
although the united states was a major influence in hawaii long before mahan argued for a wider pacific influence for the nation it was in mahans time that the united states annexed hawaii.
while the american revolution was being fought a british explorer fames cook landed on a chain of islands that he named the sandwich islands which came to be known as hawaii.
before cooks arrival in 1778 there had been no contact between the native hawaiians and europeans.
the polynesian people whom cook encountered were governed by a stable if loosely held feudal monarchy.
unfortunately like other native peoples they had no immunity to western diseases and the contact initiated by cook took a terrible toll.
hawaiis strategic location halfway between california and japan and its harbors that were perfect for american whaling vessels greatly interested american and european merchants and u s navy officers.
by the early 1800s hawaiian harbors were filled with u s navy ships and private whaling vessels and americans mixed with hawaiians on a regular basis.
in 1820 a group of new england missionaries and three american educated hawaiians arrived to convert hawaiians to christianity and interest them in american culture.
u s control of california with its large pacific harbors in 1848 and the completion of the transcontinental railroad in 1869 expanded u s commercial and military interest in the kingdom of hawaii.
trans pacific steamship lines that began at the pacific docks where the railroad ended sought fueling stations on their way to asia and hawaiis pearl harbor was the perfect stopping place.
at the same time american owned sugar plantations had become a major economic force in hawaii.
native hawaiians who were now a minority within their own country and controlled perhaps 15 percent of the land and 2 percent of the capital did not want to further u s influence in their country but the hawaiian government agreed that it would not grant special trading rights or naval bases to any other country in return for a promise that hawaii could ship a steady supply of sugar duty free to the united states.
hawaiis king kalakaua visited the united states in 1874 to formalize the agreement.
by the 1880s american economic power in hawaii was overwhelming but the islands remained independent.
when king kalakaua died his sister queen liliuokalani succeeded him.
she sought to regain hawaii for the hawaiians and reduce the economic and political power of the united states.
most of the american planters on the island did not like the queens moves and formed the annexation club.
in 1893 the annexation group overthrew her and seized power.
ihe u s minister in hawaii john l stevens cabled washington the hawaiian pear is now fully ripe and this is the golden hour for the united states to pluck it the u s navy landed sailors to preserve order thus securing the queens overthrow.
hawaii would have been annexed to the united states if the recently inaugurated democratic president grover cleveland had not sensed that there was something unseemly about the whole affair and ended negotiations with the rebels.
cleveland announced his firm opposition to annexation.
k part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 120 140 0 10c chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 5j wb netherlands east indies map 20 1 the u s in the world 1900.
by 1900 the united states had claimed many islands in the south pacific and had strong involvement with other pacific islands as well as latin american countries.
under cleveland the united states might have supported liliuokalanis restoration had she not insisted that she would execute all of the rebels.
that action was too much for cleveland and his administration ignored hawaii which continued as an independent nation under the control of the american planters who had overthrown the queens government.
when william mckinley was elected president in 1896 he demonstrated none of clevelands resistance to u s acquisition of hawaii as the next step in the nations manifest destiny mckinley said we need hawaii as much as in its day we needed california in june 1897 mckinley proposed a treaty of annexation to which the planter government agreed.
mckinley realized that anti imperialists in the senate could block the two thirds vote required to approve the treaty so the president used the same strategy that john tyler had used half a century earlier for texas.
he asked both houses of congress to annex the territory by joint resolution which required only a majority vote.
by june 1898 to the protests of native hawaiians and the cheers of the planters hawaii became a permanent territory of the united states.
in that same year the united states annexed tiny midway and wake islands and a year later agreed to divide samoa with germany.
across the pacific mahans dream of stations for the growing navy was a reality see map 20 1.
opments in the united states contribute to the nation s interest in acquiring alaska and hawaii as new territories.
the splendid little war with spain cuba puerto rico and the philippines 1898 analyze the causes and consequences of the u s war with spain in 1898.
20 2 ihe u s war with spain in 1898 often called the spanish american war followed decades of u s expansionism much of it expansion into territory that had previously been part of spains once vast empire in the americas.
spain had at one time exercised political control of all of latin america except for brazil and it had ruled the philippine islands for centuries.
as a result of successful independence movements all that was left of the spanish empire in the 1890s was the philippines and a collection of caribbean islands.
many in spain wanted to retain those outposts for their own value and as symbols of spains past glory.
nevertheless as a result of a short war which future secretary of state john hay called a splendid little war spain lost the last of its holdings.
ihe united states gained long term influence in both cuba and the philippine islands and made puerto rico a permanent u s territory.
tensions in cuba ihe u s war with spain started in cuba.
ihe united states had long been interested in cuba.
well before the civil war southern senators had suggested that the united states ought to acquire cuba as a slave state to offset the growing number of northern free states.
in 1854 the american ambassadors to europes leading powers issued the so called ostend manifesto demanding that spain sell cuba to the united states but it did not happen.
after the civil war cuba was no longer of value as a slave state but interest in the island never disappeared from american politics and american investors were active there.
by the 1890s almost 90 percent of cuban exports came to the united states and american investors owned much of the best farm land on the island.
cubans wanted to throw off spanish rule and win independence.
an 1890 agreement with spain had reduced the tariff on sugar launching a boom in the cuban economy but a new u s tariff in 1894 strongly influenced by lobbying from the sugar trust in the united states significantly raised the tariff on imported sugar.
ihe increased cost of cuban sugar in the united states significantly reduced the sales of cuban sugar and devastated the cuban economy.
cuban revolutionaries led by jose marti who had been living in exile in new york city saw the resulting cuban depression as the ideal moment to gain independence.
marti returned to cuba in 1895 and his revolutionary forces began burning cane fields killing spanish soldiers and making spanish rule more costly.
spanish authorities responded by creating concentration camps where they held cubans in controlled enclaves that separated them from the rebels.
many in these camps suffered from malnutrition and disease.
when william mckinley was inaugurated as u s president in 1897 he made it clear that he wanted spain out of cuba.
american public opinion was on the side of the rebels.
new york newspaper editors william randolph hearst and joseph pulitzer engaged in what was called yellow journalism named for a popular cartoon character of the day known as the yellow kid publishing sensationalized accounts of spanish atrocities in cuba.
they sent well known artists like frederic remington and writers like richard harding davis to cuba to report on spanish actions to increase circulation for their publications.
while many americans saw the cuban revolution of the 1890s as a simple question of good cubans against bad spaniards american business leaders with investments in cuba also worried that a revolutionary victory would threaten their investments.
marti while grateful for american support worried about long term american influence insisting that to change masters is not to be free 170 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 the spanish government in madrid did not want a war with the united states and they worried correctly it would turn out that the government and indeed the spanish monarchy could not survive the overthrow of the last bastion of spains empire in the americas.
as u s public opinion became more belligerent so did public opinion in spain.
spanish people rallied to their flag and in one town a mob attacked the u s consulate.
war in cuba puerto rico and the philippine islands in february 1898 over 200 american sailors were killed when the battleship uss maine blew up in havana harbor.
the explosion may well have been the result of a bad boiler however americans blamed spain and remember the maine became a rallying cry.
mckinley managed to get congress to declare war without ever asking for it.
the u s invasion of cuba was not well managed.
american troops arrived wearing wool uniforms hardly the right material for a hot caribbean summer.
even though theodore roosevelt gained fame for leading mostly african american troops shown as white in subsequent pictures in a rapid assault on san juan hill the battles in cuba were generally slow and difficult.
in 4 months of fighting 345 americans were killed in action while 5 000 died from disease.
since the united states was at war with spain mckinley also approved the orders that had been issued by assistant secretary of the navy roosevelt issued just before he resigned that position to fight in cuba to admiral george dewey to sail the u s fleet to the spanish owned philippine islands.
the six warships under deweys command quickly sank the spanish fleet at the battle of manila bay on may 1 1898 giving the united states control of a pacific territory much larger than cuba.
the american pacific fleet also captured the spanish garrison on guam island and took control of the uninhabited atoll of wake island.
finally the united states decided to take the last spanish outpost in the caribbean puerto rico.
once control of cuba seemed assured in july 1898 mckinley ordered general nelson a.
miles to puerto rico.
he wanted to be sure the troops arrived before peace talks began with spain.
in 1898 some puerto ricans welcomed the u s overthrow of spanish authority and the indigenous independence movement in puerto rico was not as strong as that in cuba.
by august 1898 spain was ready to ask for peace.
much to mckinleys displeasure the congressional resolution authorizing the war had included the teller amendment named for senator henry teller of colorado which said the united states could not permanently annex cuba.
if the united states could not annex cuba puerto rico seemed like the next best permanent u s territory in the caribbean.
in the case of the philippines which had not been an initial focus of the war mckinley felt that he could see but one plain path of duty the acceptance of the archipelago in the treaty of paris of december 1898 spain ceded control of cuba puerto rico and the philippines to the united states for a payment of 20 million.
afterward the united states promised eventual independence for cuba.
suddenly the united states was a world power joining the nations of europe with its own far flung empire.
what to do with that empire would be a subject of considerable debate in the future.
the anti imperialists when the u s war with spain ended the united states had to decide what to do with its new territory.
in spite of the teller amendment president mckinley did everything possible to maximize u s involvement in cuba including ensuring that the u s navy would have a perpetual base at guantanamo bay.
the united states was going to keep puerto rico but what about the distant philippines.
the war had begun and ended in the caribbean over issues of spanish control of cuba however as part of the war the united chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 57l a large number of the troops who fought in cuba including those commanded by theodore roosevelt in his assault on san juan hill were african american soldiers like these from the 9th cavalry.
after liberating the philippine islands from spain the united states quickly found itself at war with the filipino people who wanted independence and as this picture shows took many of the people of the island prisoner.
4 j states also found itself in control of a chain of seven thousand islands with 7 million people living thousands of miles from the united states.
president mckinley told a group of visiting episcopal clergy that he had lost sleep and had prayed long and hard about what to do with the islands and that the answer had come to him t here was nothing left for us to do but to take them all and to educate the filipinos and uplift and civilize and christianize them the united states could not give them back to spain or another country and he insisted they were unfit for self government nearly all filipinos were already christian since catholic spain had ruled the islands for nearly 400 years but mckinley meant protestant christianity.
the constitution might prohibit the governments direct involvement with the religious beliefs of the filipinos but allowing missionaries was easy.
a greater difficulty with the presidents plan was the fact that many filipinos did not want to be annexed by the united states.
a revolt against spain had been underway long before commodore dewey sank the spanish fleet in manila bay.
in addition dewey had encouraged emilio aguinaldo leader of the filipino insurrection to establish an interim government for the islands.
aguinaldo expected u s recognition of philippine independence and even after it became clear that this was not president mckinley s plan aguinaldo hoped for either the defeat of mckinleys treaty in the senate or a victory in the 1900 presidential elections by william jennings bryan who strongly opposed annexation of the philippines.
when the senate ratified the treaty with spain and bryan lost the election aguinaldo led a revolt against the united states.
what the u s government called the philippine insurrection aguinaldo called a war for independence.
between 1898 and 1902 and beyond the u s army engaged in a brutal battle with filipino insurgents.
many more american soldiers were killed in the postwar insurgency in the philippine islands than were killed in the war with spain.
thousands of filipinos were killed perhaps 20 000 in combat and 200 000 from war related causes and many more left homeless.
572 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 within the united states broad based opposition to the war in the philippines was organized as the anti imperialist league founded at boston in june 1898.
the league included unlikely allies.
andrew carnegie offered to buy the islands from the united states to secure their independence and wrote to one member of mckinleys cabinet you seem to have finished your work of civilizing the filipinos it is thought that about 8 000 of them have been completely civilized and sent to heaven i hope you like it.
charles francis adams descendent of two presidents former abolitionist thomas wentworth higginson reformers including jane addams and henry demarest lloyd labor leaders including samuel gompers rival democrats william jennings bryan and grover cleveland and university presidents like harvards charles w eliot and stanfords david starr jordan all opposed the annexation.
the nation s best known authors mark twain and william dean howells turned biting humor on mckinleys efforts.
twain said that the u s efforts in the philippines meant that the united states had become yet another civilized power with its banner of the prince of peace in one hand and its loot basket and its butcher knife in the other booker t washington said until our nation has settled the indian and the negro problems i do not think we have a right to assume more social problems most anti imperialists insisted that the constitution did not allow for the united states to acquire any territories that it did not plan to eventually admit as states and that the constitution follows the flag meaning all of the civil and political rights guaranteed in the constitution also applied to other people under u s control.
the advocates of territorial expansion did not agree and in may 1901 the u s supreme court in a series of 5 4 decisions in the insular cases declared that the philippines and puerto rico were territories not future states and that therefore those residing there were subjects not citizens it was a bitter moment for the anti imperialists.
while roosevelt had been one of the staunchest advocates of going to war in 1898 and of keeping control of the philippine islands after the war by the time he became president in 1901 the u s effort was increasingly unpopular and he had other priorities.
in 1901 the army captured aguinaldo.
william howard taft who had been governor general of the philippines was welcomed home and a truce settled on the islands though u s troops remained until the japanese invasion at the start of world war ii.
united states attention turned elsewhere.
the constitution follows the flag an argument that the rights of u s citizens should be extended to any people living in a territory conquered by the united states.
quick review was the u s war with spain a triumph for the united states.
20 3 foreign policy foreign adventures 1900 1914 explain developments in u s policy in panama asia and mexico between the u s war with spain and world war i.
when theodore roosevelt became president in september 1901 he inherited two major foreign policy issues from mckinley the ongoing war in the philippines which he quickly put behind him and the question of a central american canal connecting the atlantic and pacific oceans which he embraced with rooseveltian enthusiasm.
roosevelt considered the central american canal one of his proudest achievements.
a canal in panama ever since the california gold rush of 1848 there had been talk of building a canal across central america that would allow shorter travel by ship from the atlantic to the pacific oceans but the hurdles were significant.
the narrow point of land between north and south america was hot and damp and mosquito born diseases made working there a death sentence.
the land was also mountainous and for any canal to be built engineers had to design a series of locks to raise and lower ships.
nevertheless chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era s 204 mostly west indian workers using steam shovels and hand tools in backbreaking labor built the panama canal once the united states gained control of the territory.
roosevelt corollary president theodore roosevelt s policy asserting u s authority to intervene in the affairs of latin american nations an expansion of the monroe doctrine.
in 1850 the united states and britain negotiated the clayton bulwer treaty stating that any canal would be a joint venture though neither controlled the territory.
fifty years later few in the united states still wanted a joint venture with britain and in november 1901 secretary of state john hay and the british ambassador to the united states lord pauncefote concluded a treaty that gave the united states the exclusive right to build an interocean waterway in central america.
mckinley had created an isthmian canal commission that recommended building a canal in nicaragua but roosevelt preferred a shorter route through panama.
the canal was not the first time roosevelt involved the united states in latin america.
in 1902 shortly after he came to office the government of venezuela held back on debt payments to european banks.
britain italy and germany sent ships to venezuela but roosevelt citing the monroe doctrine pressured them to withdraw.
a year later when the dominican republic seemed set to follow the same route as venezuela roosevelt sent u s forces to the island and took control of its customs operation dividing the revenue between the country and the european creditors an involvement in the finances of the dominican republic that lasted until 1941.
then in 1904 he formalized u s action in the dominican republic announcing the roosevelt corollary to the monroe doctrine stating that the united states had a right to intervene in any nation in the americas that could not manage its own affairs.
roosevelts greatest interest in latin america however remained constant.
he wanted a canal and he wanted it built in the territory of panama that then belonged to colombia.
even though the government of colombia did not agree many in panama saw the situation differently.
panama was a frontier province of colombia distant enough that it could take 15 days for messages from panama city to reach the national government in bogota.
many in panama were ready to declare independence.
there is no evidence that roosevelt actively urged a revolution but he certainly did nothing to discourage one either.
in november 1903 when panama revolted against colombian rule roosevelt sent orders to u s navy ships standing by on both the pacific and atlantic coasts of panama to prevent landing of any armed force with hostile intent either government or insurgent since the insurgents were already in panama and the only forces that wanted to land were from the colombian government the impact of the order was clear.
describing the independence movement in panama roosevelt told the u s congress that the people of panama had risen up against colombia literally as one man senator edward carmack retorted yes and the one man was roosevelt once panama declared independence the united states quickly with indecent haste one critic said recognized the independent panamanian government and then 1890 1945 74 part vii war prosperity and depression proposed the canal to them.
three months later in february 1904 both nations ratified a treaty giving the united states the right to a canal zone 10 miles wide which the united states would possess as if it were the sovereign of the territory while the new government in panama city got the 10 million that had originally been offered to colombia.
roosevelt got the route he wanted if not the good will of latin america.
late in his term roosevelt visited panama.
ever the energetic enthusiast he climbed up to the drivers seat of the biggest steam shovel digging the canal spoke with some of the 19 000 west indian laborers who were doing the backbreaking work and who died at an astounding rate 85 just in the month of the presidents visit met with authorities of the new government and envisioned ships passing through the canal and towns rising on the banks of what was still at that point a muck filled ditch.
the canal did not open until 1914 long after roosevelt had left office.
with or without roosevelt the united states would most likely have built a canal between the oceans at some point.
nevertheless the route and the speed were a result of roosevelts efforts.
the united states russia japan and china across the world russia had long been expanding its territory.
russian cossacks had asserted control of asian siberia for russia in the 1600s and then looked west to north america and south in asia.
all russian expansion came to an abrupt halt in early 1904 however.
japan which had emerged as a modern military and diplomatic power was determined to stop russia from acquiring influence in manchuria and korea.
the japanese fleet under admiral heihachiro togo attacked and destroyed a russian fleet anchored at port arthur.
to america the war seemed far away and the united states quickly declared neutrality.
a year later in may 1905 another russian fleet was destroyed.
the japanese navy sank twenty two russian ships killed some 4 000 russian sailors and captured several more ships along with the russian commander admiral rozhdestvenski.
nevertheless no peace treaty emerged and japanese resources were spent.
the japanese government sent a secret message to roosevelt asking if he would directly and entirely of his own motion and initiative.
invite the two belligerents to come together roosevelt loved the idea of playing mediator and proposed arbitration to the tsar.
russia agreed and the announcement of the peace conference won roosevelt worldwide praise.
once roosevelt got representatives of both countries to portsmouth new hampshire in august 1905 they argued about borders money and a postwar plan.
but eventually roosevelts arm twisting led to a peace agreement.
the war ended and roosevelt was praised by the russian tsar and the japanese emperor.
a year later roosevelt was rewarded with the nobel peace prize.
while the czarist government was grateful for roosevelts role in ending the war russian immigrants to the united states had their own grievances against the tsars rule.
when hundreds of russian jews were killed in pogroms between 1903 and 1906 jewish immigrants in the united states pressured the u s government to do something about the situation and president roosevelt and secretary of state john hay issued a formal protest.
the russian ambassador responded to the protest saying that it was unbecoming for americans to criticize russia in light of american lynching of african americans and the bad treatment of chinese immigrants.
japan too though appreciative of roosevelts efforts to mediate with russia was not pleased by san franciscos segregation of japanese students.
california was the port of entry for immigrants from japan and china.
it was also the place where anti asian feelings ran strongest.
in october 1906 in the aftermath of the citys great earthquake as they reorganized and reopened the citys schools the san francisco school board adopted a policy of racial segregation for chinese korean and japanese children.
the government of china protested but was too weak to do more.
in japan however anger at the insult led to calls for war.
roosevelt tried to convince californians to rescind the segregation order while encouraging the government of japan to ignore the insult but failed at doing both.
chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 57 gentlemen s agreement.
a diplomatic agreement in 1907 between japan and the united states curtailing but not abolishing japanese immigration.
203 great white fleet a u s navy fleet sent around the world from december 1907 to february 1909 by president theodore roosevelt to show american strength and to promote good will.
dollar diplomacy the u s policy urged by president taft of using private investment in other nations to promote american diplomatic goals and business interests.
however in 1907 and 1908 he successfully negotiated the gentlemens agreement by which the united states agreed not to pass any formal limit on japanese immigration and the japanese government agreed to limit the emigration of laborers to the united states.
for japan it was important not to face anything as insulting as the chinese exclusion act of 1882 had been.
for californians roosevelt had accomplished the goal of establishing a limit on japanese immigration.
at the same time roosevelt used japan s threat of war to ask congress to appropriate funds to expand the u s navy and then sent the great white fleet 16 battleships painted gleaming white rather than navy grey around the world with a dramatic stop at tokyo bay.
the 1908 tensions with japan had receded though they were hardly ended.
in china tensions were also rising against the united states.
the society of righteous and harmonious fists called boxers by foreigners a secret society consisting of local farmers peasants and others who were victims of disastrous floods and opium addiction led the boxer rebellion in 1901 attacking all foreigners including american businessmen and missionaries whom they blamed for their plight.
although the boxer rebellion was quickly quashed by an international force chinese citizens carrying anti american posters and singing anti american songs organized a massive boycott of u s goods in 1905.
woodrow wilson s asian policy while he was president theodore roosevelt had insisted that the long standing open door policy allowing the united states and britain free trade with china be continued in spite of japans desire to dominate all asian markets.
president taft had less lofty goals for americas role in the world and though he was wary of political ties he strongly encouraged american investment wherever there was an opportunity leading critics to call his policy dollar diplomacy.
late in tafts term j p morgan negotiated a large international loan to china to support the building of new rail lines there.
upon becoming president woodrow wilson found himself immediately involved with asian matters and specifically the morgan loan.
wilsons new secretary of state william jennings bryan had deep reservations about the loan.
within 2 weeks of the inauguration wilson announced that the government of the united states opposed the loan because its terms undermined the administrative independence of china china did not get the loan.
unfortunately it also did not get the railroads that the loan was supposed to finance something that weakened the country in its future dealings with japan.
tensions with japan that had been brewing since roosevelts time continued.
just as wilson assumed office the california legislature adopted a law that no one ineligible for citizenship could buy land in california.
since japanese immigrants could not become citizens everyone knew at whom the law was directed.
secretary bryan made two trips to california to try and get the law rescinded but failed.
japans government reacted angrily as it had with school segregation in 1906 and again a war seemed possible.
wilson and bryan did everything they could to diffuse the situation.
the leaders in tokyo also did not want a war but in japan feelings of deep anti american animosity were furthered by californias continuing determination to marginalize japanese immigrants.
wilson and bryan also tried to end u s control of the philippines.
they convinced congress to pass legislation granting eventual independence to the islands but republican opponents succeeded in deleting any specific deadline.
only after world war ii did the united states recognize the independence of the philippines though it had been promised in 1916.
mexico and latin america the most difficult foreign policy issue for wilson in his first term involved mexico.
in february 1913 just before wilsons inauguration mexican army general victoriano huerta led a military coup against the elected moderate president francisco madero who was killed in the bloody overthrow.
many american investors wanted the u s government to support the new huerta administration but wilson announced we can 76 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 have no sympathy with those who seek the power of government to advance their own personal interests or ambitions.
wilson and bryan believed that the coup was part of a battle between british and american oil companies and they wanted none of it.
wilson desperately wanted to let mexico work out its own future.
as he told the journalist ray stannard baker he felt shame as an american over the first mexican war of 1848.
he continued that it was his resolution that while he was president there should be no such predatory war he also believed that a people had the right to do as they damned pleased with their own affairs baker added that the president did indeed use the word damned.
in spite of the presidents intentions americans had major investments in mexico and thousands of american citizens worked in mexico as teachers nurses and construction workers.
wilson could not ignore the country and he sent envoys to try to persuade huerta to resign but failed.
he spoke passionately about the self restraint of a really great nation when a revolution against huerta led by venustiano carranza and francisco pancho villa broke out wilson recognized it.
in april of 1914 when wilson got word that a large shipment of european arms for huertas government was on its way to the mexican port of veracruz wilson ordered the navy to land at the port and stop the arms.
the arms were stopped but to wilsons surprise mexico did not welcome the intervention mexican forces fought the u s marines and 17 americans were killed.
not only huerta but also carranza condemned what they called a u s invasion.
the end result was good for carranza.
without the new arms huerta resigned and went into exile and carranza rode into mexico city as the victor.
argentina brazil and chile agreed to negotiate a solution and the americans withdrew from veracruz.
unfortunately a new civil war began in mexico when villa split with carranza.
in march 1916 villa who was now leading a full scale revolt led several hundred troops in an attack on the u s border town of columbus new mexico.
they wanted arms that were stored at nearby u s army fort furlong but more important the wily villa wanted to create an international incident.
he did not get the arms but he did get the incident.
wilson notified carranza of his intention to respect mexican sovereignty but also ordered the u s army under general john j pershing to enter mexico and find villa.
m2 iibi mexican revolutionary pancho villa clashed with others in mexico but also conducted a long running battle with u s forces.
chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive en u s troops 1915 34 financial supervision 1916 41 n r 1 400 miles j 400 kilometers atlantic ocean u s attempted to buy 1869 u s takes control of customs houses 1905 u s troops 1916 24 financial supervision 1905 41 u s possession after 1898 puerto rico u s acquired canal zone 1903 canal completed 1914 martinique fr.
1 u s troops 1909 10 1912 25 1926 33 financial supervision 1911 24 barbados br.
trinidad br.
feci y brazil map 20 2 u s.
intervention in the caribbean and latin america.
between 1865 and 1933 but especially under the administrations of mckinley and the progressive presidents roosevelt taft and wilson the united states intervened regularly in the nations of the caribbean and latin america.
carranza had much to benefit from eliminating villa and stayed out of the battle.
some 10 000 u s troops under pershings command were well equipped with motor vehicles and airplanes but they never found villa though they engaged in some bloody battles as they chased him through northern mexico for months.
eventually in early 1917 as wilson became more and more concerned with the war in europe the u s forces withdrew without success and villa survived until he was assassinated in 1923.
the united states intervened in several other latin american matters during wilsons administration see map 20 2.
bryan offered an apology to colombia for the u s role in the revolution that had separated panama and negotiated a 25 million payment to colombia.
roosevelt was furious at an obvious slap at his administration and his friend henry cabot lodge blocked authorization of the funds in the senate.
the united states sent marines to end unrest in nicaragua the dominican republic and haiti they stayed in haiti until 1934.
for all of their talk of nonintervention wilson and bryan seemed quite willing to intervene in the americas.
quick review how would you summarize the similarities and differences in roosevelt s taft s and wilson s foreign policy.
give specific examples of ways they differed.
578 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 the united states and the great war 20 4 analyze the causes and consequences of u s involvement in world war i.
just after the november 1912 election while he was still living in princeton presidentelect wilson told one of his former faculty colleagues it would be an irony of fate if my administration had to deal chiefly with foreign problems for all my preparation has been in domestic matters it was an irony that would come to pass with a vengeance.
war in europe on june 28 1914 the austrian archduke franz ferdinand heir apparent to the throne of the austria hungarian empire and his wife sophie were assassinated in the town of sarajevo by a serbian nationalist who wanted independence for serbia.
nothing could have seemed as far removed from the united states than the murder of members of a central european royal family.
however within a very short time the impact of the assassination was felt everywhere in the world.
in the summer of 1914 europe was at peace.
even so independence movements within the austria hungarian and ottoman empires particularly in balkan states including serbia were challenging the empires central governments see map 20 3.
in addition a newly united germany was angry at being shut out of the colonies in africa and asia by the speed with which the british and french had moved.
an arms race had developed among the continent s greatest powers and in their quest for security european nations had developed a complex series of defensive alliances.
germany austria hungary and the turkish ottoman empire were known as the central powers.
russia france and great britain were known simply as the allies.
all of these factors quickly led europe to tumble into all out war when austria set out to punish serbia and russia came to the aid of the serbians.
by august all of europe was engulfed in what was called the great war.
the term world war i was coined only after the outbreak of another great war in 1939 one which quickly came to be known as world war ii.
at the beginning of the war many europeans were caught up in patriotic fervor.
young men signed up promptly and marched off proudly.
both sides expected an easy victory.
the german army attacked france by moving through neutral belgium.
it was a move that cost germany dearly in public support but it allowed the german army to get within 30 miles of paris early in the war.
then an allied counteroffensive drove the germans back and by november 1914 both sides were dug in for the long trench warfare that would not move very much though every small move cost thousands of soldiers their lives until march of 1918.
the long years of trench warfare were ghastly.
in 1916 at the battle of the somme 60 000 british soldiers were killed in a single day.
in a year long battle for the town of verdun a million soldiers were killed.
new forms of artillery tanks and flamethrowers along with the introduction of poisonous mustard gas caused what seemed like never ending waves of death while life in the trenches involved living for months with mud rats and rotten food.
despite these costs the battle lines did not change significantly.
wilson called it this vast gruesome contest of systematized destruction the united states saw all of these developments as a distant tragedy.
a young american mining engineer herbert hoover organized the commission for belgian relief which along with the american red cross sent aid to people caught in the path of war.
hoover gained international fame as the napoleon of mercy for his efforts.
however most americans preferred not to get involved and agreed with u s ambassador to london walter hines page who said i thank heaven for many things first the atlantic ocean president wilson declared neutrality.
he wanted to stay out of the war and he understood that any european war would stir up deep tensions in a nation made up of immigrants from every one of the nations at war.
neutrality however would not be easy to maintain.
20 4 chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 57 new states as of 1921 border of german empire in 1914 border of austrian hungarian empire in 1914 border of russian empire in 1914 border of ottoman empire in 1914 new boundaries as a result of postwar treaties boundaries as of 1914 atlantic ocean map 20 3 europe and the middle east before and during world war i.
this map shows the areas dominated by the austria hungarian and ottoman empires both of which would disappear at the end of world war i.
also shown is the area in northern france where the greatest fighting of the war took place.
to great britain to france to belgium to denmark to romania to greece to italy the warfare on land and on the oceans around europe cut into u s trade hurting wheat farmers and cotton growers who could not get their goods to european markets.
britain began to place large orders for farm products and for munitions while using its powerful navy to maintain a blockade of the central powers.
war torn britain needed money to buy these things but when j p morgan began to float large loans secretary of state bryan imposed a ban on loans to belligerents seeking the true spirit of strict neutrality.
bryans ban hurt u s commerce and britain and france claimed it was prejudicial toward them so bryan and wilson announced that commercial credit could be extended to the allies.
no one understood the difference between commercial credit and loans but the distinction allowed the european allied powers to get the goods they wanted u s farmers and manufacturers to profit and everyone to pretend that neutrality was still maintained.
the wilson administration had to steer a difficult course while facing considerable internal pressures.
former president roosevelt urged massive buildup of the army 580 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 and navy as well as a military draft all in the name of preparedness for an eventual war on the side of the british and french.
from roosevelts perspective wilson was dangerously passive.
in contrast progressive senator robert la follette of wisconsin and other politicians especially those from states with large german populations led a peace movement fearing that wilson was edging toward war.
jane addams led a large womans movement for peace.
many union leaders saw the war as a battle between european capitalists in which the working class should not be involved.
anarchists and socialists condemned the war.
between 1914 and 1916 in spite of roosevelts best efforts to build support for preparedness and war most americans in and out of office favored keeping as far distant from europes problems as possible.
of the many diplomatic tensions that the war in europe created by far the greatest had to do with the german use of a new kind of sea power the submarine or u boat.
britain s navy ruled the waves but german u boats could glide under the waves and strike at ships bringing supplies to britain and france.
on february 4 1915 the german admiralty announced that the waters around britain were a war zone and its submarines would freely attack any ship bringing supplies to britain.
wilson and bryan sent a formal diplomatic note that sinking ships without warning was an act so unprecedented in naval warfare that the united states would hold them to a strict accountability for such acts no one defined what strict accountability meant.
somehow submarine warfare having a ship struck by a torpedo seemingly out of nowhere terrified people in a way that direct ship to ship combat did not.
submarine warfare also threatened the profitable u s trade with britain.
for wilson it also raised the issue of basic rights of u s citizens as neutrals to travel freely.
on the last point the president and his secretary of state differed strongly.
bryan asked whether an american citizen can by putting his business above his regard for his country assume for his own advantage unnecessary risk and thus involve his country in international complications for wilson the freedom of neutrals to travel was in the interests of mankind and protecting the rights of neutrals under international law was a national duty.
in march 1915 a submarine sank a small british passenger ship the falaba and an american citizen was killed.
then on may 7 1915 a submarine sank the british liner lusitania the grandest and fastest ocean liner then in service.
the lusitania sank in 18 minutes and 1 198 people were killed including 127 american citizens.
the united states demanded an apology from germany.
when bryan suggested also issuing a formal warning to american citizens not to travel on ships belonging to countries that were at war wilson refused.
in response to the american note the german government sent secret orders to its submarine captains to avoid large passenger liners but their official word to the united states was evasive.
wilson promised that if germany would give up submarine warfare he would also press britain to end the blockade of goods flowing to germany and austria but he also prepared a second note to germany saying that the sinking of lusitania involved principles of humanity bryan argued for protesting the british blockade and for linking the second note to a policy that would bar passenger ships from carrying munitions the lusitania may well have been carrying munitions in addition to passengers.
wilson thought that bryans plan would undermine the needed message of protest.
bryan resigned rather than sign the second lusitania note.
he told the president that he was risking war by creating a situation where a foolish move by the german government could drag the united states into a war and that he could do more for peace building public opinion outside the administration than within.
bryan s departure was a sad parting between two people who had come to like and admire each other but who deeply believed in different courses of action.
robert lansing became acting secretary and signed the note.
congress debated but did not pass a law barring americans from travel on belligerent ships.
sinkings and diplomatic notes continued as did american domestic politics and new developments in woodrow wilson s personal life.
especially before the united states entered world war i songs like.
didn t raise my boy to be a soldier were popular among many who did not want to see young american men caught up in the fighting.
chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 581 in the summer of 1914 as europe began to move toward war ellen wilson the presidents wife of 30 years whose warmth offset wilson s sometimes dour personality became desperately ill.
her kidneys were failing and through the summer the president read diplomatic cables while sitting by his wife s bedside.
she died at the white house at the beginning of august.
the president wrote i never understood before what a broken heart meant less than a year later wilson met a vivacious 42 year old widow named edith bolling galt and quickly fell in love.
although some in the cabinet worried about how the public would respond to a new marriage so quickly after the loss of his first wife the two were married in december 1915.
the nation had a new first lady who would support wilson and have a significant role in policy as war and illness later sapped his energy.
while wilson was seeking to maintain neutrality and dealing with his personal life 1916 was also an election year.
after ellens death he had seriously considered not running but his new personal life and his desire to see the diplomatic crisis through led him to declare his candidacy for a second term.
the republican party was reunited and nominated supreme court justice charles evans hughes.
hughes had served two terms as governor of new york but he had also been on the supreme court since 1910 and thus sat out the roosevelt taft split.
roosevelt called him the bearded iceberg but campaigned strongly for the ticket as did taft.
it was a very close contest but in the end wilson carried california by 4 000 votes and with it the electoral college.
a month after the election wilson tried to broker a peace between europes warring powers.
he asked both sides for their demands.
germany indicated that it was willing to discuss peace but a new british government led by prime minister lloyd george said it had no interest in american mediation.
then in december lloyd george indicated willingness to talk while the germans backed off.
in the midst of this diplomacy the german government made two fateful mistakes.
on january 31 1917 it announced to the united states that it was resuming the full employment of all the weapons at its disposal at the same time german foreign minister arthur zimmermann sent a secret cable to the german embassy in mexico with an offer to the carranza government long estranged from wilson and the united states that if it would attack the united states germany would see to the restoration of the territory from texas to california that had been taken from mexico in 1848.
the british government managed to intercept and decode the zimmermann telegram and release it to the public turning much of american public opinion against germany.
wilson was more concerned with unrestricted submarine warfare than any interference from carranza.
he broke diplomatic relations with germany.
he then asked congress for authority to arm merchant ships but la follette and other republican progressives blocked the bill in the senate.
wilson called them a little group of willful men and claimed the authority to arm the ships on executive authority.
at the same time other americans including former president roosevelt were pressing wilson to do more for britain.
as early as january 1915 roosevelt although out of office wrote to british foreign minister sir edward grey calling wilsons lack of greater support for the british very obstinate roosevelt thought wilson was stumbling in 1915 and was ready to march.
in the end when war came it brought roosevelt political and personal tragedy.
wilson would accept neither his advice to help britain nor his offer of service and in july 1918 roosevelts beloved son quentin was killed in combat in france.
from the german perspective an immediate attack on supplies going to britain and france was the only way to win the war.
if they could block food and munitions from getting to the allies then the germans believed they could win the war before the united states could organize itself to do much harm.
in march u boats sank three u s merchant ships with the loss of 15 american lives.
as bryan had warned wilsons hard line meant that germany had the initiative.
the president felt he had run out of options.
on april 2 1917 wilson appeared before a joint session of congress and asked for a declaration of war against germany.
part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 american voices woodrow wilson war message 1917 llfilson had spoken directly to congress many times before.
inf nevertheless when he decided that the united states needed to go to war on the side of britain and france the words took on a new level of importance.
everyone knew what he would ask but they waited to hear his reasons.
gentlemen of the congress on the 3d of february last i officially laid before you the extraordinary announcement of the imperial german government that on and after the 1st day of february it was its purpose to put aside all restraints of law or of humanity and use its submarines to sink every vessel that sought to approach either the ports of great britain and ireland or the western coasts of europe.
vessels of every kind whatever their flag their character their cargo their destination their errand have been ruthlessly sent to the bottom without warning and without thought of help or mercy for those on board the vessels of friendly neutrals along with those of belligerents with a profound sense of the solemn and even tragical character of the step i am taking and of the grave responsibilities which it involves but in unhesitating obedience to what i deem my constitutional duty i advise that the congress declare the recent course of the imperial german government to be in fact nothing less than war against the government and people of the united states that it formally accept the status of belligerent which has thus been thrust upon it what this will involve is clear.
it will involve the utmost practicable cooperation in counsel and action with the governments now at war with germany it will involve the organization and mobilization of all the material resources of the country to supply the materials of war it will involve the immediate full equipment of the navy in all respects but particularly in supplying it with the best means of dealing with the enemy s submarines.
it will involve the immediate addition to the armed forces of the united states already provided for by law in case of war at least 500 000 men who should in my opinion be chosen upon the principle of universal liability to service it will involve also of course the granting of adequate credits to the government sustained i hope so far as they can equitably be sustained by the present generation by well conceived taxation one of the things that has served to convince us that the prussian autocracy was not and could never be our friend is that from the very outset of the present war it has filled our unsuspecting communities and even our offices of government with spies and set criminal intrigues everywhere afoot against our national unity that it means to stir up enemies against us at our very doors the intercepted note to the german minister at mexico city is eloquent evidence.
the world must be made safe for democracy.
its peace must be planted upon the tested foundations of political liberty.
we have no selfish ends to serve.
we desire no conquest no dominion.
we seek no indemnities for ourselves no material compensation for the sacrifices we shall freely make.
we are but one of the champions of the rights of mankind.
source woodrow wilson war messages 65th cong 1 st sess.
senate doc.
5 serial no.
7264 washington d c 1917 2 april 1917 thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis as wilson described it what led to his decision to ask congress to declare war on germany.
contextualization how did wilson justify american military intervention on moral ethical grounds.
what does the speech tell you about wilson s vision of america s place in the world.
the war at home support and opposition not everyone was convinced by wilsons eloquence.
in the senate wisconsins la follette and george norris of nebraska led the opposition to a declaration of war.
norris a republican long part of the progressive movement said we have loaned many hundreds of millions of dollars to the allies in this controversy.
and he saw the war as simply a way to defend those loans insisting we are going into war upon the command of gold he would have none of it.
when the vote came six senators three republican and three democrats opposed the war.
in the house 50 representatives voted no on the war resolution.
the most dramatic vote came from jeannette rankin of montana.
rankin was the only woman in the house elected at a time when women in most states still did not have the vote.
she was under intense pressure from some suffragists who planned to demand votes for patriotic women as a war measure to vote for the war but in the roll call rankin answered i want to stand by my country but i cannot vote for war.
i vote no in 1941 after a long absence rankin would chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 583 zfi 2w2 20 4 committee on public information government agency during world war i that sought to shape public opinion in support of the war effort through newspapers pamphlets speeches films and other media.
the u s government and private organizations like the red cross used advertising that had been effective in other sectors of american life to recruit americans to support the war effort as in this poster of a young woman summoning americans to service.
584 part vii war prosperity and depressic i summon you to comradeship ititheredcross i3 i be on the floor of congress again and would be the single no vote against u s entry into world war ii.
once the united states was formally at war the previous antiwar constituency split between those including bryan who believed that once the united states had made the decision to go to war everyone should support the war effort and others from jane addams to eugene v debs to emma goldman who continued to oppose the war no matter what the president asked or how the congress voted.
despite the opposition once the united states was formally at war in the spring of 1917 the wilson administration set out to do everything possible to assure the support of every citizen.
in his war speech wilson had said if there should be disloyalty it will be dealt with with a firm hand of stern repression he meant it.
to build support for the war wilson created the committee on public information cpi and appointed the respected progressive journalist george creel as its head.
no one could challenge creels progressive credentials as a muckraker supporter of womens rights and political reformer.
creel rejected crude propaganda insisting that a free people cannot be told what to think.
they must be given the facts and permitted to do their own thinking creel also insisted that he and the wilson administration would be the ones to decide what facts to give people and more seriously what alternative facts should be blocked.
creel announced it was a fight for the minds of men for the conquest of their convictions and the battle line ran through every home in the country under his leadership the cpi hired other muckraking journalists including ray stannard baker and ida tarbell and published 75 million pamphlets supporting the u s war effort.
they recruited 75 000 four minute men volunteers who were ready to speak at a moments notice in favor of the war effort and against germany at any theater or neighborhood meeting.
he worked with the still new movie studios to create films like the kaiser beast of berlin.
creels cpi launched a special war americanization plan to encourage foreign born immigrants especially those from the central powers to buy liberty bonds and otherwise assert their american patriotism.
he also hired charles dana gibson famous for creating the nations model of feminine beauty in the gibson girl to produce prowar posters that would glorify the american war effort and call on all americans to purchase war bonds and tend home vegetable gardens or victory gardens as well as for young men to serve in the army.
the government also launched war study courses to encourage patriotism and loyalty among public school students.
creel was confident enough of his efforts that he opposed more blatant limitations on civil liberties.
after the war he wrote better far to have the desired compulsions proceed from within than to apply them from without herbert hoover who had gained fame organizing support for people in war ravaged belgium became the head of the u s food administration and urged americans to support the war by eating less and conserving more so that food could be sent to the troops or the allies.
like creel hoover believed that voluntary compliance was most effective so he rejected rationing in favor of what he described as mobilizing the spirit of self denial and self sacrifice in this country people got the widely touted message food will win the war dont waste it the federal government also created the fuel administration and the war industries board and took direct control of the nations railroads.
most of the new agencies were led by business executives and the criticism of business leaders that had characterized wilsons first term virtually disappeared as the nations corporate elite became essential supporters of the war effort.
while creel led the governments fight for the minds of the american people and hoover tried to change their eating habits other self styled patriots had their own agendas.
the nongovernmental american protective league apl which eventually grew to 250 000 members included some who had opposed german immigrants or domestic political radicals and who saw the war as a time to further their agenda.
apl members without government authority opened mail and listened in on telephone calls looking for spies and traitors.
fearing such animosity many german americans 1890 1945 were careful to demonstrate their loyalty.
the deutsches haus of indianapolis became the athenaeum of indiana sauerkraut became liberty cabbage and german language classes schools and newspapers were closed.
on occasion the split between those who supported and those who opposed u s involvement in the war turned violent.
a few months after the united states entered the war during the hot summer of 1917 some 2 000 members of the apl along with the sheriff of bisbee arizona raided a mass meeting of the industrial workers of the world the large and radical union that strongly opposed the war and rounded up over a thousand iww members and supporters a third of whom were mexican american leaving them out on the desert without food or water for 2 days before letting them escape to new mexico.
a german american robert prager was lynched by a mob in collinsville illinois.
an iww organizer frank little was lynched in butte montana after he told striking copper miners that they were battling an imperialist capitalist war an editorial in the washington post said of the violence in spite of excesses such as lynching it is a healthful and wholesome awakening in the interior of the country in 1917 and 1918 congress passed several acts to control the countrys responses to the war including the sedition act of 1918 and the espionage act of 1917 giving the government vast new powers to limit free speech and the press that had not been seen in the united states since the alien and sedition acts of the john adams administration.
the sedition act of 1918 made illegal uttering printing writing or publishing any disloyal profane scurrilous or abusive language about the government of the united states or the military or naval forces of the united states postmaster general albert burleson banned from the u s mail anything that he thought violated the act.
attorney general thomas w gregory and his successor a mitchell palmer prosecuted violators or left it to local u s attorneys to do so.
in spite of government policies and the efforts of many in organizations like the apl to force all americans to support the war dissenters continued to speak out.
jane addams leader of the womens peace party as well as chicagos hull house spoke to the city club of chicago just after war had been declared saying that the united states has entered the war has not changed my views of the invalidity of war as a method of settlement of social problems a particle and i can see no reason why one should not say what one believes in time of war as in time of peace her words were greeted only by silence from the club women.
the national federation of settlements which addams had helped to found said it has been very painful to many of us who hold miss addams in deep affection and wholly respect her to find that we cannot 20 4 sedition act broad law restricting criticism of america s involvement in world war i or its government flag military taxes or officials.
think or act in unison with her jane addams continued to oppose the war and seek international mediation to end it.
she not only wanted the united states out of the war but also wanted to end the war wherever it was fought.
at the same time addams ever the practical settlement house leader sought to ensure that there was bread in time of war no matter who needed to eat.
she happily cooperated with the u s government s food administration though she objected to its slogan food will win the war nevertheless addams urged residents of chicago to plant vegetable gardens and consume less so that more could be sent to those in greatest need.
while addams was snubbed for her antiwar stance others paid a much higher price.
radical leaders were watched carefully for unpatriotic words and actions.
over a hundred iww and socialist party leaders were arrested and jailed on charges of violating the sedition act.
in june 1918 eugene v debs told a huge rally in canton ohio i realize that in speaking to you this afternoon there are certain limitations placed upon the right of free speech.
but debs also made it clear that he was equally as opposed to the leadership of germany as to that of the allies for he said all sides were using working people to fight their battles.
so he continued ihe master class has always declared the wars the subject class has always fought the battles.
in particular he added t he working class who make the supreme sacrifices the working class who freely shed their blood and furnish the corpses have never yet had a chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 585 i 20 4 schenck v united states the first of several decisions by the u s supreme court upholding the sedition and espionage acts.
knowing that the americans were coming the british and french launched a major offensive in the summer of 1917.
as with previous efforts the offensive was turned back and the terrible losses led to mutinies throughout the french army.
the allied armies seemed to be losing the will to fight.
on germanys eastern front the bolshevik revolution in russia in november 1917 led to a new government that wanted nothing to do with the war.
the bolsheviks signed the treaty of brest litovsk which ended the war between germany and russia on german terms the most important term of all being that germany could now focus exclusively on the western front and attack france in the spring of 1918.
the treaty did not come in time to save germany however.
by 1918 850 000 fresh u s troops had arrived and they quickly went into combat while the german troops were exhausted by 4 years of war.
for the german soldiers the fact that they were facing so many well armed fresh troops undermined morale as much as any specific american victories though those victories were not without importance.
at chateau thierry in june of 1918 u s forces helped stop a german offensive toward paris.
by that fall the americans were part of an allied effort that had driven the german army out of france and back inside germany.
the end was becoming clear.
an armistice was signed and on november 11 1918 at 11 00 a m the guns of europe fell silent.
peace talks and the failure of the treaty of versailles no one knows exactly how many were killed and wounded in world war i or how many more died of disease and exposure.
by some estimates as many as 65 million men fought of whom 8 million were killed.
in europe hardly a family escaped losing american voices mathew chopin advancing over the top and carrying wounded comrade under shell fire 1918 m ms soldiers began arriving in france in the summer of 1918 and were quickly moved to the front lines.
while presidents and generals planned those doing the actual fighting recent arrivals to war from farms and crowded city neighborhoods told their own stories of fighting fear bravery and sorrow including this one recorded by mathew chopin while still in france waiting for a ship home in early 1919.
at early dawn we continued advancing over the top through clouds of gas and smoke under rain of machine gun bullets shrapnel and steel.
the huns as most americans called the germans during the war were shelling heavily the edge of the roadside.
it was freezing cold we were out of water and had just a small ration of salmon and hard tack.
completely exhausted and thirsting for a drink i remember grabbing a canteen from a passing artillery caisson to soothe my parched lips when the explosion of a shell sent over deadly gas getting four of our men.
we got down in a valley for awhile during a machine gun barrage and then up again firing away at the enemy as fast as our automatics could work.
so many of our men were getting wounded and as the litter bearer was killed while going out under fire for wounded my sergeant sent me with another man to replace him.
it was a dangerous situation going over rounds of hell as we had to go up and get them under machine gun and rifle fire we began picking up the wounded as fast as they came and bandaging those in need of first aid.
it was a heartrending sight that weakened the strongest for everywhere were wounded and lifeless forms some all torn to pieces their limbs and heads entirely severed from their bodies.
i remember making a trip about a mile under heavy gun fire to get a wounded stretcher bearer whose partner had been killed.
he was a game little yank yet a pitiful sight with his side all ripped open by shrapnel.
as i laid him gently on the stretcher i still remember his last uttered words oh god if i could only live to die at home.
source mathew chopin through the valley of death 1919 from louisiana doughboy index htm and cited in p scott corbett and ronald c naugle life liberty and the pursuit of happiness documents in american history volume ii 1861 to present boston mcgraw hill 2004 pp.
thinking critically 1.
analysis what impression of the fighting do you get from chopin s description.
historical interpretation what light does chopin s account shed on the impact of new military technology on the fighting during world war i.
588 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 the peace talks at versailles brought together a wide range of world leaders but were dominated by the leaders of great britain france and the united states.
someone and for a generation young women outnumbered young men by significant numbers.
ships were sunk villages and towns destroyed national economies wrecked.
while some including wilson wanted to use the end of the war to secure a just and lasting peace others wanted vengeance and still others wanted to forget all about war and simply have a good time in a life that they knew could be cut all too short.
amid all these conflicting political and emotional crosscurrents leaders of the victorious nations met in paris at the beginning of 1919 to write a peace treaty.
woodrow wilson who had broken precedent early in his term by speaking directly to congress broke precedent again when the war ended.
he sailed for paris to personally lead the american delegation at the paris peace talks.
no american president had ever left the united states while in office and some even wondered whether it was constitutional to do so.
wilson waived the concerns aside.
modern communications would allow him to remain in close touch with washington while he was across the atlantic.
the british french and italian prime ministers were all going to be present and wilson had no intention of handing the american role off to anyone else.
when the president and mrs wilson arrived in brest france on december 13 1918 they were greeted as heroes and they continued to be honored as they toured france britain and italy.
a banner on the champs elysees in paris announced honor to wilson the just and an american newspaper reporter wrote no one ever had such cheers it must have been a satisfying moment for the war weary president.
for wilson one ominous cloud over the negotiations was the fact that republicans had made substantial gains in the congressional elections of november 1918 in spite of his impassioned appeal to the voters to keep the democrats in charge while he negotiated a treaty.
then while he was in france in january 1919 wilson received a telegram that his arch rival theodore roosevelt had died.
a reporter said he thought he saw a look of pity and then a smile of triumph on the presidents face though wilson was far too diplomatic to say anything.
when the paris peace talks convened at the old royal palace of versailles wilson thought he was in a very strong bargaining position given the role of u s resources and troops in bringing the war to a successful conclusion for the allies.
his counterparts thought differently.
georges clemenceau the tough 77 year old french premier wanted vengeance for frances terrible losses and british prime minister david lloyd george though more moderate than clemenceau harbored nothing like wilsons generous spirit.
france and britain had lost 10 to 20 times as many soldiers as the united states most of the battles had been fought in france and neither leader nor their followers were in any mood to be generous.
the losers germany austria and the ottoman empire were excluded from the conference.
the new communist government of russia which had signed its own separate treaty with germany in early 1918 was also excluded from the peace conference and wilson sent troops to try and support the overthrow of the communist government which would lead to long term tension between russia and the united states.
since 1916 wilson had been telling his fellow americans what he wanted from a peace conference.
he insisted the traditional u s isolationism could not continue and the nation must be willing to become a partner in any feasible association of nations to maintain the peace in october just before the presidential election he told an audience in omaha nebraska we are part of the world and in january 1917 he told the senate that the united states wanted peace without victory his goal was to avoid future wars based on the covenant of a new international organization that would ensure that no such catastrophe shall ever overwhelm us again.
chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era fourteen points the proposed points outlining peace offered by president woodrow wilson in 1918 after world war i the treaty agreed to at the versailles peace conference did not however include all 14.
20 4 in january 1918 as the united states went to war wilson outlined what came to be known as his fourteen points.
the president said that america insisted on open covenants of peace openly arrived at the commitment to openness was a mix of wilsonian idealism and a reaction to the release by the new russian leader v i lenin of secret agreements that had been negotiated by the czarist government britain and france.
although he did not use the word self determination wilson condemned old style european imperialism and indeed any wars fought for territory.
he insisted that the many diverse nationalities living within the austria hungarian and ottoman turkish empires should have an absolutely unmolested opportunity of autonomous development see map 20 4 most of all he called for a general association of nations to preserve peace.
wilson stayed at the peace conference for 6 months except for one 2 week return trip to the united states.
he did not have as much success as he expected.
he was not well staffed.
he found himself in painful meetings with the three european premiers who had different goals from his and who especially clemenceau obviously did not respect him.
the treaty that emerged from the peace conference was perhaps inevitably a disappointment to everyone.
wilson got his league of nations which would include not just the allies as clemenceau initially wanted but would be open to every nation of the world.
the leagues covenant included article x in which member nations agreed to respect and preserve as against external aggression the political integrity and existing political independence of all members of the league however though the league now existed wilson had also paid a high price to get it.
clemenceau compromised on his initial goal of dividing germany into several smaller nation states but he won on achieving strict limits to german military power temporary occupation of the rhineland and a war guilt clause which meant that germany should pay most of the wars cost.
most of the worlds non european map 20 4 a changing middle east.
while the major impact of the treaty of versailles was within europe the peace conference also created several new middle eastern nations including syria iraq and trans jordan later jordan and israel out of the former ottoman empire.
kpart vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 peoples were bitterly disappointed with the treaty.
middle eastern and african colo nies that had belonged to the defeated central powers expected to be granted their independence by the peace conference.
instead they became mandates assigned to various victorious powers that were supposed to grant them independence at some unspecified future date.
japan which had played only a modest role in the war won the right to continue its control over shandong province in china leading a young mao zedong to call the treaty really shameless in addition protests erupted in india egypt korea and china over other provisions in the treaty.
african american leaders also protested the failure of the treaty of versailles to respect the right of citizens of former german colonies in africa or mention racial discrimination in the final treaty.
du bois tried to organize a pan african conference in paris to protest the treatys failings but the british government would not give passports to africans from british colonies who wanted to attend and the u s state department refused permission to american delegates including madame c j walker the first african american woman millionaire and journalists ida wells barnett and william monroe trotter.
du bois made it to the meeting only by signing up as a cook on a freighter bound for france.
during the peace negotiations several new nations were created within europe poland yugoslavia romania and czechoslovakia that were supposed to recognize the hopes for independence by ethnic groups who had been dominated by the old tottering austria hungary and ottoman empires but the mapping of those boundaries set off its own ethnic tensions especially for people who suddenly became an ethnic minority in a new country see map 20 5.
wilson convinced himself that he had gotten as good a treaty as he could which was perhaps true given the other actors at the peace conference and he invested his greatest hopes in the idea that the league of nations could resolve any remaining issues.
he signed the treaty at versailles in june 1919 and sailed for home.
on july 10 wilson personally spoke to the u s senate asking them to ratify the treaty.
he reminded his audience of the nations high ideals in going to war and the fact that in the settlements of the peace we have sought no special reparation for ourselves the key to the whole treaty and indeed to future peace wilson continued was that the league of nations was the only hope of mankind so he begged the senate to ratify the treaty immediately without any amendments asking shall we or any other free peoples hesitate to accept this great duty.
dare we reject it and break the heart of the world the senate which had final authority to approve any treaty would take 8 months to give wilson his answer.
wilson was greeted as a hero when he arrived home in the united states and public opinion seemed to be on his side but there were problems lurking for the versailles treaty.
the battle over the treaty has often been portrayed as it was by wilson as one between his internationalism and an older isolationist view of america however the issues were more complex.
wilson had made the treaty needlessly partisan by campaigning vigorously but unsuccessfully for a democratic victory in the 1918 elections and then failing to take any republican leaders with him to paris.
he had also lost many of his strongest supporters who were disillusioned by the attack on civil liberties that he had allowed during the war and the compromises he had made at paris.
some senators such as californias hiram johnson and idaho s william borah opposed any binding promise to intervene in other nation s affairs.
borah said that he wanted not isolation but freedom to do as our own people think wise and just.
the greatest threat to the treaty came from massachusetts republican senator henry cabot lodge chair of the senate foreign relations committee who hated the treaty and hated wilson even more.
lodge objected to the treaty for many reasons.
he feared the treaty he said because it gave an international organization the power to send american soldiers and sailors everywhere a power lodge insisted which ought never to be taken from the american people or impaired in the slightest degree.
some thought lodge was less concerned about the league than about the insult to chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 1 202 202 202 20 4 changes in european boundaries after world war i bibb areas lost by russian empire bum areas lost by austro hungarian empire 1111 areas lost by german empire 1818 areas lost by bulgaria names of the newly independent nations created at the versailles conference of 1919 are in bold atlantic ocean map 20 5 europe in 1919.
the treaty of versailles created a number of new nations in eastern europe out of what had once been the austria hungary and ottoman empires as well as new nations in the middle east.
people like himself who had been excluded from the treaty making process and his personal animosity to the president.
nevertheless lodge insisted that the issues were beyond party that the united states is the worlds best hope but if you fetter her in the interests and quarrels of other nations if you tangle her in the intrigues of europe you will destroy her power for good and endanger her very existence 592 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 as he had done at princeton and in new jersey state politics when he faced opposition wilson appealed over the heads of his immediate opponents to a wider audience in this case the whole nation.
in the fall of 1919 wilson began a 10 000 mile tour of the country giving 40 speeches in 21 days to enthusiastic audiences asking them to tell their senators to support the treaty.
the public response was gratifying but did not move votes in the senate.
ihe trip also broke the presidents already fragile health.
on september 25 at pueblo colorado after a speech in which he said that with the treaty he had negotiated international law is revolutionized by putting morals into it and promising that his beloved league would lead us and through us the world out into pastures of quietness and peace such as the world never dreamed of before he collapsed and admitted that he could not go on.
after he returned to the white house wilson suffered a life threatening infection and a massive stroke that left him partially paralyzed.
ihe medical conditions may also have clouded his judgment and made him more stubborn.
ihe senate foreign relations committee recommended approval of the treaty but with 14 reservations including one insisting that the u s military could not be sent to defend article x without specific congressional approval.
wilson adamantly refused to consider the reservations.
in a final vote on november 18 and 19 1919 the senate first came to a tie vote for the treaty with reservations far short of the two thirds majority needed to approve a treaty.
then on a second vote in which they considered the treaty without reservations the senate defeated the entire treaty by a vote of 55 to 39.
ihe league of nations would be launched in geneva switzerland but without the participation of the united states.
wilsons grand vision for a world at peace with the united states as a leader was dead.
many argued that the presidents refusal to compromise had been among the forces that killed it.
colonel house who had once been wilsons closest confidant wrote that he had once thought that senator lodge was the worst enemy of the treaty but before the debates and votes were over he had decided that the worst enemy had actually been wilson himself.
with the end of world war i europe had a dramatically different map and the united states had a dramatically different political situation.
people who had fervently gone to war in 1917 were tired and cynical by 1919.
the cost of the war in lives money and liberties led many to question the governmental and business leaders who had been most enthusiastic about it.
by 1920 many in the nation were ready to forget high sounding idealism progressive or otherwise.
it was perhaps time for more joy or at least the election of a more genial and less idealistic president.
quick review how did u s participation in world war i shape wilson s presidency.
conclusion during the progressive era the united states began to look outward more than in the past and to extend its power and influence further across the globe.
the three american leaders known as the progressive presidents theodore roosevelt taft and wilson all spent much of their administrations dealing with foreign policy.
in what some have called the age of u s imperialism the united states took control of vast new territories including hawaii a number of pacific islands the canal zone in panama as well as cuba puerto rico and the philippine islands.
alaska which had previously been purchased from russia now became an official u s territory hawaii was annexed after an american led revolt on the island and the canal zone was acquired by treaty after complex negotiations with panama and colombia.
most of the other territories came under u s control as a result of the 1898 war with spain.
while cuba and the philippine islands eventually attained independence u s influence continued there for a long time.
chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 20 1 202 202 20 4 the increased involvement of the united states in international affairs in the late 1800s and early 1900s and its expanded territorial reach made the united states a major world power.
consequently diplomatic tensions began to mount especially between the united states and latin america where construction of the american controlled panama canal and military interventions in mexico nicaragua the dominican republic and haiti created resentment.
although the united states had successfully brokered a peace agreement between russia and japan in 1905 further u s involvement in asia coupled with anti asian legislation in california embittered the japanese.
many within the united states also opposed american involvement in the affairs of the rest of the world especially after the 1898 war with spain and the continued u s occupation of the philippine islands.
after the assassination of archduke franz ferdinand in 1914 the central powers germany austria hungary and the ottoman empire went to war against the allies russia france and great britain.
americans were divided about the conflict and looked to president wilson to maintain u s neutrality.
however for some americans feelings changed when german u boats sank three u s merchant ships and a british ocean liner which killed 127 american citizens.
the publication of a secret german cable to mexico known as the zimmermann telegram in which germany promised the return of texas to mexico if mexico would attack the united states turned more of american public opinion against germany.
in 1917 when germany expanded its submarine attacks the united states entered the war.
support for u s involvement in the war was not universal and a large and vocal peace movement emerged.
but the wilson administration pressed for a series of laws to silence dissent.
in particular the sedition act and the espionage act gave the government unprecedented power to restrict free speech.
the supreme court upheld these laws and many antiwar protesters were prosecuted and jailed.
by 1918 the allies with support from american troops had defeated the central powers and an armistice was signed.
at the paris peace talks president wilson hoped to secure a lasting peace and favored treaty provisions that called for a league of nations.
republican opposition to the league blocked u s adoption of the treaty and the league of nations was launched without american involvement.
chapter review how was u s foreign policy between 1898 and 1918 different from that of the pre civil war period.
594 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 chapter 20 chapter review continuing expansion ih explain continued u s expansion particularly u s acquisition u of what would much later be the 49th and 50th states.
review questions 1.
cause and effect how did alfred thayer mahans the influence of sea power upon history shape american foreign policy in the late 1800s and early 1900s.
contextualization why did hawaii become a major focus of american activity in the pacific in the 1800s.
the splendid little war with spain cuba puerto rico and the philippines 1898 analyze the causes and consequences of the u s war with spain in 1898 review questions 3.
historical interpretation what role did economic considerations play in propelling america into war with spain in 1898.
cause and effect how did the u s war with spain and the fighting in the philippines that followed help spark anti imperialist sentiment in the united states.
constructing an argument defend or refute the following statement.
the united states went to war with spain to seize control of parts of the spanish empire not to defend the rights of the cuban people 20 2 foreign policy foreign adventures 1900 1914 20 3 explain developments in u s policy in panama asia and mexico between the war with spain and world war i.
review questions 6.
historical interpretation what does the roosevelt corollary tell us about the way american policy makers viewed latin america during the early 1900s.
cause and effect how did american actions in the early 1900s contribute to long term tensions between japan and the united states.
comparison compare and contrast wilsons foreign policy in asia with his actions in mexico and latin america.
how would you explain the differences you note.
20 4 the united states and the great war analyze the causes and consequences of u s involvement in world war i.
review questions 9.
historical interpretation what factors contributed to the outbreak of world war i in 1914.
contextualization why did wilson find it so difficult to maintain american neutrality.
comparison what connections can you make between efforts to suppress dissent during world war i and earlier periods in american history when limits were placed on individual liberties.
chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 59.
1919 1929 21 a unique prosperous and discontented time chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the unique aspects of a decade in u s history that lasted from 1919 to 1929.
the 1920s was known as the jazz age not only because of its most popular music but also because jazz music provided the background to an era in which many americans wanted to forget the past and have fun dancing drinking and riding in increasingly popular automobiles.
21 1 l e a r n i n ru the prelude the red summer of 1919 explain how events at the end of world war i shaped the decade that followed.
21 2 the 1920s the exuberance of prosperity analyze how prohibition and other developments of the 1920s reshaped american culture.
21 3 the 1920s the conflicts about american ideals explain the elements of discrimination hardship and fundamentalism that also shaped american life in the 1920s.
21 4 harding coolidge and hoover national politics and policies in the 1920s analyze the political and policy developments of the decade.
almost as soon as the era ended journalists and historians began talking about the jazz age or simply the 1920s as a way to describe a distinct era in american history.
the 11 years that was framed by the end of world war i in november 1918 and the stock market crash of october 1929 was unique in many ways.
as troops returned to the unites states from their service in europe during world war i and as national leaders debated the treaty of versailles at the start of this era many americans wanted to forget about the rest of the world and its troubles.
they expected the resulting peace to usher in a time of pleasure and plenty.
for many white middle class americans the twenties were indeed a time of great prosperity and a time to enjoy the freedom of the jazz age.
however for others including many white farmers in the midwest and south southern black sharecroppers and american indians living on isolated reservations the twenties were not prosperous at all.
for many recent immigrants and for residents of small towns and rural areas the 1920s were a decade when they felt especially marginalized when it was clear that sophisticated urban dwellers looked down on them and their cultural and religious values and their resentment took many forms.
understanding the differing experiences of those who lived through this decade is the focus of this chapter.
596 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 the prelude the red summer of 1919 21 1 significant dates explain how events at the end of world war i shaped the decade that followed.
when the guns of world war i fell silent on november 11 1918 the world celebrated.
while the united states had been spared much of the wars cost many americans were not sure what to make of the postwar world.
some americans had talked of socialism even communism since the strikes of the 1870s but most did not follow their lead.
as a result of world war i communists had seized control of russia.
some americans celebrated the new russian government but many more feared it and wondered whether there might be links between americas homegrown radicals and russia.
for african americans who had fought in the war had risked their lives for democracy and had seen different cultures the idea of returning to a united states with rigid segregation generated new tensions and determination.
other african americans had moved north to take war time jobs and they had no intention of returning to the segregated south.
to the surprise of some within months of the armistice the country quickly became a very tense place.
with the coming of peace american workers wanted a part of the new postwar prosperity and tried to gain back the money they had lost from stagnant wages in an era of wartime inflation.
in january 1919 35 000 shipyard workers went on strike in seattle washington and a month later 60 000 workers in other industries joined them.
the week long seattle general strike when virtually no one in the city went to work stands as the largest citywide strike in u s history and it frightened many.
the seattle strike was the largest but hardly the only strike in 1919.
textile workers in lawrence massachusetts the scene of the 1912 bread and roses strike see chapter 18 engaged in a short and successful strike to demand a 48 hour work week in january 1919.
in september the police force of boston massachusetts who had not received a raise since 1913 went on strike.
without a police force in boston mobs looted stores and bars the police commissioner created a temporary voluntary force and massachusetts governor calvin coolidge gained national fame when he fired all of the striking police officers saying there is no right to strike against the public safety by anybody anywhere any time while people debated the right of public employees to strike steel workers went out on strike in september 1919 after the chairman of u s steel judge elbert gary refused to meet with union representatives.
a month later coal miners walked off the job just as the nations demand for coal for winter heat was beginning.
strikes were not the only signs of political chaos in 1919.
in april bombs arrived in the mail of postmaster general albert burleson attorney general a mitchell palmer several members of the u s senate seattles antistrike mayor hanson and federal immigration authorities and judges.
not one of them was injured but no one ever discovered who sent the bombs.
on may day an international socialist holiday in honor of the haymarket events see chapter 18 riots erupted in several cities including cleveland ohio where one socialist was killed and 40 injured in a parade.
a few days later a protester in washington dc was shot and killed when he refused to stand for the national anthem.
the crowd applauded.
the american legion a new organization of returning soldiers promised to uphold americanism and attack radicals.
in centralia washington an iww group killed four parading legion members and the legion lynched an iww organizer.
at the same time the worldwide influenza pandemic that began in 1918 came to the united states.
during 1919 half a million americans died of the flu many more than had died in the war.
the influenza did not discriminate between young and old or rich and poor.
although its source was microbes not radicals the influenza epidemic contributed to the sense that something was terribly wrong in the postwar world.
1919 palmer raids and red summer major strikes in many industries chicago race riot 1920 eighteenth amendment creating prohibition takes effect.
nineteenth amendment giving women the right to vote takes effect congress again defeats treaty of versailles charles ponzi s scheme collapses warren harding elected u s president first radio broadcast as station kdka reports election returns 1921 margaret sanger founds american birth control league washington conference agrees to limit growth of world s navies 1923 warren harding dies calvin coolidge becomes president 1924 calvin coolidge defeats john w davis for president 1925 the great gatsby published scopes trial in dayton tennessee 1927 babe ruth hits 60 home runs sacco and vanzetti executed kellogg briand pact outlawing war negotiated 1928 herbert hoover defeats al smith for president mickey mouse born mi.
chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontented time the influenza epidemic of 1918 killed far more americans than world war i more than 500 000.
police and public officials like these members of the st louis red cross motor corps wore masks to protect themselves.
images such as this one like the disease helped spread fear around the country.
palmer raids a series of raids by u s government agents in 1919 and 1920 to find arrest and sometimes deport people considered to be dangerous radicals.
for many americans the chaos of 1919 proved that there was a link between u s labor unions socialists and the bolshevik communist regime in russia.
communism seemed to be spreading with a revolt in hungary and uprisings in the old capitals of vienna and berlin.
maybe some said it was coming to the united states.
seattle mayor ole hanson toured the country proclaiming that he had put down a bolshevik uprising in his city.
the los angeles times told people that they needed to wake up to the bolshevik menace while former president william howard taft said that the bolsheviks were crusaders pushing their propaganda in every country seeking to rouse the lawless the discontented the poor the lazy and the shiftless to a millennium of plunder and class hatred the senate ordered an investigation of russian bolshevik influence in the united states.
attorney general palmer presented what he said was evidence of communist influence in the country.
palmers proof was a witness who had heard one striker say the iww was not as bad as it was supposed to be it was hardly overwhelming proof of an international conspiracy.
inflation and stagnant wages seemed to have more to do with the strikes and protests than international intrigue.
nevertheless people were frightened and the federal government responded.
the wilson administration not only asked congress to extend the war time lever fuel act that had prohibited the obstruction of coal distribution during the war but also asked for a peace time sedition law to continue some of the wartime restrictions on civil liberties.
using the lever act attorney general palmer persuaded a federal judge to issue an injunction against the coal strike.
palmer also ordered an all out effort to find dangerous radicals and appointed a young justice department staffer j edgar hoover later the first director of the federal bureau of investigation to lead it.
by the end of november the so called palmer raids had led to many arrests and 249 of those arrested who had not been born in the united states were ordered deported among them the well known radical emma goldman who told federal authorities ever since i have been in this country and i have lived here practically all my life it has been dinned into my ears that under the institutions of this alleged democracy one is entitled to think and feel as he pleases.
what becomes of this sacred guarantee of freedom of thought and conscience when persons are being persecuted and driven out for the very motives and purposes for which the pioneers who built up this country laid down their lives.
goldman and the other deportees along with an impressive number of guards left new york on the liner buford bound for exile in russia.
at the same time congress expelled its one socialist member the strongly anticommunist representative victor berger from milwaukee who had opposed the war and remarked that all the american people had gotten out of it was flu and inflation.
milwaukee was not represented in congress until 1921.
the november arrests and deportations were not the end of the hysteria.
on january 2 and 3 1920 justice department agents led by j edgar hoover arrested 5 000 perhaps even 10 000 suspected radicals in 33 cities.
this second round of palmer raids destroyed the tiny u s communist party and caught many others.
the size and scope of the raids and the lack of evidence of a widespread conspiracy undercut public support for palmer.
by the spring of 1920 more americans were starting to question the raids.
maybe there were not as many bolsheviks in the country as palmer thought.
fears about communists and labor unions were not the only concerns to rock the country in 1919.
the city of chicago had been on edge for weeks in the hot summer of 1919.
while nearly 5 000 public employees from garbage collectors and street sweepers to city hall clerks were on strike someone put up signs in chicagos black community that said we will get you july 4 somehow the fear of communists 598 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 and the fear of expanded rights for african americans merged as it often did.
black residents fearing an assault armed themselves.
then on july 27 a black boy swimming in lake michigan drifted across the line that supposedly separated the races on chicago s lakefront beaches.
a white mob beat the boy to death while a policeman ignored them.
blacks attacked the policeman and the white mob.
in the days that followed armed whites attacked chicagos black community and blacks fought back.
an injured black military veteran confronted a white crowd yelling this is a fine reception to give a man just home from the war the crowd beat him to death.
when a group of whites drove a truck armed with a machine gun into a black neighborhood blacks killed them.
when the riot ended 5 days later 23 blacks and 15 whites had been killed and over 500 people had been injured.
unlike previous race riots in other cities which had been almost exclusively white attacks on blacks the black community in chicago had fought back.
the black owned chicago defender noted that the youngest generation of black men are not content to move along the line of least resistance as did their sires while the chicago race riot was by far the worst it was not the only one that summer.
in charleston south carolina a brawl between white sailors and local blacks left two blacks dead and several white sailors injured.
in longview texas a white mob beat up a black school teacher for distributing the chicago defender.
as in chicago blacks retaliated.
after the washington post published a series of stories about black crime especially rape a riot between white soldiers and black residents left six dead and hundreds injured.
thirty six blacks were lynched in 1917.
in 1919 76 lynchings were recorded including some of veterans recently home from world war i.
in one mississippi lynching the jackson newspapers announced plans in advance.
in september in omaha nebraska a mob attacked the jail where a black prisoner was being held beat up the mayor who tried to stop them and then lynched the prisoner william brown.
only u s army troops under general leonard wood brought order to omaha.
as the african american writer james weldon johnson looked at the racial violence and the fear of communists that were roiling the country often being mixed he called the season the red summer of 1919.
that red summer was a strange and violent start to a decade of prosperity and discontent that followed.
quick review to what extent did america s growing involvement in the world contribute to domestic events in 1919.
the 1920s the exuberance of prosperity 21 2 analyze how prohibition and other developments of the 1920s reshaped american culture.
on may 11 1921 when prohibition had been in effect for a little over a year the new york times reported that an attractive 24 year old legal stenographer from west 156th street in manhattan claire fiance had been arrested when a detective stopped her to ask about a suspicious looking package she was carrying and with a bright smile and a shake of her bobbed hair fiance replied that she was carrying a bottle of whiskey a violation of the law that prohibited the transportation of alcohol.
fiances arrest and those of many more women like her was a symbol of two of the most impor tant shifts in american law and culture that took place in the 1920s shifts in many americans attitudes toward the consumption of alcohol and toward the appropriate role of women in american society.
during the course of the 1920 presidential campaign the republican nominee warren g harding coined a new word that described the nation s mood.
he said americas present need is not heroics but healing not nostrums but normalcy.
chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontented time 21 2 harding s normalcy a word coined by warren g harding while he was the 1920 republican presidential candidate to convey what he thought the country wanted a new kind of norma i free from war international entanglements and reform efforts.
20 hardings normalcy was less a return to some previously normal era than a plea to give the reforming spirit of the previous decades a rest.
people were as tired of roosevelt era reforms as they were of wilson s internationalism.
many wanted to enjoy themselves take part in the growing national prosperity and keep the reformers and the government out of their lives.
there was nothing very normal about the era especially in terms of a national law that banned alcohol or in terms of the changing roles of women or the new technologies that changed the culture but it seemed to summarize what many americans wanted for themselves and their country.
prohibition the campaign for moral conformity just at the time when many sought normalcy the greatest reform experiment in the nations history the prohibition of alcohol took effect.
even though prohibition seemed like a reform more typical of the progressive era the way prohibition was implemented was typical of the 1920s.
indeed prohibition and resistance to it defined the 1920s for many.
americans had long been fond of alcohol.
but some americans had also long worried about the nations drinking habits.
in the 1830s the army ended the traditional whiskey ration for the troops.
by the 1850s school children learned to read from mcguffey s readers that included stories about the scene of desolation that liquor created.
some religious groups concluded that drinking and protestant christianity were incompatible.
the womens christian temperance union wctu became the primary voice of temperance reform in protestant america in the 1880s see chapter 19.
while the wctu sought to persuade people to give up drink a new organization the anti saloon league sought to banish alcohol by law in the 1910s.
the male dominated league had a solid financial base greatly helped by john d rockefeller and relied on professional experts to organize campaigns lobby legislators and attack opponents.
in political campaigns the anti saloon league supported dry supporting prohibition candidates of any party and attacked any politician it considered either wet opposing prohibition or insufficiently dry.
as elected officials saw colleagues elected or defeated because of the leagues political acumen they started to support prohibition whatever their personal feelings or drinking habits.
the campaign to prohibit alcohol can be understood as no small part of a larger effort by native born white protestants especially those living on farms and small towns to retake control of a national culture that they saw increasingly under the sway of recent immigrants.
as native born protestant america became more and more hostile to drink many immigrants did not appreciate the campaign for moral conformity that they saw in the prohibition movement.
the protestant evangelist charles stelzle though a prohibition leader was more understanding of the role of the neighborhood saloon than many of his compatriots.
while many prohibitionists described saloons as dens of iniquity stelzle remembered growing up on new yorks lower east side where the working men held their christening parties their weddings their dances their rehearsals for their singing societies and all other social functions in the neighborhood tavern.
saloons were often where ethnic groups could maintain language and tradition.
in the evening germans could have their beer italians their wine and irish their whiskey while enjoying the company of others like themselves.
for people who gathered over a drink prohibition was an attack on the freedom and acceptance they had come to america to find.
anti saloon league leader william anderson condemned immigrant resistance to prohibition.
the board of temperance prohibition and public morals of the methodist church said if it is true that foreign born laborers are rebellious against the country because of prohibition it may be said that the country is not being run for their benefit.
if they do not like the way things are being done let them go back part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 to europe.
as a result of statements like that many recent immigrants experienced prohibition as an attack on their cultures and some of prohibitions strongest advo cates did little to discourage such an assumption.
with the coming of world war i the anti saloon league had made support for prohibition a test of patriotism.
the league had successfully inserted a clause into the lever food and fuel control act banning the use of grain for hard liquor while giving the president authority to regulate wine and beer production.
wilson was no fan of prohibition but it was hard for him to reject a call for national sacrifice in support of the war.
in december 1917 congress with intensive lobbying by the anti saloon league passed the eighteenth amendment to the u s constitution prohibiting the manufacture transport and sale of liquor.
the league worked quickly to ensure that the required three quarters of the state legislatures acted and in january 1919 nebraska became the 36 state to ratify putting the amendment over the line.
in october 1919 congress passed the volstead act sponsored by minnesota representative andrew j volstead banning not only hard liquor which many even among the amendments supporters thought was its purpose but also wine and beer anything with more than xh of 1 percent alcohol.
violating the law carried as much as a 1 000 fine.
the u s treasury was given authority for enforcement.
like the eighteenth amendment the volstead act did not ban the possession of alcohol only its manufacture transportation and sale a loophole that made enforcement extremely difficult.
the act also allowed doctors to prescribe whiskey for medical needs and drugstores to dispense it and it allowed sacramental wine for religious purposes and industrial use of alcohol all loopholes that would be exploited in the 1920s.
when prohibition took effect on january 16 1920 americans observed the day in widely different ways.
liquor stores sold out.
people who could afford to do so filled their basements with bottles since possession remained legal and that night saloons hotels and private clubs gave one last grand party.
assistant secretary of the navy franklin d roosevelt drank champagne with former harvard classmates at the metropolitan club in washington.
other americans held very different celebrations.
the best known evangelist of the day billy sunday told worshipers in norfolk virginia the reign of tears is over.
the slums will soon be only a memory.
we will turn our prisons into factories and our jails into storehouses and corncribs.
men will walk upright now women will smile and children will laugh.
hell will be forever for rent in fact prohibition unleashed a crime wave not only because illegal liquor produced great profits emboldening criminals to new levels of creativity and violence but also because so many average americans were willing to disobey the law.
a scandalous age bootleg ponzi and teapot dome as prohibition began in 1920 a chicago gangster known as big jim colosimo owned saloons and brothels across the city.
colosimos nephew and business manager johnny torrio had moved from brooklyn to chicago to work for him in 1909 and both men had become millionaires.
prohibition meant they had to change some of their ways but they certainly planned to continue expecting increased profits.
one day torrio asked colosimo to meet a load of whiskey that torrio was having delivered to one of their cafes.
colosimo showed up on schedule and as he walked through the dining room someone emerged chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontented time with the coming of prohibition federal agents and local police regularly raided establishments that served alcohol and poured it into sewers.
in spite of many such raids alcohol consumption was hardly slowed by the eighteenth amendment or the volstead act as illegal production and sales filled the gap.
21 1 21 2 21j 21 4 from the cloakroom and shot him.
colosimo died instantly.
while no evidence was ever found that torrio or his new bodyguard from brooklyn al capone was involved in the murder torrio aided by capone quickly took control of the liquor business in chicago.
the colosimo murder was only the start of the violence to come with prohibition all across the country.
organized crime had existed long before prohibition but once prohibition took effect criminals from los angeles to boston in powerful gangs or as individual operators took control of the now illegal liquor business in their cities expanding their operations and criminal networks beyond anything seen before often violently.
the single most violent incident in prohibition came near its end.
by 1929 capone had consolidated his control of illegal liquor in chicago.
he also controlled much of the police force the elected political leadership and the courts of chicago and had his own squad of gunmen and rumrunners to bring illegal alcohol to the city especially from canada.
when an upstart gangster known as bugs moran tried to take part of his business away capone hired professional killers.
on february 14 1929 five men two dressed as police officers arrived at morans headquarters.
they lined up the seven men there against a wall shot and killed them and calmly drove off.
that bloody st valentines day massacre provided a fitting capstone to a bloody decade wherein gangsters killed each other and innocent bystanders.
many other people were killed in drunken brawls in the illegal saloons or speakeasies that proliferated or by drinking improperly made bootleg liquor that poisoned them.
by 1929 after all the killing and dying americans were wondering whether prohibition was such a good thing after all.
capones influence with politicians and police made him safe from arrest in chicago but after 1929 the newly elected herbert hoover demanded that the u s treasury department do something to uphold the law even in chicago and capone was eventually arrested and imprisoned for income tax evasion in 1931.
the liquor trade continued unabated.
while prohibition related crimes made the headlines in the 1920s they were not the only criminal enterprise to flourish in a decade that many experienced as particularly lawless.
in 1919 charles ponzi opened a new investment firm in boston announcing an extraordinarily high rate of return because of the skill he claimed in international trade.
in fact he simply paid old investors with money provided by new investors.
other than using the profits to live a very high life ponzi did not invest at all.
the scheme made ponzi rich and famous but newspapers and bank investigators started asking questions and ponzis world collapsed in august 1920.
he was arrested and eventually deported from the united states.
investors lost all their money.
the ponzi scheme was neither the first nor the last time that someone tried to get rich by catering to the greed of others but it became the term used to describe that kind of fraud.
perhaps the largest criminal enterprise of the 1920s was conducted within the federal government itself.
in 1909 the government set aside three large oil reserves two in california at elk hills and buena vista and one in wyoming at teapot dome.
they were managed by the navy department until the harding administration came into office in 1921.
harding a most genial president hated to say no to anyone especially old friends whom he met for poker games and illegal drinking throughout his administration.
when hardings secretary of the interior albert b.
fall asked to have the oil reserves transferred from the navy department to the department of the interior harding agreed.
falls long standing ties to the oil industry might have helped him manage the national assets.
in 1922 officials in the u s navy were growing nervous about the growth of japans navy and wanted some of the reserve oil pumped and transferred to pearl harbor.
to meet the navy s needs fall secretly leased the reserves to oil companies owned by his friends harry f sinclair and edward doheny for very low rates.
ihe two pumped oil from the reserves paying a royalty in oil to the navy.
the navy got the oil it needed in hawaii.
sinclair and doheny made a considerable profit.
after a part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 602 congressional investigation led by montana senators burton k wheeler and ihomas walsh began in 1924 it was discovered that sinclair had made a gift of 260 000 to fall while doheny had lent the secretary 100 000 with no interest or deadline for payment.
a great deal of additional money seems to have changed hands behind the scenes as sinclair and doheny not only stole from the government but from their own companies.
once congress began to unearth the trail of oil and money what became known as the teapot dome scandal kept spreading.
eventually the u s supreme court declared both leases illegal and fraudulent fall was found guilty of accepting a bribe and spent a year in prison and the harding administration was tagged as one of the most corrupt in history.
while the teapot dome scandal was the largest of the harding scandals there were plenty of others.
hardings appointee as head of the veterans bureau charles r forbes managed to lose some 200 million in 2 years buying new goods at a high price from friends and selling goods on hand as cheap surplus.
the arrangement made money for his friends but cost the government a fortune.
similar scandals involved the alien property custodian office which was supposed to manage german assets in the united states and the prohibition enforcement division of the treasury department which it was said would ignore violations as long as the right amount of money was left in a fishbowl in a new york city hotel room.
with senior level officials of the u s government behaving in such a manner it was no surprise that regular citizens viewed obedience to the law as optional.
r i 21 2 teapot dome the name given to a major scandal of the harding presidency in which u s navy oil reserves including those at teapot dome wyoming were used to enrich the secretary of the interior and his friends.
the vote for women in august 1920 just months after the prohibition amendment had been ratified the u s constitution was amended again to say the right of citizens of the united states to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of sex the nineteenth amendment took effect in time for women in every part of the united states to vote in the presidential election of november 1920.
womens suffrage and the new roles for women that evolved in the 1920s helped shape that decade as much or more than prohibition or any other development.
the women most associated with the two amendments susan b anthony and elizabeth cady stanton leaders in the long lasting womens suffrage movement and frances willard of the womens christian temperance union all died before the campaigns they led achieved their goals.
it was carrie chapman catts privilege to preside over the victory.
catt was an active member of both the womens christian temperance union and the national american woman suffrage association.
the organizations provided a network for her to meet other women and those connec tions would determine the rest of her career.
catt served two terms as president of the nawsa from 1900 to 1904 and again during the crucial years from 1915 to 1920.
as world war i began in europe catt was active in the womens peace party but left it after the united states entered the war.
other women such as jane addams and jeanette rankin the first woman in congress continued to oppose the war when such views were seen as dangerously unpatriotic.
catt in contrast demanded a suffrage amendment as a war measure if the united states was going to fight for democracy catt argued then expanding democracy in the united states to include women was essential.
in 1919 the northeastern federation of colored womens clubs extracted a promise from a sometimes reluctant catt not to agree to any compromise language in the constitutional amendment that could leave enforcement to the states.
they knew all too well what southern state legislatures would do with the votes of african american women.
sadly after the war catt did all too little to support voting rights for african american women south or north.
in spite of differences about the war itself women found ways to work together.
jeannette rankin introduced the anthony amendment the womans suffrage amend ment to the house of representatives on january 10 1918.
the amendment passed chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontented tim thinking historically understanding different perspectives on womens rights very soon after women gained the vote carrie chapman catt helped the national american woman suffrage association turn itself into the league of women voters and served as its honorary president until her death in 1947.
some nawsa veterans debated whether women should affiliate with the democratic and republican parties or remain independent.
different women followed different courses of action the newly organized league initially an all white organization committed itself to nonpartisan education and helping women join parties and vote wisely.
while the league encouraged women to engage in politics other women who viewed the right to vote as merely a first step toward gaining other rights pushed for a much more militant approach to women s rights.
alice paul led the national woman s party that adopted a declaration of principles in 1923 which in part insisted in short that woman shall no longer be in any form of subjection to man in law or in custom but shall in every way be on an equal plane in rights as she has always been and will continue to be in responsibilities and obligations.
in their quest for these rights the woman s party began a long fight for an equal rights amendment to the u s constitution.
other women took a very different view of the place of women in society.
opposition to women s suffrage did not disappear in 1920 and one antisuffrage group changed the name of its journal from protest to the woman patriot dedicated to the defense of womanhood motherhood the family and the state against suffragism feminism and socialism.
it was a long title but it spelled out their agenda as did a 1921 article in the woman patriot that said that they fought the grant of the ballot because they foresaw that it was the logical boundary line between the old institution of marriage ideal of the family as the unit of society and the feminist revolt against nature.
battle lines of a contest that would continue for the next hundred years were being drawn.
african american women had their own concerns.
during the 1920s rigid segregation made voting almost impossible for african american women or men.
they also faced other pressing issues as charlotte hawkins brown 1883 1961 of the national colored woman s club told a conference of mostly white women that was meeting in memphis tennessee in 1920 i came to memphis crushed and humiliated o n my way to this conference.
had a premonition of trouble as she was in a sleeping car but found twelve young white men sitting around.
a young man leaned forward and said we have wired ahead to have you taken off this train.
now we give you your choice to get off this car right away and go into the day coach or be taken off.
the leader of the crowd said let s march and these young men got in front of us and two or three behind and we were ushered into the colored day coach friends what do you say about the cold heart edness that we have felt we have begun to feel that you are not after all interested in us we feel that so far as lynching is concerned that if the white woman would take hold of the situation that lynching would be stopped mob violence stamped out and yet the guilty would have justice meted out by due course of law and would be punished accordingly.
want to say to you when you read in the paper where a colored man has insulted a white woman just multiply that by one thousand and you have some idea of the number of colored women insulted by white men.
source ellen skinner editor women and the national experience sources in women s history boston prentice hall 2011 mari jo buhl teresa murphy jane gerhard editor women and the making of america upper saddle river nj pearson prentice hall 2008.
thinking critically 1.
cause and effect how did the passage of the nineteenth amendment change the place of women in american political life.
what aspects of women s participation in politics were not changed by the amendment.
comparison compare and contrast the responses of to the passage of the nineteenth amendment included here.
how would you explain the differences you note.
111 the house 274 to 136.
the senate moved more slowly but under catts leadership the nawsa helped defeat four antisuffrage senators in november 1918 and the amendment was approved and sent on to the states in june 1919.
a little more than a year later the tennessee legislature gave the amendment the required 36 state.
on august 26 1920 the secretary of state announced that the amendment had been ratified.
that fall more than 26 million women across the country voted in the presidential election.
one of them charlotte woodward at 91 was the only surviving signer of the seneca falls declaration of 1848.
it had been 72 years since elizabeth cady stanton and her allies proclaimed their right to vote.
604 partvil war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 many women in the 1920s asserted new freedoms not only in dress and style but also in claiming the right to hold a job though too often the jobs that were available were at the bottom of the economic ladder in places like the typing pool.
s ii a revolution in culture manners morals and automobiles both gaining the right to vote and prohibition played a part in fostering a new lifestyle for a generation of young women who came to be known as flappers flappers cut their hair short and dressed in ways that exposed more skin on their necks arms and legs than any previous generation.
some flappers embraced their own sexual freedom objecting to the older rules about sexuality and many chose to drink or smoke.
certainly the flappers of the 1920s were not the first women to rebel against the sexual double standard that made women guardians of morality.
women had broken out of assigned spheres to fight for the right to vote and for social reform.
but in the 1920s having won the right to vote the activism of many women changed drastically.
flappers were determined to have equal freedom as men to do as they pleased in work and in their social lives.
the emergence of the flappers was one but only one aspect of that new activism.
preprohibition saloons and bars had been male preserves.
no respectable woman would enter one.
however the illegal speakeasies that replaced the old bars in the 1920s often in the same location catered not only to men but also to women and not just flappers.
as elmer davis a thoughtful observer of his times said of prohibition the old days when father spent his evenings at cassidys bar with the rest of the boys are gone and probably gone forever cassidy may still be in business at the old stand and father may still go down there of evenings but since prohibition mother goes down with him it was not only young middle class women flappers who challenged their status in the united states in the 1920s.
the voices of those advocating for women had become stronger and elected officials began to listen to the newly expanded electorate.
in 1921 congress passed the sheppard towner act providing federal funds for prenatal and infant care.
in 1922 congress passed the cable act protecting the citizenship rights of american women who married noncitizens.
by 1923 three women all republicans were serving in the house of representatives.
women became active in both political parties and ran for office in all parts of the country.
in new mexico a descendent of one of the old spanish land holding families adelina otero warren who had been honored for her leadership when new mexico ratified the nineteenth chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontei 60s1 211 21 2 american voices ellen wells page a flappers appeal 1922 215 i middle and upper class young women known as flappers were the symbols of the revolution in morals that took place after world war i.
in previous generations young women from good families were expected to be the guardians of morality but in the 1920s these women became the leaders of a revolt against the social norms.
flappers wore make up and exposed parts of their bodies necks and arms that no decent woman of earlier generations would have shown.
they stopped wearing corsets danced closely with men and rode in automobiles that gave them privacy.
some smoked drank and engaged in premarital sex.
far from hiding their revolt they gloried in it.
one self described flapper appealed for understanding of her generation.
if one judges by appearances i suppose i am a flapper.
i am within the age limit.
i wear bobbed hair the badge of flapper hood.
and oh what a comfort it is.
i powder my nose.
i wear fringed skirts and bright colored sweaters and scarfs and waists blouses with peter pan collars and low heeled finale hopper shoes.
i adore to dance.
i spend a large amount of time in automobiles.
i attend hops and proms and ball games and crew races and other affairs at men s colleges.
but none the less some of the most thoroughbred superflappers might blush to claim sistership or even remote relationship with such as 1 1 don t use rouge or lipstick or pluck my eyebrows.
i don t smoke i ve tried it and don t like it or drink.
i want to beg all you parents and grandparents and friends and teachers and preachers you who constitute the older generation to overlook our shortcomings at least for the present and to appreciate our virtues.
i wonder if it ever occurred to any of you that it required brains to become and remain a successful flapper.
indeed it does.
it requires an enormous amount of cleverness and energy to keep going at the proper pace.
it requires self knowledge and self analysis.
we must know our capabilities and limitations.
we must be constantly on the alert.
attainment of flapperhood is a big and serious undertaking.
you repeat skeptically.
then why aren t they used to better advantage.
that is exactly it.
it is the effect of the war.
and then you blame prohibition but this is my point instead of helping us work out our problems with constructive sympathetic thinking and acting you have muddled them for us more hopelessly with destructive public condemnation and denunciation we are the younger generation.
the war tore away our spiritual foundations and challenged our faith.
we are struggling to regain our equilibrium.
the times have made us older and more experienced than you were at our age.
source ellen welles page a flapper s appeal to parents outlook december 6 1922.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how did page define flapperhood.
contextualization what does the document tell us about typical 1920s explanations of the flapper phenomenon.
what was page s attitude towards such explanations.
amendment ran for congress in 1922 winning the republican nomination but losing the final election.
had warren won her close race she would have been the first latina among the first women in congress.
in 1921 margaret sanger who became a birth control advocate while working as a visiting nurse in new york city organized a birth control conference for physicians and researchers in new york city and later the same year founded the american birth control league.
in 1923 she opened a physician run birth control clinic since bylaw only physicians not nurses like sanger were allowed to dispense birth control information in the 1920s.
she organized several international conferences on birth control in the 1920s.
in the 1930s she tested federal laws against the importation of foreign made contraceptives and won.
in 1942 the american birth control league became planned parenthood with sanger as honorary chair.
planned parenthood also supported the research that led to the first birth control pill approved by the u s food and drug administration in 1960.
while responses to prohibition and womens issues were changing the culture technological changes of the 1920s also reshaped the ways americans thought about culture and morality.
for many americans urban and rural the radio and motion pictures brought news of national and international events and shaped a more unified and fast changing national culture.
the relatively low cost automobile made it possible for more americans to travel while giving younger americans a degree of privacy 606 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 unheard of by previous generations especially once enclosed sedans replaced open cars in the mid 1920s.
washing machines refrigerators vacuum cleaners and toasters reshaped traditional housework for women.
in addition new forms of financing allowed people to buy all of these goods on installment plans dramatically increasing consumer debt while making the new inventions available to more people.
when the nations first radio station kdka in pittsburgh began operating broadcasting the election returns in the harding cox presidential contest in november 1920 it ushered in a new era in news and entertainment.
within a very short period of time hundreds of stations were reporting news playing records covering religious services sports events and political campaigns and broadcasting live concerts once they had figured out how to manage acoustical control.
in 1927 congress passed the radio act which created a plan to license radio stations and regulate the wavelengths at which they broadcast.
a decade after kdka started its first broadcast half of all american households owned a radio.
although automobiles had already been introduced they became increasingly common during the 1920s.
fords chryslers chevrolets cadillacs lexingtons maxwells and hudsons showed up in front of american homes.
during that decade the number of cars registered in the united states tripled from 9 million to 26 5 million.
auto related industries such as steel paint textile and tire production along with highway construction boomed in the 1920s.
auto dealerships gas stations repair shops roadside restaurants and hotels grew.
congress provided funds for the federal bureau of public roads in 1921 and metropolitan areas expanded as distances became easier to traverse.
new york city built the bronx river parkway connecting large parts of the city and los angeles opened new highways into the heretofore farming country of the san fernando valley.
the 1920s was the first decade in which more americans lived in cities and towns than on farms.
it was also a decade in which suburbs expanded dramatically as the automobile and growing roadways allowed people to spread further than the train and streetcar tracks had during the first wave of suburbanization in the 1880s.
the pace of suburbanization was quickened when general motors purchased a number of streetcar companies and tore up the tracks replacing the service with general motors buses.
from new york to los angeles the nations trolley system slowly withered replaced with buses that could move more freely but that later added to growing traffic congestion.
like the automobile silent motion pictures had been invented well before world war i and they too became an important part of the culture of the 1920s.
by the end of the decade an average of 100 million americans out of a total population of 123 million attended a movie every week.
movies offered fun escape and entertainment.
for people in small towns and rural areas movies brought the larger world into their community.
after 1927 motion picture technology enabled the addition of sound and voice and talkies became popular.
whether people watched the comedies of charlie chaplin the cartoons of walt disneys mickey mouse created in 1928 the religious enthusiasm of the ten commandments and the king of kings or the sexually suggestive acting of clara bow and rudolph valentino movies gave them new ways of looking at the world.
not insignificantly movie theaters were air conditioned well before most other buildings making a summer evening at the movies especially appealing.
movies newspapers and magazines such as time started in 1923 created an age of new heroes.
heroes seemed to be emerging all the time including babe ruth of the new york yankees who hit 60 home runs in 1927 in the increasingly popular game of baseball or boxers like jack dempsey and gene tunney whose matches generated over a million dollars in revenue or gertrude ederle the first listening to the radio became possible for many in the 1920s unitiq the culture in shared information and shared tastes as never before.
chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontentec me 21 1 2t2 21j 214 great migration the mass movement of african americans from the rural south to the urban north spurred especially by new job opportunities that began during world war i and the 1920s.
woman to swim the english channel in 1926 or the decade s most celebrated hero charles a lindbergh who flew solo across the atlantic in his airplane the spirit of st louis in 1927 and was welcomed home with what was becoming a new york institution a ticker tape parade down fifth avenue.
in addition a new form of self defined sophisticated culture took hold.
when the new yorker appeared in 1925 its editor harold ross said that it was not edited for the old lady in dubuque but rather was a reflection in word and picture of metropolitan life part of the new yorkers success was the guidance it gave to members or aspiring members of new yorks smart set on how to navigate the city s nightlife which nightclubs speakeasies cafes and hotel lounges provided the best entertainment the grandest design and though it didnt overtly say so the best drinks.
the u s writers of the 1920s spoke to a generation and class disillusioned with the idealism of past decades as well as the business and money making that characterized so much of 1920s bourgeoisie culture.
many lived abroad and were dubbed the lost generation by gertrude stein who herself lived most of her life in paris.
among them were ernest hemingway and other writers as different as t s eliot and john dos passos.
sinclair lewis published main street in 1920 and babbitt in 1922 which both looked at the stifling conformity and hypocrisy of small town america.
f scott fitzgerald dropped out of princeton where he had spent most of his college career at parties and then described that culture he knew so well in this side of paradise in 1920 and the great gatsby in 1925.
in their literature and their assumptions the social and artistic elite who lived between the end of the first world war in 1918 and the coming of the great depression in 1929 lived at a unique prosperous and discontented moment in american history and literature.
the harlem renaissance and marcus garvey in 1920 as in 1820 90 percent of african americans lived in the south.
however by 1920 some blacks had begun to move away from rural poverty and segregation in the rural south to new opportunities in southern cities and in the larger industrial cities of the north.
although the height of the great migration the great movement of african americans from rural south to urban north took place in the 1940s and 1950s see chapter 24 it had its beginnings during and immediately after world war i.
the result was both a population shift and a cultural flowering see map 21 1.
world war i created new opportunities for african americans.
as work expanded factories in the north needed more workers.
the illinois central railroad which ran straight from the heart of the cotton growing mississippi delta to job rich chicago enabled those who were moving.
the nations most widely read black newspaper the chicago defender announced the great northern drive in may 1917.
the newspaper called on southern blacks to make the flight out of egypt commissioned songs like bound for the promised land and negotiated special group rates with the illinois central.
the paper told sharecroppers about jobs available in the stockyards and meat packing houses in chicago.
black music reflected the emotions of those who moved north.
the blues music born out of gospel ragtime and jazz began on back porches small town bars and dance halls and prison cells in the mississippi delta early in the 1900s.
at first blues musicians sang of hard lives in the south.
john hurt sang avalon mississippi my home town always on my mind and bill broonzy sang anywhere in mississippi is my native home but in the 1920s the blues moved north.
those who had sung about life in mississippi began to sing im going to detroit get myself a good job.
tired of stayin round here with the starvation mob some 50 000 african americans moved from the south to chicago during world war i and another 100 000 in the 10 years that followed.
chicagos black population grew from 44 000 in 1910 to 109 000 in 1920 to 234 000 in 1930.
during and after world war ii many more blacks would follow.
in addition to chicago 608 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 w pacific ocean strong population growth i mooeraje population growth r i population lof africabkalnericc map 21 1 people moving in the 1920s.
many americans chose to or were forced to move during the 1920s.
cities and suburbs grew rapidly throughout the era african americans moved from the south to northern cities such as chicago detroit and new york.
in some areas the farmers depression meant giving up on cultivated land and starting over to farm another region or become a city worker.
african americans moved to new york detroit los angeles philadelphia syracuse new york oakland california milwaukee newark gary indiana and other cities that offered jobs and a modicum of freedom.
cotton planters did everything possible to stop the northern migration.
ihe chicago defender was branded as dangerously subversive.
plantation owners opposed anything more than rudimentary education for blacks so they would have few skills to take north.
in greenville mississippi the towns leading white citizen leroy percy opposed the blan because he feared that their brand of terror would lead to an exodus within a year of the black people who were essential to the economy.
african americans kept moving.
the novelist richard wright described the experience of many of the early migrants in his novel native son and his autobiography black boy.
wright was born to a sharecropper family in natchez mississippi.
he left the rural south for memphis and then in 1927 for chicago to experience he said the warmth of other suns it was not an easy move.
wright remembered i had fled a known terror and perhaps i could cope with this unknown terror ihe north to which the southern immigrants came was not always a welcoming place.
after world war i some whites sought to reclaim the industrial jobs they had held before the war at the same time that wartime demand for workers ebbed.
salaries were much higher in the north but so were rents.
living conditions in increasingly segregated and rapidly growing urban neighborhoods made for tightly packed homes.
race riots in chicago and st louis in 1919 made it very clear just how unwelcoming the north could be.
african americans had long lived in cities like new york providence and philadelphia.
free black communities emerged before the civil war in places like pittsburgh cleveland and cincinnati.
in 1910 only a tiny percentage of northern chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontent harlem renaissance a new african american cultural awareness that flourished in literature art and music in the 1920s.
blacks were professionals mostly preachers or teachers in african american churches and schools.
most northern black men were janitors porters servants or waiters while black women were cooks laundresses maids or servants.
still there was often conflict between these long time urban blacks and the newcomers from the south who started arriving in large numbers after 1917.
each found the social and economic position of the other threatening.
nevertheless in spite of fear pain and segregation something very important started happening in the expanding black communities of the urban north in the 1920s most of all in new york citys harlem see map 21 2.
when the philosopher alain locke published the new negro in 1925 the book he hoped would define the harlem renaissance he wrote that in that era the african american was moving forward under the control largely of his own objectives while the intellectual and cultural leaders of harlem celebrated their renaissance other african americans especially those on the lowest rungs of the economy looked to the charismatic marcus garvey 1887 1940 to foster racial american voices alain locke voices of the harlem renaissance 1925 hen howard university professor alain locke editedvne new negro voices of the harlem renaissance in 7 925 a collection of the work of many of the artists poets and novelists whose work was part of the movement the word negro was the preferred term of respect for most americans of african descent just as the term african american would be in future decades.
locke became known as the dean of the new negro movement an artistic and intellectual flowering of an assertive new cultural identity.
the acknowledged capital of this new movement was new york city s harlem and during the 1920s the harlem renaissance defined elite black culture.
from alain locke s foreword this volume aims to document the new negro culturally and socially to register the transformations of the inner and outer life of the negro in america that have so significantly taken place negro life is not only establishing new contacts and founding new centers it is finding a new soul.
there is a fresh spiritual and cultural focusing.
we have as the heralding sign an unusual outburst of creative expression.
there is a renewed race spirit that consciously and proudly sets itself apart.
justifiably then we speak of the offerings of this book embodying these ripening forces as culled from the first fruits of the negro renaissance.
from james weldon johnson s essay in the new negro harlem the culture capital in the history of new york the significance of the name harlem has changed from dutch to irish to jewish to negro.
of these changes the last has come most swiftly.
throughout colored america from massachusetts to mississippi and across the continent to los angeles and seattle its name which as late as fifteen years ago had scarcely been heard now stands for the negro metropolis.
harlem is indeed the great mecca for the sight seer the pleasure seeker the curious the adventurous the enterprising the ambitious and the talented of the whole negro world for the lure of it has reached down to every island of the carib sea and has penetrated even into africa.
in the make up of new york harlem is not merely a negro colony or community it is a city within a city the greatest negro city in the world.
it is not a slum or a fringe it is located in the heart of manhattan and occupies one of the most beautiful and healthful sections of the city.
it is not a quarter of dilapidated tenements but is made up of new law apartments and handsome dwellings with well paved and well lighted streets.
it has its own churches social and civic centers shops theaters and other places of amusement.
and it contains more negroes to the square mile than any other spot on earth.
i believe that the negro s advantages and opportunities are greater in harlem than in any other place in the country and that harlem will become the intellectual the cultural and the financial center for negroes of the united states and will exert a vital influence upon all negro peoples.
source alain locke editor the new negro voices of the harlem renaissance new introduction by arnold rampersad originally 1925 new edition new york simon schuster 1992 thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis according to the authors what made harlem different from other african american communities.
contextualization what did locke and johnson see as the hallmarks of the negro or harlem renaissance.
610 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 apcara ca ca ss mraeea.
eej q mp fsnis g e2j es31 igxje cal jqrrrx r nil jy msa ttsih b i j eezs3 kx3 a w 3eszs iaqufi 1 5.
7o a l ezzz q qt ljezzoag laezzmavai cs3ess3eaq1 b e3 ezxs3 e23 ar t vr.
ftfle73 ia e3a tseb sssvsi csre a gg y j 3 3 r i m jqtif 11 1 hc3ezxz3ez31 b e23 m ez3czz74ez3 ffl oezz7z3ezz3l acacaaca cx3j 3c3tx3 l ng3ecm3eir i e2 a 3 e r i rr i e i jlzznag maamljlj.
black harlem 1911 predominantly black population 134th ctdcct ictczjdl a cm cm cm f u nj acmcmljejl d sa cm i on 12 il icrjrr it irrril c j laan r lm ekzzs3 czzzz3 ez3 pw i ewzz3 ezzzz3 ez3 e3 map 21 2 harlem in the 1920s.
before world war i only a few blocks of new york city s harlem neighbor hood had an african american majority.
by the end of the 1920s nearly all of harlem from central park to the harlem river was an african american community and for many including the voices of the harlem renaissance but also the followers of marcus garvey it was the capital of black america.
pride and self determination.
garvey established the universal negro improvement and conservation association and african communities league unia in jamaica in august 1914.
for poor blacks especially those seeking to adjust to life in northern cities garveys message rejecting integration with white america and focusing on self help self determination and african nationalism struck a powerful chord.
at the beginning of 1918 the new york branch of the unia had about 1 500 members.
by 1920 garvey claimed a membership of 2 4 million in 30 branches across the country.
in the early 1920s garvey outlined an independent path for blacks not to hate other people but to take responsibility for their own fate.
we are organized he said for the absolute purpose of bettering our condition industrially commercially socially religiously and politically garvey was at the height of his popularity in the early 1920s.
in 1919 the unia purchased a large auditorium in harlem and in august 1920 25 000 delegates from africa the caribbean and the united states adopted the negro declaration of rights.
a unia parade in harlem included unia men of the african mhnmmramk marcus garvey pictured with some of his followers used lavish uniforms and parades to foster pride and self confidence in his mostly poor african american supporters.
chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontei 611 legion in uniform and a delegation of 200 women of the black cross nurses marching in a show of strength and pride.
garvey created a shipping company the black star line to carry passengers and freight between the united states the islands of the caribbean and africa.
this crown jewel of garveys economic development plan was launched in 1920 and eventually owned a number of ships.
it was also garveys downfall.
selling stock at 5 per share garvey eventually collected over 750 000 perhaps much more.
but whether through mismanagement or corruption or both the line floundered.
the black star line was attacked by blacks as well as whites.
in december 1920 w e b.
du bois published an indictment of the black star line.
the finances of the black star line collapsed and with it the rest of garvey s u s based efforts.
he was arrested for fraud convicted and sentenced to 5 years in federal prison in 1923 and began serving his term in the atlanta federal penitentiary in february 1925.
in november 1927 president calvin coolidge commuted garveys sentence but had him deported to jamaica.
garvey continued to build the uni a in jamaica and traveled through much of the world but his influence though significant declined in the united states.
quick review how did changes in american culture reflect the postwar desire for fun and leisure.
when was that not the cause of change.
the 1920s the conflicts about american ideals 21 3 explain the elements of discrimination hardship and fundamentalism that also shaped american life in the 1920s.
while the 1920s are often remembered as the jazz age the decade of prohibition speakeasies new automobiles flappers and parties large numbers of americans lived quite different lives.
for many the crime and the drinking were an evil to be shunned.
some who refused to violate the prohibition laws lived quiet and law abiding lives others joined organizations that were determined to enforce prohibition not always by lawful means.
growing confidence and hope among african americans particularly threatened white southerners and long simmering tensions heated dangerously.
despite the relative prosperity many people on farms and in the poor neighborhoods of big cities still lived lives of desperate poverty.
in addition many native born americans came to distrust and fear immigrants or those who were different and the teaching of evolution threatened the very fabric of faith for others.
these conflicts challenged core american ideals on many levels and reactions ranged from quiet frustration to vocal defiance.
the rise of the ku klux kian in the 1920s as prohibition came into force the ku klux kian was also revived as a defender of prohibition as well as an opponent of immigration rights for african americans and anything that undermined the dominance of white native born protestants in the nations life.
the original kian had been one of several white terrorist organizations that opposed reconstruction after the civil war killing blacks and their white supporters and burning black schools and churches.
because of prosecution by the grant administration the reconstruction era kian virtually disappeared in the 1870s.
in 1915 a georgian william joseph simmons inspired by nostalgia for a bygone era recreated the kian.
during its first few years simmonss kian was an insignificant organization of a few hundred members.
then in the early 1920s a texas dentist hiram wesley evans pushed simmons aside and turned the kian into a hugely successful hate organization aimed at african americans immigrants catholics jews 612 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 rx b f f m jm.
the ku klux kian staged massive rallies and demonstrations such as this one in washington dc in 1925 and anyone who challenged the prohibition laws.
under evanss leadership the kian increased from a few hundred to as many as 5 million members including a female auxiliary that became the sepa rate women of the ku klux kian wkkk.
as the kian struck fear into many it enriched a few leaders who controlled access to everything from membership dues to kian robes and parapher nalia which had to be ordered directly from the national headquarters.
the kian slogan was one flag one school one bible it advocated for strict enforcement of prohibition and ironically some thought a cabinet level department of education that would ensure that all american children were taught klan defined patriotism or 100 americanism it gave flags and bibles to public schools while demanding the firing of catholic and jewish teachers.
the kian sought to require every student to attend public schools and in oregon got the state to outlaw private and parochial schools though the law was overturned by the u s supreme court before it took effect.
most people understood that the kian also had another agenda maintaining rigid racial segregation and by using terror if need be keeping african americans from asserting the right to vote or getting ahead economically.
if a black man was accused of flirting with a white woman he might expect a whipping or worse from robed kian visitors.
if the kian discovered an interracial couple they attacked them.
if a black did not want to sell land at a price offered by a kian member he or she might expect a lashing until agreeing to sell.
in 1920 nathan taylor an african american attorney in mississippi who previously had been protected by white attorneys was abducted by the kian and taken out to the middle of the mississippi river and warned that one way or another he was to leave the state.
preferring to leave alive taylor moved to chicago.
the kian often with the women of the kian in the lead launched boycotts of stores owned by blacks catholics or jewish people.
kian publications condemned the foreign influence of the catholic church and reprinted articles from henry fords fiercely anti semitic dearborn independent about what they called the money grasping jews the kians constitution defined a goal to unite white male persons native born gentile citizens of the united states of america who owe no allegiance of any nature to any foreign government nation institution sect ruler person or people to shield the sanctity of the home and the chastity of womanhood to maintain forever white supremacy.
the kian provided entertainment in isolated small towns where there was not much to do.
a hundred thousand people attended a kian rally on july 4 1923 in kokomo indiana which featured music and food.
almost as many attended a speech by imperial wizard evans at ku klux kian day at the texas state fair in dallas that fall.
the kian was especially strong in the midwest and the south but there was kian activity from maine to california.
a number of groups from the catholic knights of columbus to the african american press to the new and specifically the anti kian american unity league aul began to challenge the kian.
where the kian spoke of pure americanism the aul spoke of true americanism in some places pitched battles erupted between chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontei ie 613 21 3 eugenics a movement that claimed scientific basis to apply darwinian theory to the natural selection of the fittest human beings to reproduce and improve the human race.
kian members and their opponents but one of the most effective anti kian tactics was simply to find and publicize lists of members in the secret organization asking is your neighbor a kluxer opposition to the kian battles among its leaders and exposure of internal corruption all weakened the organization and by 1930 the kian which had once had more than 5 million members had dropped to 50 000.
although it did not disappear the kian as a power in american life was a phenomenon of the 1920s.
eugenics and i q.
tests the science of discrimination it was not only the kian that sought to marginalize african americans asians catholics and jews in the united states in the 1920s.
the eugenics movement used ideas from evolutionary biology derived loosely inaccurately and simplistically many said from charles darwin to prove that some ethnic groups were more highly evolved than others.
the eugenics movement was begun in england in the 1880s by francis galton who concluded that the social elite people like himself were significantly higher on the evolutionary scale than englands working class who in turn were more evolved than societys poor and criminal element.
eugenics quickly became popular in the united states.
eugenics gave a scientific patina to efforts to limit the immigration of ethnic groups from southern and eastern europe and from asia.
southern segregationists quickly latched on to eugenics as a scientific justification for racial segregation.
margaret sanger the advocate for family planning and birth control was a lifelong advocate of eugenics particularly its focus on preventing inherited traits and weaknesses which had been a long used approach to agricultural breeding.
the eugenics movement applied this knowledge to human concerns including various efforts to limit possibilities for those with disabilities such as deafness or limited intelligence the unfit to procreate.
henry goddard a prominent american psychologist and eugenicist established an intelligence testing program on ellis island in 1913 which was used to sort the thousands of immigrants entering the country helping to create some of the notions about higher or lower intelligence in various ethnic groups.
efforts to predict intelligence and ability grew as a result of the development of scientific intelligence testing that began with the army during world war i.
by the 1920s educators led by stanford universitys lewis m terman and columbia universitys edward l thorndike believed that whatever exists at all exists in some amount and that by measuring the amount of intelligence in a given child through the newly popular iq or intelligence quotient test educators could assign him or her a mental age and sort the more advanced for college and the rest for menial jobs.
these tests actually measured the kind of culturally specific knowledge that children of native born protestant and northern european families learned at home so test takers from those backgrounds tended to score considerably higher than the children of southern europeans who still scored higher than eastern european jews.
those of african and asian descent tended to score the lowest on the iq tests.
such science reinforced immigration restriction and racial segregation in the 1920s.
interest in eugenics faded in the 1930s especially as adolph hitler embraced the idea in mein kampf and used it as the basis of his anti semitic and anti slavic efforts to achieve a pure race and eliminate any they considered unfit iq tests remained popular much longer being used well after world war ii to sort and track students in school.
in the 1920s however eugenics and iq testing enforced popular opinion in the united states.
immigration restriction 1924 while groups like the anti saloon league and the kian were often hostile to african americans catholics and jews they found allies in congress who were also trying to end further immigration into the country.
in 1924 the opponents of immigration 614 partvil war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 succeeded spectacularly when congress cut off virtually all immigration from southern and eastern europe africa and asia.
in addition to anti immigrant groups like the kian labor unions and some african american organizations feared that a never ending stream of new immigrants could depress wages or take jobs.
cultural elitists supported by the eugenics movement worried that the traditional anglo american culture was being diluted.
hostility to new immigrants was not new.
in the 1840s the know nothing party attempted to limit irish immigration.
in 1882 congress excluded chinese immigrants.
the largest movement to limit immigration to the united states however was led by the immigration restriction league irl founded in 1894.
in 1917 on the eve of u s entry into world war i congress passed a literacy test for new immigrants over president wilsons veto.
similar legislation had also been vetoed by presidents cleveland and taft but by 1917 the anti immigrant vote in congress was strong.
more immigrants than expected were in fact literate and the literacy test did not significantly reduce the number of immigrants coming to the united states.
people like wilbur carr of the u s consular service warned that polands jewish ghettos were about to empty into the united states after world war i fueling new fears of a new horde of immigrants from war torn europe.
in response congress passed an emergency immigration restriction act in 1921 for the first time setting quotas for the numbers of immigrants who could enter the united states.
one of the architects of even tougher anti immigrant legislation was congressman albert johnson of washington state.
johnson hated radical organizations like the iww and was convinced incorrectly that most of its members were immigrants.
he was also strongly anti japanese and a member of the asiatic exclusion league.
in addition he was influenced by the scientists who argued that eugenics and iq tests proved that asians as well as southern and eastern europeans were inferior people to nordic stock.
johnson became chair of the house committee on immigration in 1919 and set out to write new legislation.
in setting the quota for the number of immigrants johnson decided not to refer to the 1910 census which had been the basis of the 1921 restriction but which was taken well after large numbers of russian italian and other southern european immigrants had arrived in the united states.
instead he referred to the 1890 census taken just before that wave of immigration to set new quotas.
using the 1890 census and limiting the percentage of immigrants allowed into the country to 2 percent of that number johnson cut the total number of immigrants allowed into the united states per year from 357 803 to 161 184.
the proposed law also tilted the ethnic makeup of the new arrivals against ethnic groups that had arrived in large numbers between 1890 and 1910.
italy was cut from 42 057 immigrants per year to 3 912 poland from 21 076 to 5 156 and russia from 5 638 to 474.
yugoslavia created out of the pre world war i austria hungarian empire was cut from 6 426 to 851 immigrants.
russian jews italians and slavic immigrants were reduced to a trickle.
in contrast german immigration was only cut from 67 607 to 51 299 and britains from 77 342 to 62 458.
northern europeans did not generally fill their quotas but the rest of the world was reduced drastically.
under the johnson formula japan should have been allowed 240 immigrants but johnson insisted that the bill ban all japanese immigration to the united states.
urban representatives led by new yorks fiorello laguardia protested.
the american jewish committee criticized the bill.
it did no good.
the new 1924 immigration restriction passed the house and senate by wide margins and president coolidge who had already told congress that america must be kept american signed the bill.
although some modifications were made from 1924 until 1965 immigration to the united states from most of europe and all of asia and africa was severely limited.
the 1924 legislation however did not impact all immigration.
it did not stop irish immigration since large numbers of irish immigrants had come to the united states before 1890 which under johnsons formula kept the quota high.
it also had no nicola sacco and bartolomeo vanzetti s trial symbolized the fears of immigrants to some and the hopes for justice for others.
vanzetti defined the way he wanted to be remembered.
in may 1927 he told a journalist who visited him in the dedham jail if it had not been for these things i might have lived out my life talking at street corners to scorning men never in our full life could we hope to do such work for tolerance for justice for man s understanding of man as now we do by accident.
impact on immigration from north and south america since the bill allowed unlimited immigration from canada and mexico.
approximately 500 000 mexican workers came to the united states during the 1920s.
they filled agricultural jobs in the west previously held by japanese immigrants as well as railroad jobs and industrial jobs in chicago gary indiana and detroit michigan.
the mexican community in los angeles a city founded by mexican immigrants grew rapidly.
the 1924 immigration restrictions created deep tensions between the united states and some other countries most of all china and japan.
the government of japan which had sought to work with several american administrations to construct gentlemens agreements limiting immigration was incensed at the disrespect in the ban of even the 200 immigrants per year that the quota would have allowed.
coming on the heels of previous insults like the 1906 segregation of japanese students in the san francisco public schools the 1924 legislation contributed to deep seated anti american feelings in japan.
other governments including those of italy and rumania objected to the legislation.
nevertheless the united states was in an isolationist mood after the end of world war i and the protests did not stop the closing of americas previously very open gates.
members of congress responded to foreign protests by saying that the nations immigration laws should be made for americans and not to please foreigners and no foreign government has the right to tell the united states who we shall or shall not admit just as the united states was closing its doors the trial of two recent immigrants polarized the nation.
nicola sacco and bartolomeo vanzetti were arrested on may 5 1920 for robbery and the murder of a paymaster and guard of a shoe factory in south braintree massachusetts.
they were tried in the midst of the antiradical anti immigrant hysteria sweeping the country and were convicted in july 1921.
after a long series of appeals reviews and massive public protests during which sacco and vanzetti maintained their innocence their conviction was upheld and they were executed at charlestown prison on august 23 1927.
the case of sacco and vanzetti took on enormous symbolic importance during the 1920s.
opponents of immigration and of political radicalism generally assumed that they were guilty simply because they were immigrants and self confessed anarchists.
for others winning freedom for sacco and vanzetti could be depending on ones view a blow struck for the cause of anarchism or for the rights of immigrants or simply the right to a fair trial.
for observers during the 1920s the sacco and vanzetti case symbolized how much a nation made up of immigrants had turned against those immigrants who arrived most recently.
the farmers depression for many farmers world war i had brought prosperity as the prices for wheat cotton and other agricultural products went up significantly.
with new money to be found in every bushel or bale farmers extended production between 1914 and 1918.
farmers enjoyed amenities as never before.
in the early 1920s one farm wife wrote about the running water in the house.
what a constant cause of thankfulness.
what a joy to use all i need and want.
no more would she have a long hot walk to the spring for a pail of water to sooth a thirsty child or to wash a dipper because the water from that same spring is in our pressure tank farmers kept expanding the areas they cultivated.
the rich lands of the delta in northwest mississippi were still more than 60 percent wilderness in 1914.
bears were seen in cornfields and wolves attacked livestock.
but in the war years the world needed more cotton than ever and planters cleared land as fast as they could.
by the wars end much of the mississippi delta was in cotton production and land sold for up to 616 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 1 000 an acre.
agricultural centers like greenville mississippi ihe queen city of the delta had 15 000 people with paved streets and factories in 1920.
some 20 railroad trains stopped every day and agents in greenville sold cotton directly to buyers in new york chicago and new orleans as well as the european cotton markets at liverpool england.
prosperity it seemed had finally arrived in the delta.
similarly in the arid cattle country of southern kansas and the panhandle region of oklahoma land that had never been plowed was being turned into farmland as fast as developers and settlers could break the sod with a plow and set up windmills to bring water from deep below.
driven by the insatiable wartime need for wheat and encouraged by the union pacific railroad which brought settlers plows and windmills settlers filed 53 000 new homestead claims in the great plains in 1914 alone.
the former grassland was now producing wheat and many families who started out living in a mud walled dugout imagined that there was a fortune in store if only they could turn over enough sod.
plant more wheat to win the war the government said and farmers in the midwest and the plains happy to mix patriotism and profit did just as the nation asked.
then the war ended.
europe began planting its own wheat again.
disbanded armies did not need uniforms.
by 1920 and 1921 most of the world was caught up in an economic downturn that drastically reduced the demand for everything especially wheat and cotton.
the general economy started to recover in 1922 and 1923 but the farm economy did not.
even with its new prosperity the united states could not consume all of the wheat and cotton and meat produced on the nations farms.
for many farmers the great depression of the 1930s began in 1920 or 1921.
not all farmers were impacted in the same way.
due to the new popularity of ice cream and increased use of milk in american diets dairy farmers prospered.
vegetable farmers sold celery spinach and carrots to city people who had discovered vitamins.
but those producing the staple crops wheat cotton and corn did not prosper.
in 1921 cotton which had brought a dollar a pound only a year before sold for only 20 cents a pound if a buyer could be found.
wheat prices also fell drastically however the price of the fertilizer farmers needed for their crops and the coal they needed to heat their homes kept rising.
desperate to maintain their incomes farmers did what seemed logical they worked harder.
if the price for a bushel or bale dropped the only thing to do was to produce more.
what was logical on an individual basis was disastrous on a national one.
the more the farmers produced the more the oversupply led prices to fall.
there seemed to be no way to break the pattern.
senators and representatives from the farm states were desperate for help and congress passed the mcnary haugen bills under which the federal government would set a minimum price for farm products and buy them when the price fell to that level.
the government would then store the goods until prices rose.
but president coolidge vetoed the bills as unsound government intervention in free markets.
midwestern progressives complained but they did not have the votes to override the veto.
in 1927 nature seemed to turn against rural america.
it rained a lot that spring.
farmers generally like spring rains but in 1927 there was too much rain.
one of the most intense storms in history came on good friday april 15 1927.
in new orleans alone 14 96 inches of rain fell in less than a day.
the mississippi river flooded from illinois to louisiana see map 21 3.
engineers had been building levies to contain the mississippi and its tributaries for decades and by the 1920s levies were everywhere.
behind the levies farmers had cleared and planted thousands of acres of land.
cities and towns had grown up.
however prosperity even survival depended on the levies holding.
that april in 1927 they did not hold.
the flood of 1927 covered an area 150 miles long and 50 miles wide along the mississippi river with water some of it 20 feet deep and made 200 000 people homeless perhaps even three times that number.
secretary of commerce herbert hoover directed the rescue efforts and the red cross provided aid across a stricken country.
many criticized rehabilitation efforts that spent an average of 20 per flood victim as too little too late.
chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontent ime map 21 3 the mississippi river flood.
this map gives some sense of the huge territory that was impacted when the mississippi river flooded in 1927.
in the aftermath of the flood many never recovered.
crops planted later that year were beset by disease and an early frost.
pellagra the result of poor diet afflicted 50 000 people in the mississippi delta.
farmers gave up on the land.
sharecroppers simply moved away.
more blacks moved north and more farmers black white and latino moved to town.
soon the generally prosperous nation quickly forgot the flood and the devastation.
the scopes trial ihe general prosperity of the 1920s drove many social changes.
high schools began to spring up in small towns and scattered rural communities offering educational opportunities that had been limited to big cities before 1920.
in 1890 a total of 200 000 american youth were enrolled in high school.
thirty years later that number was 2 million and growing a 10 fold increase.
with the growth of high schools some americans started to worry about just what was being taught in them in particular biology.
the new high school biology classes were greatly influenced by the 1859 publication of charles darwins origin of species which described all changes in plant and animal life including the emergence of human beings as natural selection a process by which random biological changes in individuals within a species that are beneficial for survival become passed on to subsequent generations.
the book was at once controversial particularly in terms of its theological implications.
most scientists embraced darwins work and saw no conflict between the new biology and traditional religious teachings.
even those scientists who questioned it acknowledged the important contribution.
harvards asa gray wrote a popular high school botany textbook in the late 1800s that presented evolution as showing that all life was part of one system showing one mind after 1900 however a new generation of scientists stopped talking about one mind.
george william hunters textbook a civic biology simply said species have been modified during a long course of descent chiefly through natural selection 618 partvil war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 popular religion was also evolving.
before 1900 most protestants liberal or conservative assumed that the bible was a fairly accurate historical record but that assumption was challenged by german inspired higher criticism of the bible that sought to understand the bible in terms of the social context in which it was written.
in reaction a new movement known as fundamentalism began within american protestantism in the early 1900s.
fundamentalist ministers called for a literal reading of the bible and rejected any other interpretation of the unchanged word of god fundamentalism represented a new militant form of protestantism and a much more pessimistic view of modern society.
protestants have traditionally been optimistic about the future.
fundamentalists were pessimistic about a sinful world.
they saw the united states of the 1920s with its open flouting of prohibition laws the questionable moral standards of the flappers the growth of catholic and jewish immigrant communities and the teaching of evolution in the schools as full of evil.
for growing numbers of american parents and political leaders worrying about the high school curriculum the changes in scientific thinking and the increasing influence of fundamentalism came into a dramatic collision in the trial of a local high school biology teacher john ihomas scopes in the small town of dayton tennessee in 1925.
scopes as required by tennessee regulations used hunters a civic biology textbook in his classes.
in following the mandated state curriculum he also violated a tennessee law against the teaching of evolution.
between 1922 and 1925 a number of states under pressure from fundamentalists including tennessee outlawed the teaching of evolution.
ihe american civil liberties union aclu however saw these new laws as an assault on free speech and placed ads in newspapers including the chattanooga times asking for volunteers to test the law and promising legal counsel.
business leaders in dayton tennessee thought the town could use some publicity and asked scopes if he would volunteer for the test case.
he agreed and one of the most famous trials in u s history resulted.
trial oftennessee biology teacher john t scopes that captured national auenwu.
chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontented time zl dayton and the nation got quite a show.
clarence darrow the best known lawyer in the country volunteered to join the aclu team.
former presidential candidate william jennings bryan volunteered for the prosecution.
every major newspaper in the country covered the trial.
most people thought darrow got the better of bryan in the arguments but on the facts scopes was clearly guilty.
scopes admitted he had violated the law and he was found guilty and fined 100 though the tennessee supreme court threw the case out on a technicality to avoid appeal to the u s supreme court which the aclu wanted.
cautious textbook publishers changed their books.
in future editions a civic biology stopped calling darwin the grand old man of biology and instead simply said that he was a leading biologist evolution which in the earlier editions had been a wonderful discovery now became merely darwins interpretation of the way in which all life changes only in the late 1950s would a full discussion of evolution return to high school textbooks.
quick review to what extent were the racism anti immigration efforts and fundamentalism of the 1920s the result of changes throughout the united states.
harding coolidge and hoover national politics and policies in the 1920s 21 4 analyze the political and policy developments of the decade.
washington conference a conference called by the united states in 1921 that led to the adoption of the five powers treaty in 1922 in an ultimately ineffective effort to limit the growth of the world s navies and thus preserve peace.
three republican presidents led the united states during the 1920s.
the election of warren harding in november of 1920 was almost a foregone conclusion given the general disenchantment with woodrow wilsons policies the war and the league of nations.
a politician who promised to return the nation to normalcy was just what people wanted.
harding and his running mate massachusetts governor calvin coolidge defeated the democratic nominee ohio governor james cox and his running mate the young franklin roosevelt by 16 million to 9 million popular votes.
in what was his last race the socialist party candidate eugene v debs polled close to a million votes while still in prison for violating the world war i sedition laws.
late in 1921 harding commuted his sentence and debs was freed.
although harding was remembered mostly for the scandals of his administration he also made some very strong appointments.
three months after coming to office he appointed former president william howard taft to the job taft had always wanted chief justice of the supreme court where taft served until 1930.
charles evans hughes the 1916 republican presidential candidate became secretary of state.
knowing that there was no chance of u s participation in the league of nations but wanting to foster peace in the postwar world hughes called the washington conference in 1921 to try to end the competition among the united states britain and japan to build up their navies.
to the surprise of many the result of the conference the five powers treaty of february 1922 slowed the worldwide navy build up and established limits on battleships battle cruisers and aircraft carriers in a ratio of 5 each for the united states and britain 3 each for japan and 1 75 each for france and italy.
no limits were set for other types of ships.
in 1922 hughes also ended the longstanding u s occupation of the dominican republic.
harding also appointed andrew mellon one of the wealthiest people in the united states to serve as secretary of the treasury.
mellon who served through the harding coolidge and hoover administrations ensured that there was a close and comfortable relationship between government and business.
he cut government spending cut taxes and retired half of the world war i debt while in office.
he was often hailed as the greatest secretary of the treasury ever until the coming of the great depression raised serious questions about his policies.
herbert hoover perhaps the most liberal 620 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 member of the cabinet served as secretary of commerce for harding and coolidge encouraging cooperation between businesses to stabilize industrial production and the economy.
harding died suddenly in august 1923 probably the result of a heart attack.
his wifes refusal to allow an autopsy led to rumors that he was poisoned or committed suicide though there was never any evidence for either.
his death came just as the tea pot dome scandal was about to come to light.
he was reported to have asked herbert hoover what a president should do whose friends had betrayed him harding was deeply mourned but as the scandals of the harding administration surfaced his reputation was tarnished before the year was out.
fortunately for the republican party hardings vice president the stern and distant calvin coolidge had no connection to the scandals and quickly took steps to investigate them.
news of hardings death reached the vice president while he was vacationing with his father in a rustic vermont farmhouse.
since the house had no electricity colonel john coolidge administered the presidential oath of office to his son by the light of a kerosene lamp a reassuring image that perfectly fit the tone of austerity and adherence to old time values that the new president wanted to set.
more important to coolidges success the economic downturn of 1921 had eased and by 1923 many americans were experiencing an economic boom known as the coolidge prosperity to no ones surprise coolidge a man of so few words he came to be known as silent cal was nominated for a full term by the republican party in the summer of 1924.
the democratic party was deeply divided between a southern and western wing that was primarily white protestant rural and supportive of prohibition and a northern wing that though also very white included many catholics and jews and was highly urban as well as strongly anti prohibition.
the kian was a force at the summer nominating convention where their opposition to a catholic candidate who wanted to repeal prohibition made itself felt.
the two leading contenders for the nomination included former treasury secretary william g mcadoo a dry who favored prohibition and was supported by the southern and western wing of the party and new york governor al smith a catholic and a wet staunch opponent of prohibition.
they battled for 103 ballots before the delegates turned to the west virginia lawyer and former congressman john davis in an exhausted compromise.
others disgusted with both parties rebuilt the old progressive party of 1912 and nominated wisconsin s popular progressive senator robert la follette for president.
coolidges victory in the 1924 elections was as decisive as harding s had been in 1920.
he won 54 percent of the total with only 28 8 percent for the democrats and 16 6 percent for the la follette progressives.
except for wisconsin which went for la follette coolidge carried every state outside of the then solidly democratic south.
the coolidge administration took some important steps in foreign policy.
just before he took office as coolidges vice president charles g dawes negotiated the so called dawes plan to help ameliorate the german financial crisis brought on by the huge reparations payments to britain and france.
in 1925 coolidge appointed frank kellogg as secretary of state.
two years later in 1927 french foreign minister aristide briand proposed a joint u s french alliance but kellogg turned the conversation to a multilateral treaty.
the kellogg briand pact outlawing war was signed in paris in aw gneher.
will the brakes hold.
as this cartoon shows the tea pot dome scandal that came to light in 1923 soon after president harding s death threatened to steamroll over many leaders of the republican party.
however the fact that the new republican president calvin coolidge had nothing to do with it allowed party leaders to distance themselves from the scandal and in the end have an easy road to the white house in the november 1924 elections.
the kellogg briand pact 1928 international treaty that denounced aggression and war but lacked provisions.
enforcement.
chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontented 621 21 4 august 1928 and eventually 62 nations were signatories to the much acclaimed agreement.
unfortunately unlike the plan for the league of nations there was no enforcement mechanism to the kellogg briand pact.
while passive at home u s government under coolidge also enthusiastically encouraged engagement with latin america maintaining military force in some countries and doubling investment in others.
after coming to office in 1929 hoover tried to improve relations with latin america removing american troops from nicaragua and haiti.
in addition while not officially recognizing the government of the new soviet union the coolidge and hoover administrations encouraged business investment and the soviet government welcomed it especially the mass production of automobiles that they called fordism.
the 1928 presidential election that brought hoover to office was very different and much closer than the previous two.
the tone of the contest was angrier.
when calvin coolidge announced that he would not seek another term as president the republicans nominated hoover.
the democrats tired of their losses in 1920 and 1924 decided that al smiths charisma and enthusiastic support in the north would make him a winner.
after all many asked didnt the south vote for the democratic nominee no matter who he was.
on many issues hoover and smith were not far apart.
hoover was more liberal than coolidge and privately worried that the coolidge prosperity was a balloon that would surely pop.
he said that he looked forward to the day when poverty will be banished from this nation though he saw business success not government intervention as the key to accomplishing that goal.
coolidge once called him that damn bolshevik smith was also a friend to big business.
once nominated smith chose john j raskob of general motors to run his campaign and included several leading industrialists in his inner circle.
nevertheless there were two huge differences between the candidates.
hoover was a dry who favored continuing prohibition and smith was a wet committed to ending it.
hoover called prohibition a great social and economic experiment noble in motive and far reaching in purpose smith told the convention that nominated him that there should be fundamental changes in the present provisions for national prohibition with many people becoming disillusioned with prohibition on that issue alone smith might have had the edge.
however another issue influenced the race.
hoover a quaker was a protestant.
smith was a catholic.
many catholic voters in places like boston new york chicago and san francisco rallied to smith with an enthusiasm they had never shown for any previous presidential candidate.
meanwhile in much of the nations protestant heartland smiths catholicism was the heated issue of the campaign.
the candidate himself thought he had addressed the issue but as he campaigned in the midwest and south smith could see burning crosses on the hillsides and his rallies were met by kian members.
at one rally in oklahoma smith eyed the crowd and commented to a reporter i dont know those people out there.
i dont speak their language on election day in november 1928 hoover won carrying states in the south that had not voted republican since the end of reconstruction and even smiths home state of new york.
smith won 40 percent of the vote and carried massachusetts rhode island and parts of the south but hoovers 58 percent of the vote and 444 electoral votes guaranteed that he could enter the white house with a solid mandate.
the stock market responded to hoovers election by reaching greater heights than ever before.
the new president kept his reservations about the stock market bubble to himself.
the nation seemed confident in their new president the economy and the way society had been moving for the last 10 years.
it would be hoovers bad luck that none of this confidence would last through his first year in office.
quick review how were the elections of 1924 and 1928 similar.
how were they different.
622 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 conclusion ihe 1920s marked a period of significant social and political change in the united states.
this period known by many as the jazz age began at the conclusion of world war i and ended with the stock market crash in 1929.
for many americans especially those in the middle and upper classes the 1920s were a time of prosperity.
for other americans however the 1920s were harsh.
in the so called red summer of 1919 many working people in the united states were deeply dissatisfied with the terms and conditions of their employment.
they wanted their salaries adjusted to reflect the inflation generated by the war and they also wanted a share of the postwar boom.
strikes were common as were violent confrontations between wage earners and business elites whose fear of bolshevism intensified their opposition to organized labor.
racial tensions also boiled over in that summer and race riots took place in cities around the country.
in january 1920 when the eighteenth amendment to the constitution outlawed the manufacture sale or transportation of any alcoholic beverage the resulting era of prohibition set off a wave of opposition.
bootleggers found ways to manufacture and sell alcohol in defiance of the eighteenth amendment and average citizens found ways to drink alcohol as they flouted the law.
the widespread prosperity and contempt for prohibition also set the stage for other law breaking during the decade including investment fraud and corruption in the federal government.
in this turbulent period women gained the right to vote when the nineteenth amendment was passed.
with their newly gained power some younger women declared themselves to be flappers flouting social conventions and many women began reforms around prenatal care and birth control as well as other issues relevant to them.
the presidential election of november 1920 was the first election in which women in every state in the united states took part.
technological innovations combined with favorable government policies toward business resulted in high corporate profits throughout the decade.
the economic growth of 1920s sustained a new mass culture focused on materialism and consumerism and was characterized by the automobile the radio and the movies.
social and cultural change affected all americans.
african americans began the great migration a movement of large numbers of southern blacks from the rural south to the urban north which continued from the 1920s to the 1960s.
newly arriving african americans in the north launched the harlem renaissance a flowering of black culture in music novels and poetry centered in new york citys harlem while others became followers of marcus garvey.
for many other americans the 1920s were a difficult time.
while sweeping changes of the 1920s were welcomed by many a large portion of american society objected to what they saw as the erosion of traditional american values leading to a resurgent ku klux kian among other things.
the black community faced brutal racism in both the north and the south.
race riots swept across the country from chicago illinois to charleston south carolina wherever blacks began to push for greater equality and economic opportunity.
a nation built on immigration turned against immigrants and 1924 legislation drastically reduced immigration to the united states.
white farmers in the midwest and south also suffered greatly as crop prices plummeted.
the government largely ignored the plight of these americans.
other americans turned to a new kind of religious fundamentalism challenging such things as the teaching of evolution in the public schools.
three republican presidents warren g harding calvin coolidge and herbert c hoover presided over the nation during the 1920s and while they differed among themselves all three supported the growth of a business oriented culture and saw business success as the key to prosperity for all.
ter e w why is the 1920s a unique era in american history.
chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discon chapter 21 chapter review the prelude the red summer of 1919 21 1 explain how events at the end of world war i shaped the decade that followed.
review questions 1.
cause and effect what factors contributed to the red summer of 1919.
contextualization how did issues and tensions emerging from world war i create the anger and violence of 1919.
21 2 the 1920s the exuberance of prosperity analyze how prohibition and other developments of the 1920s reshaped american culture.
review questions 3.
construct an argument defend or refute the following statement if it were not for american participation in world war i prohibition would never have been enacted 4.
historical interpretation what light does the teapot dome scandal shed on the nature of republican government in the 1920s.
comparison compare and contrast the domestic ideal of womanhood of the late 1800s with the new woman epitomized by the flappers of the 1920s.
what was new about the new woman.
21 3 the 1920s the conflicts about american ideals explain the elements of discrimination hardship and fundamentalism that also shaped american life in the 1920s.
review questions 6.
comparison compare and contrast the ku klux kian of the 1860s and 1870s with the kian of the 1920s.
how did the new kian differ from the original kian.
synthesis how did anti immigrant sentiment shape the culture of the 1920s.
harding coolidge and hoover national politics and policies in the 1920s 21 4 analyze the political and policy developments of the decade.
review questions 8.
constructing an argument what accounts for the republican dominance of national politics in the 1920s.
synthesis what connections can you make between the election of 1928 and the general social and cultural trends of the 1920s.
624 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 living in hard times 22 1929 1939 during the great depression lines of unemployed impoverished workers seeking food and shelter could be seen in cities and towns across the united states.
in late october 1929 the value of shares sold on the new york stock exchange known as wall street collapsed.
prices kept dropping for the next 3 years in a dizzying decline in which paper wealth simply evaporated.
for most americans the stock market crash seemed irrelevant at first.
for industrial workers who rarely owned stock the value of shares in the enterprises where they worked was not important but the subsequent drop in industrial jobs as production of automobiles radios appliances and clothing dried up was all too real.
for many farmers in the deep south and those trying to get by farming small mountainous farms in appalachia the depression had come much earlier beginning with the drop in agricultural prices in 1920 see chapter 21.
for other farmers especially those who had plowed the plains and created the wheat farms of oklahoma and kansas in the 1910s and 1920s the full impact of the depression came later.
wheat farmers struggled with the fact that a glut in the world supply of wheat kept prices low all through the 1920s but it was with the terrible dust storms of the 1930s storms in which the child of one farmer remembered you couldnt see your hand in front a your face that the full impact of the depression was felt in this region.
this chapter traces the story of the many causes that led to the long years of the great depression and the impact of the depression n the political climate in the united states and the world.
chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the causes and consequences of the great depression.
mhvvinm twwibrisi the coming of the great depression explain the coming of the great depression and the initial response to it.
the new deal explain the goals and results of the new deal and the responses to change on the part of diverse americans.
the deep roots of war the united states europe and asia analyze the international impact of the depression german and japanese military expansion and the initial u s response.
