chapter 15 a practice final test in grade 8 social studies 315 use the newspaper headlines and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
tennhon gazetteer snatnu jlntelhgetuvr 1607 1775 settlers establish colony at jamestown declaration of independence announced jj ule toit courier harpers weekly 1787 1861 new u s constitution drafted civil war comes to an end 3 in which two newspapers are the headlines correctly dated.
a boston intelligencer and charleston courier thst i c b london gazetteer and harpers weekly c boston intelligencer and harpers weekly d london gazetteer and charleston courier use the information in these scrolls and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
63 no soldier shall in time i of peace he quartered in any house without the consent of the owner third amendment k at j excessive hail shall nol he required nor excessive lines imposed nor cruel and unusual punishinenls inflicted.
eighth amendment f j 4 what do all three of these amendments have in common.
f they promote the idea of equal rights for minorities.
fciti 19 b j g they protect individuals against actions by the federal government.
h they strengthen the power of the federal government j they safeguard the right of individuals to criticize the federal government.
name chapter 15 a practice final test in grade 8 social studies 317 use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
the history of the present king of great britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over these states the declaration of independence 1776 10 the authors of the constitution intended to prevent a repetition of the situation described in the statement above by f providing for the separation of powers govt is c g forbidding congress to raise an army h creating a national executive j allowing constitutional amendments use the concept map and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
11 which title belongs in the center box.
a social reformers c religious leaders.
cult 24 b b abolitionists d womens rights advocates use the two newspaper advertisements and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
macon georgia richmond virginia november.
1837 september.
1837 reward of s25 for run away negro man.
lie was brought from florida has a wife near mariana and probably will attempt to make 5 ran away from the subscriber.
he ran off without any known cause and i suppose he is aiming to go to his wife who was sold off last winter.
12 the two notices shown above appeared in southern newspapers.
based on this information what conclusion can be drawn about slavery.
f slaves were protected and well cared for by their masters.
g slave owners usually recovered run away slaves.
h slave owners separated enslaved families based on their own needs.
j slaves were better treated than northern factory workers.
chapter 4 foundations background to american history 37 a americans won their independence during the american revolution.
jonathan trumbull was the only colonial governor to side with the colonists.
john peter muhlenberg was a protestant minister who recruited soldiers and rose to the rank of general.
the declaration of independence stated the colonists decision to separate from britain.
the declaration listed colonial grievances against britain and provided a theory of government governments purpose is to protect individuals unalienable rights to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness when a government oppresses citizens rights they have a right to overthrow it.
c signers of the declaration included john hancock benjamin rush charles carroll and john witherspoon.
d the first national government established by the new united states was a weak association.
americans created a stronger federal government when they ratified the u s constitution.
the constitution created a national executive a two house legislature known as congress and a national judiciary.
john jay was the nations first chief justice of the supreme court.
to ensure the national government would not challenge citizens rights the constitution rested on certain key principles limited government the separation of power federalism checks and balances and popular sovereignty.
e the bill of rights was added to the constitution in the form of the first ten amendments to further protect individual rights from government abuse.
f the first amendment protects freedom of religion speech press assembly and the right of citizens to petition their government.
g the second amendment protects the right of citizens to bear arms.
h the third amendment says government cannot quarter soldiers in private homes without their consent.
the fourth amendment protects people from unreasonable searches j.
the fifth amendment protects individuals from double jeopardy and from being forced to incriminate themselves and further guarantees citizens just compensation for property taken by governments right of eminent domain.
k the sixth amendment guarantees those accused of a crime a fair and public trial by a jury and the assistance of a lawyer.
l the seventh amendment guarantees jury trials in some civil cases.
m the eighth amendment prevents judges from setting bail that is too high or from inflicting cruel and unusual punishments.
n the nihth amendment lists certain rights and does not deny other rights.
the tenth amendment reserves powers not granted to the federal government to the state governments and the people.
p alexis de tocqueville observed five american values liberty egalitarianism individualism populism and laissez faire.
name chapter 4 foundations background to american history strong support for independence came from several colonial religious leaders.
in colonial times these religious leaders held great influence.
many colonists attended church on sundays where ministers made their views known in weekly sermons.
john peter muhlenberg was bom in pennsylvania studied in germany and america and became a protestant minister.
at one of his sermons muhlenberg pulled off his clerical robe to reveal a uniform underneath.
then he enlisted more than a hundred men into the continental army.
muhlenberg became part of a group known as the black regiment ministers who wore black clerical robes while preaching and who worked to recruit large numbers of volunteers for the revolutionary cause.
during the war muhlenberg rose to the rank of general under washington.
later he served as a u s.
senator and congressman.
39 john peter muhlenberg 1746 1807 representatives at the second continental congress began discussing the issue of american independence early in 1776.
after much debate the delegates decided to go ahead and declare their independence from britain.
a committee of five was charged with the task of writing a draft for the declaration of independence.
the members of the committee decided that thomas jefferson should write most of the document.
the final declaration of independence issued on july 4 1776 explained the reasons why the colonists sought independence from great britain.
the declaration not only freed the colonists from britain but also put forward a theory of government.
many of its ideas were borrowed from john locke.
the declaration explained that the purpose of government should be to protect citizens unalienable rights.
these were rights that cannot be taken away such as the rights to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness the declaration further argued that ordinary citizens had the right to overthrow an oppressive government that failed to protect these unalienable rights.
the declaration of inde pendence then went on to list the grievances of the colo the de daratln w s read nists against king george iii.
most ol these grievances were based on the belief that the british crown was threatening the colonists rights in favor of tyrannical rule.
name chapter 4 foundations background to american history they signed by state from north to south starting with new hampshire.
they acted courageously since the british viewed the declaration as an act of treason punishable by hanging.
who were some of these signers of the declaration.
john hancock.
the most recognizable signature on the declaration of independence was that of john hancock a prosperous merchant from boston and the president of the continental congress.
hancock made his signature so large so that king george iii could read it without his glasses.
when the first version of the declaration was printed and sent to each colony it carried only john hancocks signature since the official document had not yet been drawn up for others to sign.
hancocks name quickly became second only to that of george washington as a symbol of freedom in the colonies.
benjamin rush.
another signer of the declaration rush was a physician educator and humanitarian.
rush is sometimes known as the father of american medicine he was a pioneer in the fields of physiology and psychiatry.
rush is also known for his proposal to establish a national public university to train public servants.
he favored the education of women and helped to establish and finance the oldest african american church in the country the african methodist episcopal church in philadelphia.
his son later became u s.
ambassador to england.
charles carroll of carrollton.
one of the wealthiest men in the colonies carroll helped finance the revolution with his own money.
carroll was one of the first to recognize the necessity for independence from britain and strongly argued for armed resistance to britain.
from maryland carroll was a catholic.
at that time catholics made up less than two percent of the colonial population and lacked political rights.
carroll helped in the struggle for the acceptance of the roman catholic religion in america.
41 john hancock 1737 1793 john witherspoon.
a scottish immigrant witherspoon became a leading member of the continental congress and took part in more than a hundred of its committees.
shortly after signing the declaration of independence he responded to a person who argued that the colonies were not ready for independence.
witherspoon commented that it was not only ripe for independence but in danger of rotting for the want of it he was a presbyterian clergyman and he became president of the college of new jersey later known as princeton university.
under his leadership the college rose to become a leading institution of learning in america.
dr benjamin rush 1745 1813 charles carroll 1737 1832 dr john witherspoon 1723 1794 name chapter 4 foundations background to american history 43 the declaration of independence only set up a series of aspirations or goals for americans.
it promised a system of government that promoted liberty equality and individual rights and that was based on the will of the people.
the u s constitution actually turned these goals into a concrete system of government with a series of specific fundamental laws.
the constitution was not the first central government that the colonies established after independence.
the colonies originally set up a very weak national association under an agreement known as the articles of confederation.
this association was an experiment in government that failed.
in 1786 american leaders met at annapolis maryland and decided that a stronger government was needed.
they decided to meet again and invited delegates to philadelphia to revise the articles.
the constitutional convention meeting in philadelphia in 1787 quickly decided to abandon the articles altogether and to write an entirely new constitution.
the articles of confederation principles of the u s constitution the u s constitution written by the constitutional convention established the basic structure of our national government.
it established a government in which power rested with the people who elect their own representatives.
the framers of the constitution sought to create a national government strong enough to defend the nations interests and to promote its general welfare.
they gave the new national government many important powers and made federal law supreme over state law.
the signing of the u s constitution at independence hall the new constitution created an elected president a congress with two houses and a supreme court.
to ensure that this new national government was not too strong the new constitution also adopted a number of important principles name chapter 4 foundations background to american history 45 the bill of rights the original constitution contained few specific guarantees of individual rights.
ratification of the constitution was only obtained when its supporters promised to add a bill of rights to protect individual liberties.
as soon as the first congress assembled in 1789 it began deciding which rights to include in the bill of rights a list of possible rights was reduced to ten which were approved by the members of congress.
they were then sent to the states for approval.
two thirds of the state legislatures approved these amendments by 1791 when they came into effect.
the first amendment actually covers five separate rights at the same time.
lets look at each of these rights more closely.
freedom of religion the first amendment guarantees freedom of worship.
it also prohibits congress from establishing an official or state religion.
this is sometimes called the separation of church and state.
freedom of speech the first amendment protects our freedom to say or write most things in public.
americans cannot be put in jail just for criticizing the government or for expressing unpopular beliefs.
this does not mean however that we can say whatever we want.
in some circumstances our speech can be limited.
for example a person cannot yell fire in a crowded movie theater as a joke since this might threaten other peoples lives.
the supreme court has ruled that government can limit speech when that speech creates a clear and present danger freedom of the press the first amendment allows newspapers radio and television to write or announce what they want without fear of punishment.
this freedom is essential in a democratic society since people need to be well informed to vote.
the right of assembly the first amendment states that congress cannot deny individuals the right to peacefully assemble name chapter 4 foundations background to american history 47 in colonial times people protested against british customs officers randomly entering their homes.
the fourth amendment was added to protect individuals from unreasonable searches and seizures by government officials.
if there is a reasonable expectation of privacy a judge must sign a search warrant presented by a police officer before the search can be conducted.
our laws provide that only in exceptional circumstances can the police make a search without a warrant.
the police must follow certain procedures before they can enter a persons home.
a citizen cannot be deprived of life liberty or property without due process of law this means that certain legal procedures must be carried out according to established rules before a person can be punished.
a person cannot be tried for a serious federal crime which could lead to imprisonment or execution without an indictment by a grand jury a formal accusation before a person is arrested.
a grand jury is a group of citizens that meet to review if there is enough evidence available to even hold a trial.
no person can be subject to double jeopardy being tried twice for the same crime.
an accused person cannot be forced to say things that will be used against him or herself self incrimination.
under the supreme court decision of miranda v arizona 1966 a persons confession of a crime is not valid if he or she was not first informed of the right to have a lawyer present during police questioning.
eminent domain refers to the power of a government over property in its territory.
sometimes the government needs to take persons cannot be made to testify against themselves.
over private property for public use.
for example the government may need to build a highway or construct a school where private homes are located.
the government has the right to do so under the power of eminent domain.
according to the fifth amendment private property shall not be taken for public use without just compensation in other words before the government can exercise its power of eminent domain it must provide the owner with just compensation name chapter 4 foundations background to american history 49 the seventh amendment guarantees the right to a trial by a jury in many civil disputes cases where one person sues another for injury or for breaking a contract.
the ninth amendment states that just because the constitution lists some specific rights this does not mean that citizens do not also hold other rights.
the tenth amendment states that the federal government has only those powers specifically given to it in the constitution.
all other powers are reserved to the states or the people.
applying what you have learned the freedoms our citizens enjoy because of the bill of rights are important to the fabric of life in america.
design and create a poster that showcases these freedoms.
some websites can help you create interactive posters.
select two amendments you just read about in this chapter.
search the internet or your school library for an issue that deals with each amendment.
the issue may include one settled by a case in the supreme court.
for example one issue often debated is the right of citizens to carry weapons under the second amendment.
amendment amendment issue issue how was the issue resolved how was the issue resolved name chapter 4 foundations background to american history 51 at the time of the american revolution some writers began noticing that america was a very different place from europe.
at that time most of europe was still divided into hereditary social classes.
nobles enjoyed special privileges while in many countries there were still serfs with no rights at all.
throughout most of europe land was owned by a few wealthy families there was very little free land available for people to settle or buy.
one of the first attempts to describe the new american culture was by a french immigrant hector st john de crevecoeur.
in 1755 he moved to new france in north america and in 1759 he moved to new york.
he was very intrigued by what he found in america.
he tried to define what it meant to be an american in 1782.
he was greatly impressed by the mixing of peoples of different nationalities the rich resources of north america the absence of kings and nobles demanding a share of the workers labor and the willingness of americans to work hard out of their own self interest actins as an amateur historian in his letters to an american farmer crevecoeur 1735 1813 wrote about how this mixture of different peoples was being transformed by the american environment to create a new american society and culture what then is the american this new man.
he is either a european or the descendant of an european hence that strange mixture of blood which you will find in no other country.
he is an american who leaving behind him all his ancient prejudices and manners receives new ones from the new mode of life he has embraced the new government he obeys and the new rank he holds.
here individuals of all nations are melted into a new race of men whose labors and posterity will one day cause great changes in the world.
here the rewards of his industry follow with equal steps the progress of his labor his labor is founded on the basis of nature self interest can it want a stronger allurement.
wives and children gladly help their father to clear those abundant fields where crops grow to feed and clothe them all without any part being claimed either by a despotic prince a rich abbot or a mighty lord according to crevecoeur what were the chief differences between europeans and americans.
what do you think surprised him most about americans.
name chapter 4 foundations background to american history 53 tocqueville also found however that the system of democracy did not always place the best people in positions of leadership in government on my arrival in the united states i was surprised to find so much distinguished talent among the citizens and so little among the heads of the government.
it is a constant fact that at the present day the ablest men in the united states are rarely placed at the head of affairs indeed tocqueville came to the conclusion that by guaranteeing general prosperity and well being america did not necessarily promote the cultivation of excellence as he believed europe did.
historians studying tocqueville have identified five values that he found crucial to americas success as a constitutional republic egalitarianism equality egalitarianism refers to a society of equals.
in europe society was built around hereditary distinctions separating the nobles middle classes and peasants.
in america there were differences in wealth power and intelligence but everyone was equal socially.
the availability of free land also promoted equality.
owning land allowed americans to view themselves as equal to their neighbors and further contributed to their feeling of equality.
tocqueville believed that the primary concern of the nation should be to safeguard liberty since it created the conditions for americans to become economically prosperous.
two exceptions to this were slavery and the treatment of native americans which tocqueville also wrote about.
populism popular sovereignty tocqueville wrote that democratic government a government where the people more or less participate in their government is closely bound up with the idea of political liberty populism refers to the participation of the common people in political life another distinguishing characteristic that tocqueville found in american society in the early nineteenth century.
since everyone in society was equal everyone had the same right to participate in government.
the goal of such a society was peace and prosperity for all.
liberty by liberty tocqueville meant protection against tyrannical government.
the great danger in democratic government was the tyranny of the majority.
he noted that americans were devoted to the rule of law and that americas federal system helped prevent the rise of an over powerful government.
most important of all american customs and manners were devoted to the spirit of liberty.
in america tocqueville wrote religious faith helped strengthen the belief in individual liberty.
individualism in american society the government did not direct individual activity to the same extent as tocqueville had seen in europe.
people in america were free to flourish without hereditary distinctions and individuals believed they could rise in society.
individuals even organized themselves into their own private voluntary associations such as charities.
name chapter 4 foundations background to american history 55 declaration independence 1776 u s constitution 1787 mostly written mostly by thomas jefferson.
gave reasons why the colonists were demanding independence from britain.
listed the grievances of american colonists against the british king.
argued that the purpose of government was to protect citizens unalienable rights to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
justified the overthrow of a government if that government abused people s rights.
replaced the articles of confederation.
jjt established a new national government.
provided for three branches of government executive with a president.
legislature with a two house congress.
judiciary with a supreme court.
provided a set of principles to ensure the federal government would not be too powerful federalism.
limited government.
checks and balances.
popular sovereignty.
first amendment 1791 bill of rights 1791 protections of individual freedoms congress cannot establish a state religion.
4c congress cannot stop individuals from practicing their own religion.
congress cannot make laws limiting someone s freedom of speech.
congress cannot make laws limiting freedom of the press.
congress cannot make laws prohibiting people from peacefully assembling.
people have a right to petition the government to correct wrongs.
other amendments in the bill of rights protections of individual freedoms second amendment gives citizens the right to bear arms.
third amendment no quartering of soldiers.
protections of the rights of the accused fourth amendment no unreasonable searches or seizures by government.
fifth amendment established a series of due process protections.
sixth amendment fair and impartial trial.
eighth amendment no cruel or unusual punishments no excessive bail.
alexis de tocqueville other key individuals a frenchman who came to the united states to study its prison system.
wrote democracy in america.
some historians have identified five key characteristics of american democracy that tocqueville believed set americans apart from europeans liberty.
egalitarianism equality.
individualism.
laissez faire.
e pluribus unutn.
out of many comes one.
several states have united to form one nation.
john trumbull sr colonial governor who sided with the colonists against the british.
john peter muhlenberg.
clergyman who recruited soldiers to fight the british.
john hancock.
president of the second continental congress signer of the declaration.
benjamin rush.
father of american medicine signer of declaration of independence.
john witherspoon.
signer of the declaration.
president of new jersey college princeton.
helped write federalist papers first chief justice of supreme court negotiated a boundary treaty with england.
charles carroll.
signer of the declaration.
name chapter 4 foundations background to american history examine the question.
this question tests your ability to draw a conclusion from three amendments in the dill of rights.
you should read each excerpt carefully.
then think about what they have in common.
recall what you know.
you should realize that each of these amendments establishes rights for individuals accused of a crime.
these rights protect us from false accusations or unfair treatment by government officials.
apply what you know.
the best answer is choice a.
all three of these amendments deal with rights for someone accused of a crime.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 the bill of rights was added to the u s constitution primarily to f provide the president with power in times of emergency hist i a g establish fair and impartial elections h protect individual liberties j guarantee voting privileges to minorities 3 which guarantees freedom of the press freedom of speech and freedom of religion to individuals in the united states.
a the treaty of paris of 1783 hisyi a b the articles of confederation c the first amendment to the u s constitution d the fifth amendment to the u s constitution use the chart and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
person a person b signed the declaration of independence signed the declaration of independence president of the continental congress father of american medicine signature on declaration became a symbol of freedom in the colonies favored educating women and making a public university to train public servants 4 which two individuals who played a role in the american revolution are described in the table above.
f john trumbull sr and charles carroll of carrollton hist i cj g benjamin rush and john witherspoon h john hancock and benjamin rush j alexis de tocqueville and john peter muhlenberg 5 which of the following was an important characteristic of american society as noted by alexis de tocqueville in 1831 1832.
a federalism c populism f citi 22 a b imperialism d isolationism name chapter 4 foundations background to american history 59 11 which statement describes a limitation on government action established by the bill of rights.
a congress controls interstate commerce.
htst i c b the president shares control over foreign policy with congress.
c the supreme court can declare acts of congress unconstitutional.
d government officials cannot enter a home without the owners permission or a valid search warrant.
12 which principle was adopted in the u s constitution to ensure that no one branch of the federal government became too powerful.
f republican government h judicial review i h sti a y g popular sovereignty j checks and balances 13 what has been the impact of the first amendments separation of church and state on the american way of life.
a it has brought about an end to religious differences.
c hist ia b it has helped to promote religious freedom.
c it has increased american interest in religion.
d it has fostered inequality between religious groups.
14 the due process clause in the fifth amendment and the right to an attorney in the sixth amendment were both designed to f protect freedom of expression f hist i a g assure that laws are properly enacted h ensure fair treatment for those accused of crimes j provide for judicial review of laws use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
now one of the most essential branches of english liberty is the freedom of ones house.
a mans house is his castle and whilst he is quiet he is as well guarded as a prince in his castle james otis against the writs of assistance 1761 15 which provision in the bill of rights shares this same belief.
a right to a fair trial y hist i a b guarantee against double jeopardy c protection against unreasonable searches and seizures d prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment 16 st john de crevecoeur and alexis de tocqueville were similar in that both f traveled from france to america to study prison reform y.
a y g came to america during the same time period h identified values crucial to americas success as a constitutional republic j were highly opposed to what they discovered in america name wu industrialization and the gilded age history 2 a identify the major characteristics that define an historical era.
history 2 b identify the major eras in u s history from 1877 to the present and describe their defining characteristics.
history 2 c apply absolute and relative chronology through the sequencing of significant individuals events and time periods.
history 3 b analyze economic issues such as industrialization the growth of railroads the growth of labor unions the rise of entrepreneurship free enterprise and the pros and cons of big business.
history 3 c analyze social issues affecting children and philanthropy of industrialists.
economics 15 b describe the changing relationship between the federal government and private business including the costs and benefits of laissez faire anti trust acts and the interstate commerce act.
citizenship 24 b evaluate the contributions of significant political and social leaders in the united states such as andrew carnegie culture 26 a explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights in american society.
science technology and society 27 a explain the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations such as electric power telephone petroleum based products and steel production on the economic development of the united states.
in this chapter you will learn how the united states became one of the worlds leading industrial powers.
new inventions and the organizing skills of americas great entrepreneurs vastly increased the countrys industrial capacity.
the spread of railroad lines and telegraph wires helped lead to the emergence of a national market.
industrial workers ill treated and poorly paid began organizing into unions to obtain better working conditions.
key terms and people in this chapter bessemer process entrepreneur interstate commerce act transcontinental railroad gilded age sherman anti trust act alexander graham bell captain of industry child labor telephone robber baron laissez faire thomas edison andrew carnegie union free enterprise system philanthropy knights of labor national market john r rockefeller afl corporation monopoly samuel rompers 61 chapter 5 industrialization and the gilded age 63 american industrialization proceeded at a rapid pace in the decades after the civil war.
some historians consider this period americas second industrial revolution new inventions and technologies helped fuel the great economic expansion of the late nineteenth century.
in the decades after the civil war steam and electricity replaced human and animal strength.
iron replaced wood and steel replaced iron.
the bessemer process made the production of steel more economical.
before the bessemer process it took an entire day to produce 5 tons of steel afterwards the same quantity of steel could be made in a mere 15 minutes.
in 1855 henry bessemer developed a new and more efficient method of making steel.
the power of steam now drove textile mill spindles sewing machines and other equipment.
this steam generally came from the burning of coal to heat water.
new pneumatic drills were able to cut deeper into the earth than ever before to mine this resource.
in 1860 14 million tons of coal were mined in the united states by 1884 the amount was 100 million tons.
the center of the coal mining industry was western pennsylvania.
the first oil well was also drilled in pennsylvania in 1859.
improvements in refining allowed petroleum products to be used in lighting and machine lubrication.
the internal combustion engine developed at from oil to run cars and the first airplanes.
one of the earliest oil wells in pennsylvania.
end of the nineteenth century used gasoline the commercial use of electricity.
the application of electricity was another of the periods most significant developments.
for its first commercial use electricity was used as a means of communication along telegraph wires.
in 1876 alexander graham bell 1847 1922 an educator of the deaf invented the telephone.
the telephone and telegraph allowed people to communicate across great distances.
name 65 chapter 5 industrialization and the gilded age major transcontinental railroads h w w main railroads development of a national market in the late nineteenth century a truly national market emerged for the first time.
railroads canals telegraphs and telephones linked together different parts of the country.
shipping raw materials and finished goods became less expensive.
national producers could make and ship goods more cheaply than local producers since they could take advantage of more machinery and greater economies of scale.
the high investment costs of mass production manufacturing required a large market to be profitable.
new methods of selling were developed such as department stores chain stores and mail order houses including sears and roebuck.
manufacturers could advertise in magazines and newspapers and sell the same goods throughout the country.
the impact of population growth in the late nineteenth century the united states experienced continuous population growth in nearly every part of the nation.
between 1850 and 1900 the population more than tripled.
in 1850 there were 23 million americans by 1900 there were 76 million.
this large population increase was fueled by a high birthrate and a constant stream of european immigrants.
population growth created favorable conditions for business expansion.
there was a steadily rising demand for goods and a plentiful supply of cheap labor to make them.
but the growing population also made increasing demands on the natural environment using up resources.
new types of business organization before the civil war most american businesses were owned by individuals or by a group of partners.
after the war the corporate form of business became much more common.
a corporation is a company chartered by a state and recognized in law as a separate person name illbbiilbl illll chapter 5 industrialization and the gilded age 67 applying what you have learned to what extent did technology railroads the free enterprise system the rise of national markets and population each play a role in making the united states an industrial giant.
support your answer with historical evidence.
create a chart or venn diagram listing the advantages and disadvantages of the corporate form of business organization.
an entrepreneur is a person or small group who starts a business in the hope of making a profit.
in the 1870s entrepreneurs began to exercise a dominant influence on american economic life.
through the efficiencies of large scale production these industrial entrepreneurs lowered the prices of goods making them more affordable while also improving their quality.
these entrepreneurs were also able to reap huge profits for themselves creating immense wealth.
because of their lavish lifestyles the period from 1865 to 1900 became known as the gilded age some observers considered these entrepreneurs captains of industry because they forged the modem industrial economy.
their critics called them robber barons because of the ruthless tactics they used to destroy competition and to keep their workers wages low.
two of the most successful entrepreneurs in this era were andrew carnegie and john d rockefeller.
andrew carnegie andrew carnegie worked his way up from a penniless scottish immigrant to one of americas richest and most powerful men.
he first worked as a boy in a cotton mill.
later he was a telegraph operator for a railroad.
carnegie became friends with the president of the railroad who promoted him and advised him on investments.
after the civil war carnegie invested in ironworks and built a steel mill in pittsburgh selling iron and steel to railroad companies for tracks.
with his profits he bought other steel mills and founded the carnegie steel corporation in 1892.
his steel mills undercut the competition.
he bought iron ore fields coal mines and ships so he could mine his own iron ore and ship it to his steel mills in pennsylvania.
carnegie paid his workers low wages and forced them to work 12 hour long shifts while he crushed attempts by his workers to form labor unions.
carnegie spent his later life in acts of philanthropy giving away 350 million to build libraries and endow universities.
andrew carnegie 1835 1919 chapter 5 industrialization and the gilded age 69 in 1873 america experienced a depression an economic downturn in business.
large producers like carnegie and rockefeller began driving smaller companies out of business or purchasing them.
in some cases rival companies reached agreements to consolidate join together.
many producers hoped to eliminate competition by establishing a monopoly.
monopoly power allowed a manufacturer to dictate prices to consumers.
the pros and cons of big business pros large business are more efficient leading to lower prices.
they can hire large numbers of workers.
they can produce goods in large quantities.
they have the resources to support expensive research and invent new items.
cons they have an unfair competitive advantage against smaller businesses.
they sometimes exploit workers.
they are less concerned with where they do business and pollute the area.
they have an unfair influence over government policies affecting them.
laws against anti competitive practices at first the government did little to regulate big business.
government leaders believed in laissez faire the theory that the government should not interfere in the operation of the free market.
of course even under a laissez faire system government had a role in the economy it provides laws to protect property and enforce contracts.
it establishes a system of patents to promote inventions and enacts tariffs to help manufacturers.
many believed that the economy worked best when it was not burdened by government regulations.
government leaders also doubted that the constitution gave them the right to regulate business.
however some of the anti competitive practices of business were so glaring that reformers called for legislation to remedy them giving government an even greater role.
interstate commerce act 1887.
railroads sometimes charged local farmers more to haul their crops over short distances than they charged for large companies to ship goods longer distances on more competitive national routes.
some states passed laws prohibiting this practice but the u s supreme court held these laws to be unconstitutional.
the court ruled that only congress had the power to regulate interstate commerce.
in response congress passed the interstate commerce act.
this federal law prohibited unfair practices by railroads such as charging higher rates for shorter routes.
a special regulatory commission the interstate commerce commission was established to enforce the act.
this was a landmark measure since it was the first time that congress stepped in to regulate business in america.
sherman anti trust act 1890.
the purpose of this federal law was to stop monopolies engaging in unfair practices that prevented fair competition.
the act marked a significant change in the attitude of congress toward the abuses of big business.
ne chapter 5 industrialization and the gilded age 71 one important factor behind americas astonishing economic growth in the late nineteenth century was the increasing exploitation of its industrial workers.
long hours and low wages the average workday and work week were long by todays standards 10 to 14 hours a day for six days a week.
employers hired the least expensive laborers.
pay averaged from 3 to 12 weekly but immigrants were often willing to work for far less.
women and children were also frequently employed as low paid workers.
poor conditions boring and repetitive tasks as factories and work places grew larger workers lost all personal contact with their employers.
jobs were offered on a take it or leave it basis.
as industrialists sought to achieve greater speed and efficiency each worker became nothing more than a human cog in a vast machine.
work became less skilled more repetitive monotonous and boring.
industrial working conditions in the late nineteenth century were also often extremely hazardous.
safeguards around machinery were inadequate.
thousands of workers were injured or killed in industrial accidents each year.
acting as an amateur historian this poem the sweatshop was written by morris rosenfeld a russian polish immigrant who found work in the garment industry in new york city.
a sweatshop was a workshop like a small factory often in a city.
rosenfeld wrote this poem about how he felt at work the machines are so wildly noisy in the shop that i often forget who i am.
i get lost in the frightful tumult my self is destroyed i become a machine.
i work and work and work endlessly i create and create and create why.
i dont know and i dont ask.
what business has a machine thinking how would you summarize rosenfelds feelings about his work.
suppose you were going to interview morris rosenfeld.
prepare two questions you would ask him.
morris rosenfeld 1862 1923 what light does the poem shed on the experiences of american workers.
chapter 5 industrialization and the gilded age gompers limited his goals to winning economic improvements for workers higher pay an 8 hour work day and better working conditions.
gompers fought hard to improve members job security by seeking closed shops places where only union members could be hired.
the afl quickly emerged as the principal voice of organized labor.
however the afl was weakened by its continuing exclusion of unskilled workers who made up the bulk of the labor force.
as late as 1910 less than 5 of american workers were unionized.
samuel gompers 1850 1924.
73 government leaders were critical of the early labor movement.
in the late nineteenth century most government leaders favored business and opposed unions for a number of reasons the greater influence of business business leaders often contributed heavily to political campaign funds.
moreover many politicians shared the same outlook as business leaders.
they believed that successful businesses were responsible for american prosperity and saw worker demands as greedy.
protector of the economy more than 20 000 strikes involving more than 6 million workers took place between 1880 and 1900.
government leaders feared the disruptive effect of these strikes on the american economy.
in 1895 the u s supreme court even applied the sherman anti trust act 1890 against unions.
the court ruled that unions were illegal combinations in restraint of trade.
this ruling encouraged government leaders to use troops to put down strikes and to restore order.
public opinion public opinion also supported laissez faire policies.
many americans believed that businesses should have the right to hire and fire employees as they pleased.
many were hostile to unions because they feared workers wage demands would lead to higher prices.
union activities were often associated with violence and radical ideas.
in the haymarket affair of 1886 labor leaders were blamed when a bomb exploded during a demonstration of striking workers at haymarket square in chicago.
seven policemen were killed and 67 others were severely wounded.
applying what you have learned using the internet or your school library make a comparison between one business entrepreneur and an early labor leader.
how were they alike and how did they differ.
compare the influence of labor unions today with those in this period.
name chapter 5 industrialization and the gilded age 75 ggbmesiabinbbainassimikebraiasbtbbmammbbibbmabamaewmabibsimaaarabmmabnbesaega great entrepreneurs rise of organized labor i i i robber barons or captains of industry.
robber barons.
businessmen sometimes i used ruthless tactics to destroy competition j 1 and to keep workers wages low.
i andrew carnegie i j fostered the gospel of wealth.
i steel production in pittsburgh.
i j had iron ore fields coal mines steel mills.
a philanthropist who gave to libraries.
i john d rockefeller standard oil company.
1 controlled the refining of oil.
i forced to dissolve it when his company ob i tained a stranglehold on the oil industry.
like carnegie a great philanthropist.
j problems faced by workers long hours low wages.
i poor working conditions repetitive tasks.
child labor.
i lack of job security.
rise of labor unions knights of labor terrence powderly.
5 american federation of labor begun by samuel gompers.
s government attitude towards unions j government had anti union bias.
many in government saw unions as driv j ing up the cost of goods.
haymarket affair of 1886.
chapter 5 concept map name chapter 5 industrialization and the gilded age 77 use the excerpt and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
anyone may say that the organizations of labor invade or deny liberty to the workmen.
but go to the men who worked in the coal mines twelve fourteen sixteen hours a day for a dollar or a dollar and twenty five cents and who now work eight hours a day and whose wages have increased 70 per cent in the past seven years go tell those men that they have lost their liberty and they will laugh at you samuel gompers to national civic federation 1905 in the samuel gompers papers 3 based on this passage what did gompers see as the benefit of joining a union.
a workers had gained better working conditions.
f hist 3 b b workers now worked longer hours in coal mines.
c workers were able to work for a dollar and twenty five cents.
d workers were able to have their children work in mines.
4 in the late 1800s which factor directly contributed to the growth of the american steel industry.
f government regulation f sts 27 a j g employee ownership h new production techniques j the formation of labor unions 5 the interstate commerce act 1887 and the sherman antitrust act 1890 were efforts by the federal government to a regulate aspects of business econ 15 b b expand the positive features of the trusts c favor big businesses over small companies d move toward government ownership of key industries 6 in the late nineteenth century critics of big business claimed that monopolies in the united states harmed the economy by f unfairly limiting competition econ 15 b g decreasing the urban growth rate h preventing technological innovation j failing to keep pace with european industries 7 during the late 1800s what was a major effect of industrialization on american workers.
a membership in labor unions declined.
hist 3 b j b workers migrated to rural regions.
c most factory jobs became service industry jobs.
d skilled craftsmen were often replaced by unskilled machine operators.
name chapter 5 industrialization and the gilded age 79 use the information in the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
factories and workshops inspection 1.
every such work shop shall be kept clean free from vermin rodents infectious or contagious matter and to that end shall be subject to inspection as provided in this act.
if upon inspection such work shops shall be found unhealthy or infectious such orders shall be given and action taken as the public health shall require.
children under 14 years of age are prohibited from being employed in any manufacturing establishment factory or work shop in the state.
the employment of children between ages of 14 and 16 years is prohibited unless an affidavit legal document by the parent or guardian shall first be filed in which shall be stated the age date and place of birth.
factories and workshops laws of illinois passed by the general assembly 1883 11 what conclusion can be drawn from this excerpt.
a most workers in illinois were members of a labor union.
hist 3 8 b illinois was not interested in improving factory working conditions.
c illinois sought to address some of the problems caused by industrialization.
d union membership in factories and workshops was prohibited in illinois.
12 which was an important benefit of the laissez fair policies of the federal government in the late nineteenth century.
f american entrepreneurs were able to invest in their businesses i econ i5 ij i with little government interference.
g american businesses were able to avoid the ups and down of the business cycle.
h american workers found it easy to organize into labor unions.
j american workers felt secure about the safety of conditions in factories.
13 during the period from 1865 to 1900 disputes between labor and business owners were sometimes marked by a the use of violence by both sides b cooperative efforts to resolve differences c government support for striking workers d negotiations by the federal government 14 what was the main purpose of the antitrust legislation passed by congress.
f to promote corporate consolidation econj5 b i g to restrict foreign access to american markets h to protect competition between private businesses j to reduce the average size of business 15 the statement god gave me my money.
i believe the power to make money is a gift from god to be developed and used for the good of mankind was probably said by a john d rockefeller c samuel gompers c hist 3 c i b terrence powderly d thomas edison name chapter 6 american society in transition 81 in this chapter you will leam how industrialization affected american society in the late nineteenth century.
you will leam how people migrated from the countryside to cities and people from other countries came to the united states.
you will also leam how technological change made it possible to transform the physical geography of the great plains.
finally you will explore how native american indians were forced onto reservations the buffalo were killed and new settlers built ranches and farms.
in the 19th century americans moved from the countryside to cities as the nation became more urbanized.
the use of farm machinery meant fewer workers were needed on farms while demand for labor in factories and cities expanded.
b urbanization brought many problems.
cities often lacked adequate public services for their growing populations.
streets were noisy dirty and congested.
many newcomers lived in crowded tenement housing.
c political bosses ran political machines they provided basic services for immigrants and the poor in exchange for their votes they used their control of city government to make personal fortunes on overpriced city contracts.
d immigration escalated in the late nineteenth century.
a variety of push and pull factors brought more immigrants to the united states seeking a better life.
e the new immigrants came from southern and eastern europe russia italy poland and greece.
most were catholic or jewish spoke no english and were often poor.
they tended to settle in large eastern cities.
they lived in ethnic communities in ghettos where they could speak their native language.
f the children of the immigrants were often americanized in the public schools.
g nativists opposed immigration.
the chinese exclusion act was the first federal law restricting immigration.
it prohibited chinese immigration for 10 years.
h the frontier was the line between areas of settlement and those areas dominated by nature and native american indians.
the last frontier consisted of the great plains and mountains deserts and basins of the far west.
the completion of the transcontinental railroad and the defeat of the indians during the indian wars closed the final frontier and opened the region to settlement.
i miners were attracted to the far west by discoveries of precious metals such as during the california gold rush of 1849 and the klondike gold rush of 1896.
j ranchers came to drive their cattle herds across the open range to rail lines.
farmers occupied land under the homestead act and built homes and farms.
to overcome the lack of rain and trees they built homes of sod dug water wells and used steel plows and barbed wire.
k government policy drove the indians onto government reservations in the west.
l the dawes act although intended to help indians had the opposite effect.
it gave tribal lands to individual indians who often sold them.
the american indian citizenship act 1924 made all indians into u s citizens.
name chapter 6 american society in transition 83 acting as an amateur historian select one major american city and use the internet or your school library to investigate how its size changed between 1865 and 1900.
make a graph showing its population over several decades 1870 1880 etc.
find out what kind of work most people did in that city.
for example did the city have any special resources or industries that employed residents.
find out where most of the people living in that city came from.
were many residents from a particular part of the united states or from a foreign country.
what activities did people pursue in that city for relaxation and amusement.
urbanization led to physical changes in the landscape.
trees and fields were replaced by wood and brick buildings and by paved roads.
american cities mushroomed so quickly that municipal city authorities were often unable to deal adequately with all of their problems.
overcrowding and congestion cities grew haphazardly.
streets were often not wide enough to bear the increased traffic.
horse drawn cars crowded the streets making movement almost impossible.
factories and trains polluted the air while sewage sometimes contaminated drinking water and spread disease.
cities lacked the ability to deliver essential services like clean water garbage collection and public schools to so many residents.
as cities grew whole families crowded into tenements single room apartments often without heat or lighting.
frequently many families shared a single toilet.
inadequate public services.
cities lacked the ability to deliver increased public services hospitals police forces schools fire departments street cleaning and garbage collection.
transportation.
horse drawn coaches and later electric trolleys were needed to transport workers to their jobs.
to eliminate the pollution created by coaches and trolleys new york city built a subway in 1900.
by 1930 new york city had the world s largest subway system.
b the problems created by growing cities overcrowding.
families were crowded into tenements small apartment buildings.
these tenements often lacked daylight heat fresh air and adequate plumbing.
social tensions.
in cities rich people lived next door to the poor.
seeing the luxuries of the wealthy distressed poor people and increased social tensions and crimes.
chapter 6 american society in transition 85 while the political machines were corrupt they did play a useful role.
they helped immigrants settle into their new homeland find housing and obtain jobs.
they also helped immigrants become naturalized citizens and even provided money to help them through hard times.
the political machines were often the ones to get a street paved extend a water pipe or approve construction.
but these services came at a very high price.
bui 111 ai you have learned create a graphic organizer showing the influence of political bosses and their political machines on a major city such as new york boston chicago or philadelphia.
in the late nineteenth century european immigrants flooded american cities in search of work and places to live.
in many of the largest american cities european immigrants even came to outnumber native born americans.
why immigrants came immigrants have always come to the united states for a variety of reasons.
historians often divide these into push and pull factors.
a desire to escape oppression poverty religious discrimination or ethnic persecution pushed immigrants out of their homelands.
a belief that america offered freedom and economic opportunity as well as ties to relatives already living here generally pulled immigrants to these shores.
they saw the united states as a land of unbounded opportunities.
immigrants who fled oppressive regimes in europe yearned to live in a democratic society like the united states.
factors pull factors oppression poverty war religious ethnicn persecution freedom economic 51 opportunity cultural ties before 1880 most immigrants to america came from parts of northern europe especially great britain ireland and germany.
in general these immigrants were protestants except for large numbers of irish catholics.
most of these early immigrants spoke english.
name chapter 6 american society in transition 87 in their own communities immigrants could speak their native language attend their own churches and synagogues and be among relatives and friends from the old country some of these communities even published newspapers in their own native language.
however living in these ethnic ghettos also isolated immigrants from mainstream american life making it harder for them to adopt new customs.
the process of americanization while some adult immigrants attended night school to leam english most were too busy working and caring for their families to spend time learning a new language or culture.
it was left to their children to leam english and become americanized learning to dress speak and act like other americans.
these immigrant children eventually became assimilated similar to other americans.
america was seen as a melting pot in which immigrants were melted down and reshaped.
americas public schools greatly assisted in this process.
often americanization was accompanied by conflict.
for example immigrant parents might desire an arranged marriage for their children while their children insisted on finding their own marriage partners according to the american custom.
immigrant children learn to speak english in a new york city public school.
acting as an amateur.
historian the following passage is from a letter that former president theodore roosevelt wrote to the president of the american defense society in january 1919 we should insist that if the immigrant who comes here in good faith becomes an american and assimilates himself to us he shall be treated on an exact equality with everyone else.
it is an outrage to discriminate against any such man because of creed or birthplace or origin.
there can be no divided allegiance here.
any man who says he is an american but something else also isnt an american.
we have room for but one language and that is the english language and we have room for but one loyalty and that is loyalty to the american people.
we can have no 50 50 allegiance in this country.
either a man is an american and nothing else or he is not an american at all what were roosevelts views on americanization.
roosevelt once told a newspaper that english should be the only language taught in public schools what are your views on this today.
explain your answer.
chapter 6 american society in transition 89 in u s v wong kim ark 1898 the u s supreme court ruled that the children of chinese immigrants bom in the united states could not be denied citizenship.
this part of the chinese exclusion act the court held violated the 14th amendment.
applying what you have learned imagine you are a member of congress in 1882.
write a speech giving arguments for or against the proposed chinese exclusion act.
your speech should try to persuade other members of congress to vote as you suggest.
complete the graphic organizer below by describing various aspects of urbanization and immigration in this period.
chapter 6 american society in transition 91 the indian wars after the civil war union troops were stationed in forts along the frontier.
they defeated several of the tribes on the great plains and southwest during the indian wars and moved them onto reservations.
typical was the contest with the sioux indians.
after the discovery of gold in the black hills of dakota in 1875 the sioux were asked to move from their sacred grounds.
the following year sitting bull and crazy horse defeated general george custer and killed 264 soldiers at little big hom.
within two years crazy horse was captured and killed and most of the sioux were forced onto reservations.
however unrest among the sioux in 1890 led to the slaughter of 300 unarmed sioux men women and children by machine gun fire at wounded knee south dakota.
the impact of the railroads as you learned in the last chapter the transcontinental railroad completed in 1869 reduced the journey from new york to san francisco from six months to just ten days.
rail travel increased dramatically with its completion.
soon the united states led the world with more railroad track mileage than england and france combined.
the railroads attracted an increasing number of settlers to the west.
settlers could now ship their crops by rail to distant eastern markets.
railroad tracks also often ran through native american territories leading to new conflicts.
from 1870 to 1890 the herds of buffalo on the great plains were destroyed by sharpshooters traveling by train.
this development affected the ability of the plains indians to remain on the plains.
acting as an amateur historian when the texas legislature was considering a bill to protect the buffalo from sharpshooters general philip sheridan spoke out against the bill these men have done more in the last two years and will do more in the next year to settle the indian question than the entire regular army has done in the last forty years.
they are destroying the indians food supply.
and it is a well known fact that an army losing its base of supplies is placed at a great disadvantage.
send them powder and lead if you will but for a lasting peace let them kill skin and sell until all of the buffaloes are exterminated.
then your prairies can be covered with speckled cattle a buffalo hide yard 1878 showing 40 000 buffalo hides killed.
how did sheridan feel about the slaughter of buffalo on the great plains.
what effect did he predict if the slaughter continued.
name chapter 6 american society in transition 93 in the late 1870s and 1880s the herds were driven farther north a year before they were ready for slaughter.
they fattened themselves by grazing on the plains of montana wyoming and the dakotas.
however by 1886 overgrazing had destroyed much of the grass.
sheepherders and farmers had bought up much of the open range and enclosed it with barbed wire fences.
two severe winters and very hot summers killed millions of cattle in 1886 1887 finally ending the long drive.
but cattle ranchers remained breeding cattle on the closed range and sending their cattle eastwards by train each year to be fattened by eastern farmers.
farming on the great plains the railroads also led farmers to occupy the great plains.
the homestead act and the sale of railroad land grants stimulated the movement of farmers westwards.
the railroads made it possible for farmers on the great plains to ship their crops to the east.
about half of the settlers were immigrants from europe the other half were the children of farmers from the east and midwest.
at first these farmers faced the hostility of both indians and cattlemen.
the indians were defeated by federal troops in the indian wars the cattlemen formed associations and hired men to commit acts of violence against the early homesteaders.
eventually the farmers won this conflict because they came in greater numbers and were able to enclose their lands with barbed wire.
the farmers faced many natural obstacles on the great plains.
from railroad advertisements they had expected to find well watered wooded lands.
instead when they arrived they found little rainfall few trees tough soil extreme temperatures plagues of grasshoppers and personal isolation.
some starved or returned to the east.
families that stayed were forced to do endless hours of heavy work.
during the winter months families might be snowed in for months on end.
with technological ingenuity they were able to overcome many obstacles.
to make up for the lack of trees they built sod houses from clumps of grass and soil they used barbed wire to keep cattle and other animals off their farms.
they used steel plows to turn the soil drilling equipment to dig deep water wells and windmills to haul water.
they used harvesters and threshers to farm more acres with fewer workers.
name project without permission chapter 6 american society in transition 95 liblihlli b native american indians once occupied all of the present united states.
they were composed of many different groups speaking hundreds of different languages.
the advancing line of settlement and diseases from eurasia like smallpox severely reduced native american populations and pushed them westwards.
government policy from 1830 to 1890 the u s government systematically followed a policy of pushing native americans from their traditional lands onto government reservations in the west.
forced removal.
in 1830 congress ordered the removal of all native american indians to west of the mississippi.
nearly one quarter of the cherokees perished on the journey westward known as the trail of tears.
flood of settlers.
large numbers of settlers overwhelmed the native americans.
in 1869 the transcontinental railroad was completed.
along with the homestead act the continuation of railroad lines made native american lands even more desirable.
factors eroding native american control of the west warfare.
the technological superiority of the u s government made resistance futile.
the indian wars which pitted settlers and federal troops against native american indians lasted from 1860 to 1890.
destruction of natural environment.
competition between settlers miners and farmers for the land led to the destruction of the natural environment on which native americans depended for their livelihood.
the reservation once a particular native american tribe submitted to federal authority its members were settled on a reservation.
reservation lands were usually smaller than the lands from which the tribe was removed and often consisted of undesirable land.
the federal government promised food blankets and seed but this policy clashed with tribal customs since native americans were traditionally hunters not farmers.
under the new act indians did not need to give up tribal lands or customs to become citizens as they did under the dawes act.
some historians see the act as a reward for native american enlistment as soldiers in world war i.
since native american indians had served the nation in wartime they deserved to be given american citizenship.
ten years later the dawes act was replaced by an act guaranteeing tribal self government.
chapter 6 american society in transition 97 president coolidge meets with indian leaders.
acting as an amateur historian under the american indian citizenship act of 1924 the government offered the following a 11 non citizen indians bom within the territorial limits of the united states be and they are hereby declared to be citizens of the united states provided that the granting of such citizenship shall not in any manner impair or otherwise affect the right of any indian to tribal or other property imagine you are a member of a government commission in 1930.
compare the dawes act american indian citizenship act and earlier policies towards native americans.
then decide after balancing all of the interests involved which policy was most effective.
which best represented native american indian rights.
present your conclusions in a brief report.
urbanization immigration urbanization.
movement of people from the countryside to cities.
urbanization brought many problems crowded tenements one room apartments that lacked daylight adequate plumbing.
pollution sewage contamination of water.
inability to supply essential public services hospitals police schools and clean streets.
political corruption political machines run by political bosses helped immigrants but stole from city governments through overpriced contracts.
why they came push factors oppression poverty wars and ethnic persecution.
pull factors belief in american freedom economic opportunity and cultural ties.
new immigrants came from southern and eastern europe mostly catholic and jewish often less educated spoke no english.
process of americanization.
americanization.
immigrants learned to speak act and behave like americans often left to immigrant children.
chapter 6 american society in transition 99 directions put a circle around the letter that best answers the question.
use the information in the table and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
urbanization railroad mileage and industrialization i860 1870 1880 1890 urban population millions 6 2 9 9 14 1 22 1 percent of u s population in cities 20 25 28 35 cities over 10 000 in population 93 168 223 363 railroad mileage thousands 30 6 52 9 93 3 166 7 source gary fields communications innovations and networks 1 based on the table what was an important effect of industrialization in the united states in the later part of the nineteenth century.
a people began to move from cities to rural areas.
i geog 13 a j b the urban population declined.
c the rate of expansion of railroad lines began to drop.
d the proportion of americans living in cities continuously increased.
a examine the question.
the table provides information about u s demography and railroad mileage.
to answer the question you need to look at each choice and see if it is accurate based on the table.
recall what you know.
you should recall howto read a table.
the table shows an increasing percentage of people living in cities every decade.
apply what you know.
the best answer is choice d if you examine each of the other answer choices you will see that according to the table they are not supported by information provided in the table.
j now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 nativists in california in the 1880s would most likely have supported the f creation of settlement houses to aid new immigrants c hist 3 c g passage of the chinese exclusion act h continuation of the contract labor system j assimilation of native american indians into mainstream culture 3 after 1880 where did the majority of new immigrants to the united states h hist 3 c come from.
a northern and western europe c southern and eastern europe b canada and latin america d china and southeast asia chapter 6 american society in transition 101 use the information in the bar graph and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
9 based on this poster which is an accurate statement.
a immigrants were encouraged to leam to speak english.
b granite city had laws prohibiting immigrants from moving there.
c the people in the poster were native born americans.
d granite city encouraged diversity in its immigrant population.
cult 26 b pi granite city americanization schools monday and thursday evenings 7 30 p m e underwood underwood these two men are brothers one is an american citizen and the i other has just come to this country with their old mother.
see the difference in the way they dress and look.
america is a great country.
in america everybody has a chance.
everybody who comes to h america from the old country ought to leam the american language and become an american citizen.
if the people that come to america t do not become americans this country will soon be tike the old keep america great.
become american citizen beginning monday september the 27th 1920 learn the language.
i i i 10 during the late 1800s and early 1900s prejudice against new immigrants increased because these immigrants f had job skills superior to those of most american workers f hist 3 c g formed their own labor unions in order to receive higher wages h came from cultural backgrounds different from those of the majority of americans j tried to replace american democracy with other forms of government 11 what major trend occurred to the population of the united states during the industrial expansion of the late nineteenth century.
a farm population increased i geog 13 c b migration to rural areas increased c immigration decreased d urbanization increased 12 the homestead act 1862 promoted the development of western lands by f creating a system of dams for crop irrigation econi5 a j g providing free land to settlers h removing all restrictions on immigration j moving native american indians to reservations 13 in the late 1800s why did congress pass restrictions on immigration from china.
a to stop illegal immigration from latin america econ is c j b to provide highly skilled workers for industry c to limit the power of urban political machines d to satisfy nativist prejudices in california name chapter 6 american society in transition 103 use the information in the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
today three fourths of our people live in tenements and the drift of the population to the cities is sending increasing multitudes to crowd them.
the fifteen thousand tenant houses that were the despair of past generations have swelled into thirty seven thousand and more than twelve hundred thousand persons call them home.
we know now that there is no way out the system that was the evil offspring of public neglect and private greed has come to stay forever in our civilization.
nothing is left but to make the best of a bad bargain jacob riis how the other half lives charles scribners sons 1890 17 what is the main idea of this passage.
a the conditions of tenement living have improved greatly.
hist 3 c b the number of people living in tenements is declining.
c many immigrants face crowded conditions and despair in tenement housing.
d living in tenements has led to improved working class conditions.
18 which demographic shift occurred in the united states in the late nineteenth century as a result of industrialization.
f northerners moved to the sun belt states.
i geoc i3 cl g rural residents moved into urban areas.
h working class people left the cities to move to the suburbs.
j african americans moved from the north to the south.
19 how did the passage of the dawes act affect native american indians.
a it supported their existing cultural traditions.
i cult 26 b b it started a series of indian wars on the great plains.
c it attempted to assimilate them into mainstream american culture.
d it forced their removal from areas east of the mississippi river.
20 which was a successful example of americanization.
f the dawes act led native americans to sell their lands.
cult 26jb j g the homestead act made federal land available to settlers.
h the children of new immigrants learned english in public schools.
j congress prohibited the immigration of chinese workers.
21 which factor helped farmers on the great plains overcome opposition from cattle ranchers.
f the farmers allied with native american indians.
c hist 3 b g barbed wire allowed farmers to enclose their lands.
h heavy rains made the great plains more suitable to planting than grazing.
j ranchers refused to divide up the open range.
name chapter 7 the progressive era 105 a maswa a.
farmers faced problems in the late 19th century.
new farm machinery and the opening of the great plains led to overproduction.
food prices fell as farmers expenses remained the same.
farmers fell into debt while they were also charged excessive rates by railroads and grain storage operators.
farmers organized in the grange movement to fight for their special interests.
they passed laws regulating railroad rates.
when the law was overturned by the supreme court congress passed the interstate commerce act 1887.
c farmers next combined with industrial workers and miners into the populist party.
they advocated many reforms that were later adopted by the major political parties and enacted by congress.
populists believed the shortage of currency was responsible for falling prices.
in 1896 and 1900 william jennings bryan was the candidate for the populists and democrats.
bryan lost both elections.
d the progressive movement flourished in 1900 1920.
like the populists progressives sought reform.
they were mainly educated members of the middle class.
they sought to correct abuses of big business such as exploiting workers.
they also sought to reform the corrupt practices of government.
the roots of the movement were with the populists muckrackers and social gospel movement.
muckrakers like upton sinclair were investigative reporters.
e states passed political reforms and social legislation.
f on the eve of the progressive era the federal government was reformed by the pendleton act which reduced the number of political appointments and replaced them with candidates who had passed a competitive examination.
g progressive reforms were introduced at the national level by presidents theodore roosevelt william howard taft and woodrow wilson.
h theodore roosevelt believed in a strong presidency and used his powers to safeguard the public interest.
he used the anti trust laws to curb the unfair practices of business.
his square deal program passed laws protecting consumers.
j william howard taft continued most of roosevelts policies.
when roosevelt decided to run as the bull moose candidate in 1912 he split the republican party helping woodrow wilson the democratic candidate to win the election.
k woodrow wilson furthered progressive reforms with his new freedom program.
he lowered tariff duties and introduced a graduated income tax made possible by the 16th amendment.
he created the federal reserve system to control the nations money supply.
to control the unfair practices of big business he passed the clayton anti trust act creating the federal trade commission.
l in art and literature realism was popular in the late 19th century.
realism attempted to show things as they were and gave writers and artists a way to depict the hardships and abuses of the new industrial workers.
some of the greatest writers included horatio alger mark twain and kate chopin.
noted artists included james mcneil whistler winslow homer and thomas eakins.
project without permission chapter 7 the progressive era 107 granger cooperatives grangers tried to eliminate middlemen by forming farmers cooperatives to buy machinery fertilizers and manufactured goods in large numbers at a discount.
the cooperatives also sold their crops directly to city markets.
because of a lack of business experience many of the granger cooperatives failed.
the granger laws farmers mainly blamed the railroads for their difficulties.
they felt they were being overcharged by railroads and by grain storage operators.
in several midwestern states grangers elected candidates to state legislatures who promised reforms.
these states passed laws regulating railroad and grain storage rates.
in munn v illinois 1877 the supreme court upheld the right of a state to regulate businesses that affected the public interest within the state.
however in 1886 the supreme court reversed itself in a case involving the state regulation of railroad rates.
the court ruled that only congress could regulate rates on interstate commerce.
this decision ended the state regulation of railroads.
the grangers then turned their attention to congress for help.
as you learned in the previous chapter congress then passed the interstate commerce act 1887.
this act prohibited railroads from charging more for short hauls than for long hauls over the same route.
the interstate commerce commission created to investigate complaints and to enforce the act was the first federal government agency to regulate unfair business practices.
these new regulations marked a change from the laissez faire economy of the past.
create a graphic organizer showing the costs and benefits of the interstate commerce act 1887.
in 1892 farmers gave their support to the populist party a new national political party representing the common man farmers industrial workers and miners in the battle against banking and railroad interests.
women played a prominent role in the populist movement as speakers and organizers.
the populist platform populists were convinced that rich industrialists and bankers had a stranglehold on government.
like the grangers before them the populists wanted government to take a larger role ending oppression injustice and poverty.
in 1892 the populists held a national convention at omaha nebraska where they chose a presidential candidate.
they also drew up a party platform that had several innovative proposals chapter 7 the progressive era 109 acting as an amateur historian in 1896 the democratic party held its national convention to pick their presidential candidate.
william jennings bryans cross of gold speech was so powerful that he won the nomination my friends the question we are to decide is upon which side will the democratic party fight upon the side of 4the idle holders of idle capital or upon the side of 4the struggling masses.
that question the party must answer.
you tell us that the great cities are in favor of the gold standard we reply that the great cities rest upon our broad and fertile prairies.
bum down your cities and leave our farms and your cities will spring up again as if by magic.
but destroy our farms and the grass will grow in the streets of every city in the country bryan delivering his speech.
which groups did bryan appeal to in his speech to the democratic convention.
how did he try to show that farmers were superior.
election of 1900.
four years later bryan ran against mckinley again.
when mckinley won a second time this virtually brought an end to the populist party.
new gold discoveries higher farm prices and rural migration to the cities weakened national interest in a separate farmers party in later years.
election of election of 1892 james b weaver p 5 of electoral vote 22 election of 1896 william mckinley r 65 of electoral vote 292 w x v 1 william j bryan d xx 35 of electoral vote s w r republican party p peoples party d democratic party 271 electoral votes received the legacy of populism the role of third parties the populist party appeared suddenly in the 1890s and disappeared just as fast.
yet it left its mark on american history.
third parties often have an impact on the political process.
they provide an outlet for minorities to voice grievances and generate new ideas.
chapter 7 the progressive era 111 the progressive movement flourished between 1900 and the start of world war i progressives took their name from their belief in progress although the progressives borrowed ideas from the populists and the labor movement they differed in important ways.
progressives were mainly middle class city dwellers rather than farmers and workers.
their activities reflected the rising influence of the middle class.
writers lawyers ministers and college professors provided their leadership.
the primary goal of the progressives was to correct the political and economic injustices that had resulted from americas industrialization.
progressives were appalled at the increasing inequalities between the wealthy and the poor.
they did not oppose industrialization but they wanted to use the power of government to correct its evils so that all americans not just the wealthy could enjoy better lives.
to achieve this the progressives felt they also had to reform government itself which had become corrupted by big business and political machines.
a poster from the progressive era alludes to class warfare.
progressivism arose out of a combination of protestant evangelicalism the activities of journalists populism and the reaction of the educated middle class to abuses in industry and government.
progressives often felt threatened by the rise of big business large labor unions and corrupt political bosses.
they acted out of a sense of moral responsibility often based on their religious beliefs.
progressives exalted science and placed great confidence in the ability of using a scientific approach to solve social problems.
rather than accept corruption and poverty they believed the government should take positive steps to identify problems and promote progress.
the social gospel movement in the late nineteenth century a new social movement emerged that was spearheaded by protestant clergymen.
protestant ministers in the social gospel movement called for social reforms including the abolition of child labor and safer working conditions.
they objected to the harsh realities of unregulated free enterprise and emphasized the ancient idea that each man was his brothers keeper.
instead of accepting the existence of social problems as gods will groups like the salvation army emphasized the christian duty to help those who were less fortunate.
chapter 7 the progressive era 113 acting as an amateur historian upton sinclairs book the jungle portrayed the new industrial economy as inhumane destructive and uncaring.
one scene in the book described piles of rat infested rotting meat being used to make sausages t he meat would be shoveled into carts and the man who did the shoveling would not trouble to lift out a rat even when he saw one there were things that went into the sausage in comparison with which a poisoned rat was a tidbit.
there was no place for the men to wash their hands before they ate their dinner and so they made a practice of washing them in the water that was to be ladled into the sausage.
how might a reader in 1906 have reacted to this passage.
explain your answer.
the early progressives identified political and social problems and made individual or local efforts to remedy them.
the progressives provide one of the best examples of americans attempting to overcome problems through reform.
the demand for reform has been a continuing theme throughout american history.
reform movements are usually based on the belief that society can be made better.
the social reformers progressives were so shaken by the abuses of industrial society that some even made individual efforts at social reform.
settlement houses were started in slum neighborhoods by progressives like jane addams.
a settlement house was an all purpose community center for poor people living in crowded city neighborhoods.
the settlement house provided child care nursing services and english lessons to immigrants.
most of the settlement houses were staffed by volunteers.
jane addams and her volunteers actually lived at hull house among the people they were trying to help.
addams once described the main purpose of a settlement house as being to help the foreign bom conserve the value of their past life and to bring them into contact with a better class of americans jane addams 1860 1935 name chapter 7 the progressive era 115 they also expanded city services to deal with urban overcrowding fire hazards and the lack of public services.
municipal governments often took direct ownership of utilities such as water electricity and gas.
some called this gas and water socialism.
in some cities progressives even introduced new forms of municipal government to discourage corruption such as governance by a city manager or commission.
the reform of state government at the state level progressive governors like robert lafollette in wisconsin and theodore roosevelt in new york similarly took steps to free their state governments from corruption and the influence of big business.
lafollette for example challenged political bosses and reduced the influence of railroad owners.
progressives also introduced important political reforms to many states such as the initiative referendum and recall.
the purpose of these reforms was to end corruption and to make state government more directly accountable to the people.
these reforms sought to raise the level of public participation in the political process and to give citizens more of a direct voice in state government by by passing politicians.
many of these measures were borrowed from the populists secret ballot.
voters were less subject to pressure and intimidation when they could vote in secret.
initiative.
voters could directly introduce bills in the state legislature and could vote on whether they wanted a bill passed.
referendum.
voters could compel legislators to place a bill on the ballot for approval.
illllillllibbim progressive political reforms 3 recall.
elected officials could be removed from office by voters in a special election.
direct party primaries.
special elections were held to determine whom party members wanted to represent them as candidates in the general election.
direct election of senators.
senators were elected directly by the people 17th amendment instead of being chosen by state legislatures.
applying what you have learned liissiilisi how did the processes of initiative referendum and recall make state governments more responsive to the public.
fc earlier voters had used an open ballot in which everyone could see their vote.
why was use of the secret ballot more democratic.
the seventeenth amendment allowed voters to elect their own senators directly.
would you have supported this change.
explain your answer.
name chapter 7 the progressive era 117 learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing some of the factors that contributed to the rise of the progressive movement.
complete the graphic organizer below by describing some of the significant accomplishments of the early progressives.
chapter 7 the progressive era 119 fc are all monopolies bad.
a copyright or patent for example gives its owner a monopoly for a limited number of years.
in your opinion is that fair.
fc what were the costs and benefits of using the anti trust laws to break up large business consolidations.
roosevelt s square deal before the progressive era manufacturers could make wild and unsupported claims for medicines.
there were no government agencies to check the purity and safety of food products.
in the laissez faire economy consumers were supposed to look out for themselves.
roosevelt promised americans a square deal he launched new laws to protect consumer health and prevent false advertising.
this progressive legislation limited the operation of the laissez faire economy.
roosevelt also worked to preserve the nations natural resources.
protecting the public health.
upton sinclair s account of the meat packing industry shocked the nation.
congress passed the meat inspection act 1906 providing for government inspection of meat.
the pure food and drug act 1906 regulated the preparation of foods and the sale of medicines.
square deal legislation j regulating transportation and conserving the nation s resources.
roosevelt drew attention communication.
roosevelt increased to the need to conserve forests wildlife and natural resources.
the power of the interstate commerce he stopped the practice of selling public lands for development commission to regulate railroads and and added millions of acres to the national forests and parks.
gave it authority over the telegraph he formed the national conservation commission to protect the and telephone.
nation s natural resources.
although roosevelt was young and popular no president had ever run for more than two terms.
in 1908 roosevelt refused to break with tradition to run again.
instead he helped his friend william howard taft win the republican nomination.
a conservative progressive taft was elected president with roosevelts endorsement.
taft continued many of roosevelts policies such as trust busting.
however taft was not a skilled politician and alienated progressives.
he promised a lower tariff but was unable to get it passed.
he returned to public sale some of the federal lands roosevelt had withdrawn to protect the environment.
labor during the progressive era public attitudes towards unions began to change.
one event that contributed to this change was the fire at the triangle shirtwaist factory in 1911 which killed 146 garment workers.
public sympathy for the workers grew when it was learned that the factory doors had been bolted shut from the outside that the building lacked a sprinkler system and that it had only one inadequate fire escape.
soon after this tragedy congress passed legislation sympathetic to unions.
chapter 7 the progressive era 121 witnesses thought owners were tossing fabric out of windows but soon realized it was workers jumping to their deaths.
department of labor 1913.
congress created a separate cabinet post to study the problems of labor collect statistics and enforce federal labor laws.
the department of labor was the direct result of a campaign by organized labor for a voice in the cabinet and a goal of the progressive movement.
the purpose of the department was to promote and develop the welfare of working people and to improve their working conditions clayton anti trust act 1914.
a provision of this act prevented courts from applying anti trust laws to restrict unions.
the act also banned the use of federal injunctions court orders to prohibit strikes in labor disputes.
child labor act 1916.
wilson passed a law prohibiting the sale of goods created by child labor in interstate commerce.
however this law was overturned by the u s supreme court two years later.
acting as an amateur.
historian the federal reserve act created the federal reserve board a government agency that controls monetary policy.
the federal reserve sets the interest rates at which it lends money to banks.
it also decides how much of their money banks can lend and buys government bonds to affect the amount of money in circulation.
research the internet or your school library to leam more about the federal reserve.
then write a report describing how the federal reserve affects the american economy.
what role does it play in the economy today.
make a cause and effect diagram showing how different actions taken by the federal reserve affect the american economy.
for example what is the effect on the economy when the federal reserve lowers its interest rate.
chapter 7 the progressive era 123 the progressive movement was accompanied by significant gains in womens rights for which women had been fighting for nearly a century.
in the early nineteenth century the united states was a patriarchal society men held positions of authority and women were considered to be inferior.
women lacked the right to vote to serve on juries or to hold public office.
they were excluded from public life and were left in charge of the home and children.
in most states once a woman married she lost control of her property and wages to her husband.
by the mid nineteenth century some women began to organize.
in 1848 they held a convention in seneca falls new york.
the convention passed a resolution paraphrasing the declaration of independence.
it proclaimed that women were equal to men and deserved the right to vote.
after the civil war women reformers hoped that freed slaves and women would be enfranchised at the same time.
women reformers were bitterly disappointed when the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments gave citizenship and the right to vote or suffrage to male freedmen but not to women.
susan b anthony in 1872 susan b anthony a prominent reformer attempted to vote in rochester new york on the grounds that she was citizen and had that right under the fourteenth amendment.
however a judge refused to grant her the right to vote.
in 1874 the supreme court then ruled that although women were citizens they could not vote.
voting according to the court was not necessarily a privilege of citizenship.
susan b anthony 1820 1906 the fact that women did not have suffrage continued to be seen as a symbol of their inferior status and a violation of basic democratic principles.
anthony and other women reformers were able to obtain suffrage in a number of western states but they could not succeed in introducing a constitutional amendment requiring all states to give women the vote.
by 1890 the failure to achieve womens suffrage led several womens groups to merge together into the national american woman suffrage association under the leadership of elizabeth cady stanton and susan b anthony.
name chapter 7 the progressive era 125 the progressive movement comes to an end the passage of womens suffrage was the last notable reform of the progressive era.
by 1920 the force of the progressive movement had spent itself.
americans had met many of the challenges posed by industrialization and were once again poised for economic growth.
the late nineteenth century was one of the most fertile periods of american literature.
as the nation grew the increasing rates of literacy the rapid growth in urbanization a rising population and an increase in middle class affluence provided a fertile environment for readers interested in understanding these rapid shifts in culture.
the prevalence of newspapers and magazines as well as cheap dime novels created a market for literary works.
improvements in transportation and communications made it easier to travel and to share experiences.
american writers were also deeply influenced by european novelists.
during these years realism defined as nothing more or less than the truthful treatment of material was the leading literary fashion.
realists described life with as much detail as they could.
realism provided an opportunity to show the impact of industrialization and social change on people.
just after the civil war the novels of horatio alger 1834 1899 praised hard work and discipline and saw wealth as a sign of divine favor.
his first novel ragged dick 1868 was his most popular and remained in print for the next forty years.
the story of each novel was simple a poor boy with few prospects significantly improves his position in life due to hard work and help from adults.
the novels of mark twain 1835 1910 reflected the differences between pre civil war society and afterwards.
twain associated the old south with romanticism and the present with realism.
the adventures of tom sawyer 1876 described his childhood adventures in fictional form.
the gilded age 1873 depicted the boom times after the civil war and gave a name to a historical period.
his greatest work huckleberry finn treated the moral conflicts created by slavery.
twains use of regional accents gave his works a sense of realism.
william dean howells 1837 1920 was an important magazine editor who promoted realism.
his novel the rise of silas lapham described the struggles of the new rich to find acceptance in established society.
chapter 7 the progressive era 127 the agrarian movement populist party 1891 1896 problems of farmers 1870 1900.
increased farm production led to more crops per acre but falling food prices.
farmers had to ship goods to market and were at the mercy of railroad rates.
farmers were constantly in debt and a poor harvest could throw them into chaos.
grange movement 1876.
original goal was to reduce rural isolation.
soon turned into a group demanding economic and political reforms.
helped get interstate commerce act of 1887 passed to regulate railroad rates.
fa a national third party representing laborers farmers and industrial workers.
populist platform 1892.
supported william jennings bryan for president.
unlimited coinage of silver.
direct election of senators.
term limits for president.
secret ballots.
immigration restrictions.
a graduated income tax.
fa third parties in american politics.
help to educate voters on special issues.
provide an outlet for minority grievances.
pressure major parties to adopt their ideas.
the progressive movement 1900 1920 goals.
sought to correct political and economic injustices from industrialization.
fa roots of progressives were in the social gospel movement spearheaded by protestant clergymen.
called on christians to rise to challenge of helping their fellow man.
impact of progressives social reforms.
brought many social reforms to society.
jane addams leader in the settlement house movement hull house.
african american leader who helped found the naacp.
the progressive movement continued fa ida b.
african american leader who worked to end lynching.
muckrakers.
group of investigative reporters writers and social scientists.
they worked to expose the abuses of industrial society and expose corruption that existed in all levels of government.
upton sinclair the jungle revealed many abuses of the meat packing industry.
frank norris the octopus depicted the stranglehold railroads held over farmers.
jacob riis how the other half lives.
his photographs showed poverty in urban areas.
theodore roosevelt square deal woodrow wilson new freedom helped break up bad trusts.
square deal.
passed laws to protect consumer health.
meat inspection act 1906.
pure food and drug act 1906.
increased the power of the interstate commerce commission to help regulate certain industries.
worked to conserve the nation s natural resources by drawing attention to need to conserve forests parks and wildlife.
withheld federal lands from public sale.
the new freedom program sought to control business practices promote greater competition and lower tariff rates.
national park service protected public parks and monuments.
fa sixteenth amendment gave congress the power to tax personal income.
fa federal reserve act created to regulate the amount of money in circulation.
fa anti trust legislation clayton antitrust act increased the federal government s power to prevent unfair business practices.
name project without permission chapter 7 the progressive era 129 llllbiif mmsk xjfc.
sisii directions put a circle around the letter that best answers the question.
use the information in the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
in slave times the negro was kept subservient and submissive by the frequency and severity of the scourging whipping but with freedom a new system of intimidation came into vogue the negro was not only scourged he was lynched 1 the above quotation most closely represents the views held by a william jennings bryan c upton sinclair hist 5 b j b ida b.
wells d susan b anthony examine the question.
this question tests your ability to identify a view characteristic of a particular person.
recall what you know.
you should recall that a leader in the movement to expose the barbarity of lynchings especially those against african americans in the south was ida s wells.
she systematically attacked lynching and violent crimes carried out against african americans.
she went on speaking tours in the united states and england to encourage people to oppose lynchings.
apply what you know.
the best answer is choice 13.
although william jennings sryan upton sinclair and susan s anthony would most likely have opposed lynchings it was ida s wells who devoted her life to ending this practice.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 books such as the octopus by frank norris how the other half lives by jacob riis and the jungle by upton sinclair exposed problems that resulted from f the naturalization of immigrants hist 5 b j g environmental conservation h westward expansion j rapid industrialization 3 members of the progressive movement generally supported the idea that the federal government should a prevent unfair business practices econ 15 b j b restrict immigration to the united states c reduce the number of small farms d abolish private property ownership name chapter 7 the progressive era 131 use the information in the cartoon and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
source udo j keppler puck september 7 1904 adapted 9 the main message of this cartoon is that the standard oil company a used its size to lower its prices econ 15 b i b protected americans from foreign competitors c used its economic power to sway government decisions d employed violence to gain unfair advantages for its workers 10 progressive reformers attacked political machines because they often f denied voting rights to the poor hist 3 a g stole public money through overpriced contracts h wasted money on military spending j discriminated against migrant workers 11 to guarantee an adequate money supply in the national economy econ 15 e j president wilson introduced a limits on foreign investments c an end to the gold standard b insurance for all bank deposits d the federal reserve system 12 during the progressive era many state and local governments adopted the initiative referendum and recall.
together these procedures f extended the right to vote to 18 year old citizens d hist 5 a i g gave citizens a more direct voice in government h let registered voters select each states presidential electors j allowed a states residents to bring lawsuits against another state 13 during the early 1900s the term muckrakers was used to describe a people who demonstrated against war i hist 5 b b writers who exposed the evils in american society c newspaper columnists who reported on celebrities d politicians who criticized progressive era presidents chapter 7 the progressive era 133 19 when susan b anthony refused to pay a fine for her actions in the election of 1872 she stated not a penny shall go to this unjust claim her statement was made in support of a the sixteenth amendment c judicial review ault 26 a b settlement houses d womens suffrage use the information in the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
today three fourths of the people of new york city live in tenements and the nineteenth century drift of the population to the cities is sending ever increasing multitudes to crowd them.
the fifteen thousand tenant houses that were the despair of the sanitarian in the past generation have swelled into thirty seven thousand and more than twelve hundred thousand persons call them home jacob riis how the other half lives 1890 20 the main idea of this excerpt from jacob riis book is that f cities are unable to handle the flow of new arrivals c hist 5 b g the treatment of african americans remains almost as bad as under slavery h farmers can find a higher living standard if they leave the farm and move to the city j certain laws are needed to protect consumers from deceptive practices 21 progressive era reformers sought to expand voter participation in government by adopting a the initiative and referendum c tougher literacy tests f hist 5 aw b additional poll taxes d a civil service system use this flier and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
22 which reformer was a leader in support of the ideas expressed in this flier.
dubois hist 5 b j g theodore roosevelt h susan b anthony j william jennings bryan 23 the publication of the jungle by upton sinclair in 1906 was instrumental in getting the members of congress to a enact stronger anti trust laws hist 5 b b support conservation of public lands c establish a system for meat inspection d legalize strikes by labor unions twelve reasons h v.
ginen 3n uid vote vifi irr 3 atcaosfc l w whib womsn m without because meeting chilorkfc smnm tatteb cite paint vk v tb.
5 because affevtin in every session zt die lcg ub tuie.
6 because bw s experience wmc h ivs helpful t because t deprive women ci the vote is lower their pcsavox in cmmwj lecavsc the vote wouhj otp of te sponobuuy amosift women toward spiestsens of puvuc boporuoce w because of thnug anda of ihooght lt wopxn the vote.
it because the shpedom agamst their having.
the vote nwt op i2 because sn up au reasopt ih is f0 the.
common ooo0 of all.
ui v w 1 ii l i givg re a ltso ad ask m m io vof j f.
wassachuxxrfs womak sotfraoe assom wigk source massachusetts woman suffrage association america builds an empire history 2 a identify the major characteristics that define an historical era.
history 2 b identify the major eras in u s history from 1877 to the present and describe their defining characteristics.
history 2 c apply absolute and relative chronology through the sequencing of significant individuals events and time periods.
history 2 d explain the significance of the following years as turning points 1898 spanish american war history 4 a explain why significant events policies and individuals such as the spanish american war u s expansionism alfred thayer mahan theodore roosevelt sanford b dole and missionaries moved the united states into the position of a world power.
history 4 b evaluate american expansionism including acquisitions such as guam hawaii the philippines and puerto rico.
geography 12 a analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the panama canal geography 12 b identify and explain reasons for changes in political boundaries such as those resulting from statehood and international conflicts.
economics 15 c explain how foreign policies affected economic issues such as the open door policy and dollar diplomacy.
economics 15 d describe the economic effects of international military conflicts including the spanish american war on the united states.
in this chapter you will leam about u s foreign policy.
you will investigate the reasons why the united states went to war with spain in 1898.
you will also leam how the united states acquired a colonial empire.
the acquisition of this colonial empire had a dramatic effect on united states foreign policy.
in order to protect its colonial possessions the united states built a canal across the isthmus of panama.
completion of the canal further increased the influence of the united states in the affairs of latin america.
foreign policy spanish american war joseph pulitzer william randolph hears.
yellow journalism pe lome letter u s s.
maine theodore roosevelt imperialism alfred thayer mahan platt amendment queen liliuokalani sandford i.
pole john hay open poor policy poxer rebellion panama canal pig stick policy pollar piplomacy watchful waiting pancho villa 135 name chapter 8 america builds an empire 137 ess iial questions how did the spanish american war mark a turning point in american history.
what strategic and political factors led america to become an imperial power.
what were the main consequences of american imperialism.
j this chapter looks at american foreign policy.
foreign policy refers to a country s policies towards other countries.
social scientists believe there are certain characteristics that make foreign policy special.
international anarchy.
each independent sovereign nation has its own laws that citizens must obey.
if citizens fail to obey these laws they can be punished.
sovereign countries however are not subject to such higher laws.
for this reason social scientists say that sovereign nations exist in a system of international anarchy.
each nation must depend on its own military and economic power to survive.
on the other hand countries usually follow some rules and customs to get along with one another.
balance of power.
when one country becomes too powerful other countries sometimes band together in an alliance or coalition to protect themselves and make sure the threatening power does not become any stronger.
this tendency is known as maintaining the balance of power.
control of u s foreign policy.
in the united states the constitution places control of foreign policy in the hands of both the president and congress.
while the president and secretary of state handle day to day diplomacy they need congress to vote funds to support their policies or to declare war.
traditional foreign policy.
for much of their early history americans felt safe behind their two oceans.
these oceans protected americans from attack.
president washington had warned americans to avoid entanglements with european nations who were frequently at war with each other.
instead he advised americans to focus on the western hemisphere.
for the first 150 years after independence americans largely followed washington s advice.
national interests.
in the conduct of foreign policy each nation is usually guided by its national interests.
for the united states these include security from attack protecting american investments and promoting american democracy and its way of life.
to evaluate a particular foreign policy you must determine how well it promotes these goals.
chapter 8 america builds an empire 139 acting as an amateur historian in this climate of public opinion president mckinley felt he had no choice but to ask congress for permission to intervene in cuba o ur acts hitherto have been an unselfish desire for peace and prosperity in cuba.
the forced intervention of the united states as a neutral to stop the war may be briefly summarized as follows first in the cause of humanity to put an end to the barbarities bloodshed and miseries now existing there.
it is our duty for it is right at our door.
second we owe it to our citizens in cuba to terminate the conditions that deprive them of legal protection.
third the right to intervene may be justified by the serious injury to the commerce trade and business of our people fourth the present condition of affairs in cuba is a constant menace to our peace all these and others that i need not mention with the resulting strained relations are a constant menace to our peace and compel us to keep a semi war footing with a nation with which we were at peace explain how would you have voted as a member of congress in 1898.
teddy roosevelt center with his rough riders after taking san juan hill.
the spanish american war was fought on two fronts in the pacific and the caribbean.
shortly after the start of the war the u s pacific fleet sailed to the philippines to aid filipino rebels already in revolt against spain.
the navy defeated a squadron of spanish ships in manila bay.
assistant secretary of the navy theodore roosevelt raised a volunteer force known as the rough riders acting with other army regiments they defeated spanish forces at san juan hill in cuba.
the u s navy also took guantanamo bay.
nevertheless some u s army troops had to withdraw from cuba because they were contracting yellow fever.
other forces occupied guam and puerto rico.
within four months spain was defeated.
american forces were left in occupation of the philippines cuba puerto rico and guam.
the spanish american war as a turning point the spanish american war marked the end of spains colonial empire and the emergence of the united states as a world power.
the war had let the united states demonstrate its naval strength to the world.
it also raised a critical issue for americans what should the united states do with the former spanish colonies it was now occupying.
many historians see the war as a turning point because the united states had awakened to its potential as a world power.
chapter 8 america builds an empire 141 by the wars end the united states was occupying four of spains former colonies.
many americans believed they should annex them.
these american imperialists saw this as a unique opportunity pointing out how european powers had recently acquired colonies in africa and asia.
they believed the united states should take its own colonies before there was nothing else left to grab.
the imperialists gave these arguments on behalf of u s colonial expansion need for raw materials and markets.
the united states was now an industrial power.
colonies could provide needed raw materials for factories a guaranteed market for manufacturers and a place for farmers to sell their surplus crops.
strategic reasons.
some americans believed colonies would promote american naval strength.
with naval bases throughout the world america would be able to maintain a powerful navy to protect its interests.
reasons for colonial expansion it 1 nationalism.
some saw colonial expansion as a means of showing that the united states was a great and powerful nation.
they argued that the european powers were gathering colonies in africa asia and the pacific and that the united states should grab its own colonies before nothing was left.
attitudes towards other peoples.
many americans believed in anglo saxon superiority that americans were a superior race that should rule others.
progressives believed that by spreading american institutions they could help other less fortunate peoples.
missionaries wanted to convert native peoples to christianity.
admiral alfred thayer mahan president of the naval war college was americas leading advocate for imperial expansion.
theodore roosevelt was one of mahans followers.
in his the influence of sea power upon history 1890 mahan focused on the harsh political realities of expansion.
mahan argued that to achieve world power a country needed a powerful navy.
for this a country also needed a large merchant marine to supply its sailors.
finally a world power required colonies and naval bases to provide coaling stations for its steamships and to create the trade needed to support its merchant ships.
because other powers were also competing for naval supremacy alfred thayer mahan and world markets mahan believed it was essential for americans 7 to seize control of pacific trade routes to construct a canal through central america and to dominate the caribbean region.
geographically americans would then control the sea lanes from the caribbean sea across the pacific ocean all the way to china and japan.
chapter 8 america builds an empire 143 in the end the imperialists won the argument.
after the spanish american war the united states acquired a colonial empire consisting of the philippines guam hawaii puerto rico samoa and midway.
senator and anti imperialist league member mourned the danger that we are to be transformed from a republic founded on the declaration of independence into a vulgar common empire founded on force a congressional resolution passed just before the war had guaranteed the independence of cuba but even this island came under the informal control of the united states.
cubans were forced to agree to the platt amendment which gave the united states the right to intervene in cuban affairs at any time.
hili 11111 11 applying what you learned have your class pretend they are the u s congress debating whether to keep the philippines guam and puerto rico as colonies.
have delegates from each of these places also make statements to congress.
then have the class vote.
make your own world map showing the development of americas colonial empire.
give each colony a separate color and show the date it was acquired.
i jr the philippines filipinos were greatly disappointed when the u s congress decided to annex the philippines instead of granting them their independence.
filipino rebels fought against their new colonial rulers until they were finally defeated in 1902.
project without permission chapter 8 america builds an empire 145 geography placed americans in an advantageous position for trade with east asia they were separated from this region only by the pacific ocean.
clipper ships brought chinese tea and other goods from east asia to the united states.
after 1898 control of several pacific islands gave the united states greater influence in the pacific.
these colonial acquisitions also increased american opportunities for trade with both china and japan.
china in china european powers had already established exclusive spheres of influence areas where they enjoyed special privileges in the 1850s.
the united states did not have a sphere of influence there but had long carried on active trade in china.
if other nations were permitted to partition china the united states would likely be blocked from future economic activities.
u s secretary of state john hay was anxious to protect american businessmen and investors there.
he worried that american trade would be shut out of china by these european powers.
hay saw china as a vital market for americas new industrial economy.
in 1899 hay announced the open door policy giving equal trading rights to all foreign nations in china.
hay sent notes to the other major powers and declared his policy to be in effect.
only a few months later in 1900 a rebellion erupted in china.
it was led by the boxers a group opposing western influence in china.
the boxer rebellion threatened the lives of foreigners living in china.
an international army with u s participation was sent to china where it crushed the rebellion.
hay announced that the united states would oppose any attempt by other nations to use the rebellion as an excuse to dismember china.
japan the united states opened an isolationist japan to western trade and influence when commodore matthew perry landed there with american gun ships in 1853.
by the 1890s japan had adopted western ways and had become the first asian industrial power.
japan also adopted imperialist policies defeating china in 1894.
in 1905 japan surprised the west by defeating russia in the russo japanese war.
president roosevelt brought the russians and japanese together and negotiated a peaceful settlement in the treaty of portsmouth 1905.
he won the nobel peace prize for his efforts.
president roosevelt meets with the japanese and russian delegates.
chapter 8 america builds an empire 147 cuba cuba is the largest island in the caribbean.
as you learned earlier congress had passed a resolution before the spanish american war not to annex cuba.
nevertheless after the war cuba became a protectorate under american control.
u s forces remained on the island and american businesses invested heavily in cuba.
cubans were forced to agree to the platt amendment which gave the united states the right to intervene in cuban affairs at any time.
the platt amendment was not repealed until the 1930s.
panama canal during the spanish american war warships in the pacific fleet had to sail 16 000 miles around the tip of south america to reach the caribbean.
this highlighted the need for a canal to send ships back and forth between the two oceans instead of having two separate naval fleets.
the isthmus of panama the narrowest point in central america was the best place to build the canal.
at this time panama was a part of colombia.
the united states and the government of colombia entered into negotiations but could not agree on terms.
while president roosevelt was waiting to hear from colombia he struck a deal with panamanian rebels who wished to obtain their independence.
roosevelt sent a u s warship to panama to protect the rebels when they took action.
immediately afterwards roosevelt recognized panama as a new country.
in return the new government of panama gave the united states complete control of a 10 mile strip of rainforest through the center of panama known as the panama canal zone.
the challenges of building the canal.
president roosevelt ordered the building of the canal almost at once.
the construction of the canal presented as many problems as the political obstacles.
construction of its 51 mile length took 10 years 1903 1914 to complete at a cost of thousands of lives and 400 million.
because the canal crossed landforms at different elevations engineers had to design a series of six giant locks.
panamas tropical climate posed special challenges workers labored in intense heat as they cut through mountains and dense rainforests.
heavy rains caused frequent mudslides.
dr walter reed had just discovered that yellow fever was spread by mosquitoes.
to reduce the threat of yellow fever dr william gorgas of the u s army ordered all swamps drained vegetation cut down and all standing water sprayed with oil to prevent further breeding of mosquito larvae.
president roosevelt works a steam shovel at the canal.
pancho villa and his band of rebels.
name chapter 8 america builds an empire 149 wilson quickly followed the pattern of presidents roosevelt and taft by sending troops to haiti nicaragua and the dominican republic to protect american interests.
president wilson also expanded americas colonial empire by purchasing the virgin islands from denmark in 1917.
mexico was already undergoing a violent revolution when woodrow wilson became president.
wilson refused to recognize its new government which had seized power through violence.
instead he adopted a policy of watchful waiting when troops of the rebel leader pancho villa murdered americans in new mexico and retreated across the border wilson reacted.
he sent an american expeditionary force into mexico under general john j pershing to apprehend him.
nevertheless pancho villa eluded capture.
wilson finally withdrew these troops in 1917 when america entered world war i in europe.
make a chart comparing the policies of presidents roosevelt taft and wilson towards latin america.
fc conduct research on the internet or your school library to find photographs showing the building of the panama canal and other american activities in latin america between 1898 and 1918.
briefly describe what each photograph illustrates.
spanish american war 1898 u s colonial empire causes.
humanitarian concerns.
yellow journalism.
protect u s economic interests in cuba.
de lome letter called mckinley weak.
sinking of the u s s.
u s gets philippines puerto rico guam.
cuba became a virtual u s protectorate.
why war is considered a turning point.
ended spanish colonial empire in americas.
saw emergence of u s as a world power.
reasons for colonial expansion.
need for raw materials and markets.
colonies would help u s naval strength.
nationalism would show other nations how strong u s had become.
missionaries sought to spread the christian religion to other peoples.
alfred thayer mahan.
wrote the influence of sea power upon history.
argued for making u s into a world power.
the u s needed a strong navy merchant marine to protect its colonial interests.
ne chapter 8 america builds an empire 151 the first spadeful directions put a circle around the letter that best answers the question.
use the cartoon and your knowledge of social studies to answer questions 1 and 2.
1 the cartoon shows the actions of president roosevelt in a securing an area for building a canal b leading troops in the spanish american war c ending a war between panama and colombia d improving diplomatic relations with latin american nations geog 12 a source w a.
a world worthwhile.
examine the question.
this question tests your ability to interpret a cartoon.
the question simply asks what the cartoon shows.
recall what you know.
think about what you can recall about this time period.
you should recognize the figure as president poosevelt.
americans at this time were calling for a canal through central america.
the flag on the hill says new treaty ships are waiting to go through the area where poosevelt is standing.
apply what you know.
the best answer is choice a.
it shows poosevelt actively involved in building the panama canal.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 critics of the actions shown in this cartoon claimed president theodore roosevelt was f causing environmental damage in central america z hist 4 b g wrongfully instigating a revolution in panama h requiring massive tax increases in the united states j producing major trade deficits with china 3 what was a primary reason for the establishment of the open door policy.
a to protect united states trade in china econis c j b to gain control of the panama canal zone c to encourage chinese immigration to the united states d to improve relations with china name chapter 8 america builds an empire 153 use the newspaper headlines and your knowledge of social studies to answer questions 10 and 11.
10 the headlines in this newspaper are an example of f yellow journalism fhist4 a g muckraking literature h investigative reporting j government censorship 11 this publication and similar news stories encouraged the u s congress to a declare war on spain hist 4 b b pass anti terrorism laws c improve naval safety d conduct an investigation reward wh0 destroyed the maine 50 000 reward edition for greater new york new york journal and advertiser new york thursday february destruction of the mr shir maine ms the work of ah enemy i 50 000.
i 50 000 reward.
for the detection of the perpetrator of i the maine outrage.
assistant secretary roosevelt convinced the explosion of the war ship was not an accident.
the journal offers 50 000 reward for the conviction of the criminals who sent 258 american sailors to their death.
naval officers unanimous that the ship was destroyed on purpose.
for the detection of the perpetrator of the maine outrage.
12 which policy sought to further american interests in latin america by using the financial power of american business.
f policy of watchful waiting h balance of power econ 15 c g big stick policy j dollar diplomacy use the chart and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
person a person b supported building a canal in panama.
helped to overthrow queen liliuokalani.
leading imperialist who urged americans to increase their navy.
served as president and governor of hawaii.
13 which two influential individuals are described in columns a and b.
a moorfield storey and woodrow wilson hist 4 a b alfred thayer mahan and sandford b dole c john hay and william howard taft d theodore roosevelt and andrew carnegie 14 which overseas action most clearly illustrated the use of the roosevelt corollary to the monroe doctrine.
f the purchase of alaska from russia econ 15 c j g the declaration of war against spain in 1898 h the annexation of the hawaiian islands j the collection of debts owed by the dominican republic i name chapter 9 america in world war i 155 important ideas ill a.
nationalism economic rivalry the alliance system and militarism contributed to the outbreak of world war i in europe.
in 1914 europe was divided into two alliances.
the spark that began the war was the assassination of archduke franz ferdinand by slav nationalists with serbian help.
b german troops marched through neutral belgium and invaded france but were halted before they could take paris.
new and improved weapons like the machine gun created a new form of warfare.
each side dug trenches set up machine guns and put land mines in the no mans land between the trenches.
c germany tried to use its u boats submarines to break the british naval blockade that sought to starve germany and austria hungary into submission.
d by 1918 the war had become deadlocked.
neither side was strong enough to overcome the other.
e president woodrow wilson tried to follow americas traditional policy of neutrality by not taking sides in the early years of the war.
however the united states shared its language political system and many traditions with great britain and france.
americans were shocked by germanys invasion of belgium which was sensationalized in the press.
germany sent a message offering to help mexico regain the american southwest if it joined the war on germanys side.
f german submarines sank ships with american passengers such as the lusitania and the sussex.
germany attempted to avoid such incidents but americans were supplying britain with war materials while germany was suffering from a british blockade.
in 1917 germany announced it would resume unrestricted submarine warfare and sank more ships.
wilson asked congress to declare war.
g the united states prepared the american expeditionary force aef under the command of general john pershing.
when the aef arrived in europe it broke the deadlock in the war.
men like alvin york showed great bravery in the war.
h president wilson announced americas war aims in the fourteen points before the wars end.
the fourteen points demanded the reorganization of europe based on nationalism.
austria hungary and ottoman turkey would be divided into smaller national states.
poland would be restored as an independent country.
economic barriers like tariffs would be lowered.
finally wilson envisioned a league of nations an international peace keeping organization.
i germany surrendered in 1918.
president wilson traveled to europe to participate in the paris peace conference.
to get his allies to agree to the league of nations wilson made many concessions.
against wilsons wishes the versailles treaty treated germany harshly.
germany was made to accept responsibility for starting the war and had to pay reparations to the victorious allies.
when wilson returned home the u s senate led by henry cabot lodge rejected the treaty.
the united states never joined the league of nations.
chapter 9 america in world war i 157 austria gave an ultimatum to serbia and then invaded serbia to avenge the assassination.
they were encouraged by their ally germany.
existing alliances quickly brought the other major powers into the war.
russia was allied to serbia germany was allied to austria hungary and britain and france were allied to russia.
what might have been a minor regional crisis quickly escalated into a major european war.
the generals on each side hoped for a quick victory before their enemies could get their forces into action.
europe at the start of world war n e s sweden great britain a denmark isl russia atlantic ocean spain a o mediterranean sea africa miles france 750 a new kind of wa military leaders on both sides predicted the war would be over quickly.
to avoid a two front war german war plans called for their army to march through neutral belgium to take paris before russia could enter the war.
the germans advanced across belgium into france but they were stopped before reaching paris.
new and improved weapons were used to fight the war including the machine gun poison gas submarines and airplanes.
these weapons made it easier to defend positions than to attack.
soldiers dug deep fortified trenches.
soon trenches extended hundreds of miles along eastern france on germanys western front trench warfare was a new and strange form of warfare that the world had never seen.
these trenches were separated by fields of barbed wire and mines known as no mans land anyone who climbed out of the trenches faced instant death from enemy machine gun fire.
soldiers spent years in the trenches facing shelling from artillery fire for hours each day.
since neither side could advance fighting lines became stationary.
name chapter 9 america in world war i 159 freedom of the seas.
the main reason for american entry into world war i was german unrestricted submarine warfare the british blockade.
a british naval blockade prevented food and arms from being shipped to germany.
meanwhile the united states became the main source for allied arms supplies and food.
the german navy was too weak to break through the british blockade.
by using submarines germany was able to retaliate by sinking merchant ships delivering goods to great britain.
however unlike battleships submarines had no room to pick up survivors.
sinking of the lusitania.
the lusitania was a british passenger ship.
in 1915 the lusitania left new york city for liverpool.
unknown to her passengers much of the cargo below deck was made up of munitions for the british war effort.
a german submarine sank this british passenger ship killing more than 1 000 passengers including 128 americans.
the sinking of the lusitania enraged opinion in the united states.
a u boat sank the lusitania killing 1 198 passengers sussex pledge.
the sussex was a french ship that provided ferry service on the english channel.
after a german submarine attacked the ship in 1916 killing more than 50 passengers president wilson threatened to break off relations with germany.
germany pledged not to sink any more ocean liners without prior warning or providing help to passengers.
germany announces unrestricted submarine warfare.
suffering from near starvation by the british blockade desperate german leaders announced finally that they would sink all ships in the blockaded areas.
this declaration of unrestricted submarine warfare violated the principle of freedom of the seas the right of neutral nations like the united states to ship non military goods to nations at war.
when german submarines then actually attacked american merchant vessels president wilson asked congress to declare war on germany.
assume you have been selected to be participate in a commission investigating the neutrality of the united states.
conduct your own research on the internet or in the library to examine americas behavior during the early years of the war as a neutral.
write a report on your findings with the title did the united states act as a true neutral before it entered the war name chapter 9 america in world war i 161 alvin york 1887 1964 was a devoted bible reader and almost avoided military service as a conscientious objector.
he was drafted into the army at age 29.
in many respects he was typical of the draftees underprivileged and undereducated who were sent to france to make the world safe for democracy in the battle of the argonne forest with nothing more than his rifle and pistol he reportedly killed 25 germans and captured 132 prisoners.
alvin york acting as an amateur historian the passage below is from the diary of alvin york.
york was bom in a two room log cabin in the hills of tennessee my little old mother and pastor pile wanted to get me out of the army.
pastor pile put in a plea to the government that it was against the religion of our church to fight.
he filled the papers out and sent them to me to sign.
the army told me all i had to do was to sign them.
my mother too put in a plea to get me out as her sole support.
my father was dead and i was supporting my family.
i had brothers in tennessee that could look after my mother.
so i never asked for an exemption from service.
i never was a conscientious objector.
i didnt want to fight and kill.
but i had to answer the call of my country imagine you are sergeant york or some other soldier in the american expeditionary force on the western front during world war i.
write a letter to your family at home describing your experiences.
to fight the war president wilson was given sweeping powers by congress.
he established several agencies to regulate the economy during the war.
railroads were placed under direct government control.
congress passed the selective service act 1917 and millions of americans registered for the draft.
almost two million american troops eventually reached europe while women and african americans filled many of their jobs at home.
the cost of the war about 30 billion was paid for by higher taxes and war bonds.
the war greatly benefited the american economy since exports to the allied powers greatly increased.
during the war civil liberties were curtailed to meet wartime needs.
the espionage act of 1917 made it a crime to criticize the war effort.
name chapter 9 america in world war i 163 american troops broke the deadlock in europe causing germany to surrender in november 1918.
wilson hoped to use his fourteen points as the basis for a peace plan.
a learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing some of the key events associated with the united states entry into world war i.
causes of world war i in europe reasons for u s.
entry chapter 9 america in world war i 165 the u s senate rejects the treaty president wilson hoped that the league of nations would prevent future wars but his opponents in congress argued that it would drag the country into unnecessary military commitments.
wilson needed two thirds of the u s senate to ratify the versailles treaty but he rejected any compromise with the senate.
henry cabot lodge 1850 1924 had studied history and political science at harvard university.
he was a friend of theodore roosevelts and a strong supporter of imperialism.
lodge had been in charge of the congressional committee that had investigated the conduct of the u s army in suppressing rebels in the philippines.
he was a strong opponent of the league of nations.
he believed that if the united states joined the league it would lose its freedom of action.
henry cabot lodge acting as an amateur historian below is a speech by henry cabot lodge senate majority leader in 1919 he sets forth his objections to the league of nations the independence of the united states is not only more precious to ourselves but to the world than any single possession.
is there any country today on the face of the earth which can compare with our liberty our peace and our freedom.
i will go as far as anyone in world service but the first step to world service is the maintenance of the united states.
i have always loved one flag and i cannot share that devotion with a mongrel banner created for a league of nations.
i have never had but one allegiance and i cannot divide it now.
the united states is the worlds best hope but if you tie her to the interests and quarrels of other nations if you tangle her in the troubles of europe you will destroy her power for good and endanger her very existence what reasons does lodge give for opposing membership in the league of nations.
to overcome the senates objections president wilson decided to appeal directly to american voters for support he went on a national speaking tour but he had failed to gauge the feelings of most americans.
during his tour wilson suffered a stroke.
later the senate refused to ratify the treaty of versailles.
despite wilsons grand vision the united states never joined the league of nations.
america retreats into isolationism by 1919 most americans were disillusioned with world affairs.
the small gains they seemed to have made in world war i came at a terrible cost.
americans once again heeded george washingtons advice to avoid european entanglements and they turned their attention towards their material well being at home.
chapter 9 america in world war i 167 world war i results important individuals i wilson s fourteen points.
proposed by i wilson as a basis for the peace treaty.
1 create new nation states poland i break up austria hungary.
freedom of the seas.
i no secret treaties open diplomacy.
league of nations.
versailles and other treaties.
ended world.
dealt harshly with germany.
j germany lost its colonies i austria hungary and ottoman turkey were j broken up into separate nation states i league of nations was created.
archduke franz ferdinand.
his assassina i tion sparked the start of wwi.
john j pershing.
commanded american expeditionary force during wwi.
i alvin york.
wwi soldier who won congres j sional medal of honor for valor.
i woodrow wilson.
u s president during wwi.
issued fourteen points.
he strongly supported u s participation in a league of i nations.
henry cabot lodge.
senator who led i the fight against joining the league of nations.
chapter 9 concept map had closer hls to british and french at first sought j a policy of neutrality u s enters war unrestricted submarine warfare austria hungary and ottoman empire divided league of nations 1 senate rejects league germany punished zzl v forced to pay reparations each side used wilson issues all it s resources total war blockade fourteen points trench warfare airplanes submarines u boats poison gas a new kind of war america in world war i assassination of archduke franz ferdinand economic rivalries machine guns causes of henry cabot lodge the war in opposed it europe.
set off debate in u s senate v v nationalism militarism alliance system accepts guilt for starting war name chapter 9 america in world war i 169 use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
a weary exhausted nerve racked group of men assembled north of sommerance france to dig in for the night.
the artillery was firing furiously but the enemys bombardment ceased suddenly and now only occasional shells would explode in the vicinity.
the weather was gloomy and the air chilled one to the bones.
yet it was with that methodical care that is characteristic of worn out men that we prepared our foxholes carrying boards and iron sheets from abandoned machine gunners dugouts to make our houses as comfortable as possible even if only for one night william l langer gas and flame in world war i 4 what new aspect of combat during world war i is described in this passage.
f guerilla warfare f hist 4 e g nuclear weaponry h biological weapons j trench warfare 5 in 1919 isolationists in the senate opposed u s membership in the league of nations because they a feared creation of the security council hist 4 f j b resisted colonialism in africa and asia c opposed membership in the league of nations by germany d did not want involvement in future foreign wars 6 the major purpose of president wilsons fourteen points 1918 was to f persuade congress to enter world war i t hist 4 f g set goals for achieving peace after world war i h provide aid for rebuilding war tom nations j punish germany for the sinking of the lusitania 1 what was a major reason the united states entered world war i.
a japanese forces had occupied manchuria.
hist 4 c b german troops had landed on american soil.
c the austro hungarian empire had invaded belgium.
d germany had resumed unrestricted submarine warfare.
8 in 1912 president elect wilson announced that theres no chance of progress and reform in an administration in which war plays the principal part in his speech he was expressing his view that f the united states should enter world war i immediately i hist 4 c g reform movements are strengthened by war h the nation should change its leadership if it goes to war j the progressive movement would best be served by a continuation of peace chapter 9 america in world war i 171 15 during his re election campaign in 1916 president woodrow wilson used the slogan he kept us out of war in april 1917 wilson asked congress for a declaration of war on germany.
what explains the reason for this change.
a german forces had invaded poland and belgium.
hist 4 c b germany had resumed unrestricted submarine warfare.
c britain was invaded by nations of the central powers.
d russia signed a treaty of alliance with the german government.
use the graph and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
16 data from this graph supports the conclusion that world war i f caused the u s trade deficit to increase g cost the united states many billions of dollars h was a significant benefit to the american economy j created an unfavorable balance of trade 17 which need did president woodrow wilson identify in order to persuade congress to enter world war i.
a the need to protect freedom of the seas hist 4 c b the need to assist the neutral nations with their defense c the need to retaliate against the japanese bombing of pearl harbor d the need to remove the nazi threat from the western hemisphere 18 president woodrow wilsons fourteen points were based on the belief that f military strength offers a nations best security hist 4 f i g isolationism should guide a nations relations h self determination should be applied to all peoples j industrial nations should have equal access to colonial possessions 19 the success of american soldiers during world war i was largely credited to his leadership and he returned to the united states as a true hero this statement was made by a speaker attending the funeral of a archduke franz ferdinand hist 4 b b john j pershing c woodrow wilson d henry cabot lodge chapter 10 the roaring twenties 173 important ideas a.
the 1920s were a period of economic prosperity and of new cultural values.
immediately after the war americans experienced a temporary recession as businesses adjusted from a wartime to a peacetime economy.
americans frightened by the triumph of communism in russia experienced a red scare attorney general palmer arrested thousands of suspects and deported them.
c nativism and racism were also on the rise and americans retreated to a more traditional isolationist foreign policy.
d three republican presidents pursued pro business policies with low taxes and high tariff rates.
warren harding proposed a return to normalcy but his administration was beset by corruption as later revealed by the teapot dome scandal and other scandals.
calvin coolidge believed the business of america is business while herbert hoover saw rugged individualism as the spirit that had made america into a great nation.
e several factors contributed to the economic prosperity of the 1920s.
the most important one was the spread of the automobile.
henry ford used assembly line production to lower car prices bringing ownership in reach of most americans.
f electricity and electrical appliances also greatly helped to stimulate the economy.
g corporate profits led stock prices to rise.
many americans became involved in speculation in the stock market and real estate in the hopes of getting rich.
h the 1920s saw a clash of cultural values.
the eighteenth amendment banned the sale of alcoholic beverages.
tennessee passed a law banning the teaching of evolution.
this law came to national attention in the scopes monkey trial a teacher broke the law and was defended by clarence darrow.
william jennings bryan helped the prosecution.
there was also a rise of nativist feeling and the introduction of restrictions on immigration establishing quotas for the first time.
eugenics attempted to promote what were considered to be superior genetic characteristics.
women gained the right to vote with the passage of the nineteenth amendment.
the 1920s saw greater freedom for women as they wore less restrictive clothing entered the work force in greater numbers and began gaining college educations.
k millions of african americans began moving from the rural south to cities in the north and midwest during and after world war i in the great migration.
l the vibrant african american community in harlem in new york city became the cultural center of the harlem renaissance.
writers like alaine locke and langston hughes celebrated their heritage.
marcus garvey attempted to organize african americans in a back to africa movement.
m writers like f scott fitzgerald depicted the lifestyles of the young and materialistic rich in the 1920s while sinclair lewis ridiculed american hypocrisy.
chapter 10 the roaring twenties 175 the end of world war i brought new fears to many americans of communists anarchists and immigrants.
russia had been ill prepared for the war.
in 1917 strikes in cities and soldiers mutinies had led to the overthrow of the tsar.
later in the year communist revolutionaries led by vladimir lenin had seized power.
communists threatened to spread their revolution to other countries in europe like germany and hungary.
when a wave of strikes also hit the united states in 1919 many americans feared this was the start of their own communist revolution.
this red scare created an atmosphere of panic.
palmer raids.
in january 1919 an italian anarchist set off a bomb outside the home of attorney general mitchell palmer.
the bombing was one in a series of attacks that day on judges politicians and law enforcement officials in eight american cities including cleveland and new york.
the nation demanded that action be taken.
this convinced palmer that a radical plot to overthrow the u s government was underway.
in january 1920 palmer ordered the round up of 4 000 suspects in several cities without warrants.
his assistant j edgar hoover directed the raids.
palmer arrested men he accused of plotting to overthrow the government.
most were later released but 600 were eventually deported.
the sacco and vanzetti case.
the anti communist hysteria affected immigrants as well.
two italian immigrants nicola sacco and bartolomeo vanzetti were convicted of committing murder during a robbery.
the robbery was allegedly committed to obtain funds for an anarchist revolution.
pressure for their release came from around the world.
many americans feared looking weak to the rest of the world if they let them go.
although the evidence was insufficient to convict them the judge was extremely partial in his conduct of the trial.
both sacco and vanzetti were found guilty and executed in 1927.
supporters of sacco and vanzettis innocence believed their conviction was due to their anarchist views despite jurors who insisted that anarchism had played no part in their decision.
sacco left and vanzetti.
the rise of nativism and racism the red scare anarchist bombings and the sacco and vanzetti trial contributed to the rise of nativism a dislike of foreigners.
nativists believed white protestant americans were superior to other people.
as you will leam later in this chapter these attitudes led to new restrictions on immigration.
the migration of african americans from the south to northern cities also led to increased racial tensions after the war.
the ku klux kian dead for decades found new life in 1915.
kian members were hostile to immigrants catholics jews and african americans.
major race riots broke out just after the war in many american cities.
the worst riot occurred in chicago where 38 people were killed.
the lynching of african americans also continued as well as segregation in the south.
name chapter 10 the roaring twenties 177 harding also resisted anti semitism.
his campaign manager was a jewish american from texas albert lasker also known as the father of modern advertising harding signed an act creating child health care centers.
he also pursued arms reduction by sponsoring the washington naval conference and supporting u s membership in the world court.
acting as an amateur historian the message below was delivered by president harding as part of his inaugural address in 1921 we must seek the readjustment with care and courage.
w e must strive for normalcy to reach stability.
the forward course of the business cycle is unmistakable.
peoples are turning from destruction to production.
industry has sensed the changed order and is turning to resume their normal onward way.
the call is for productive america to go on.
i speak for administrative efficiency for lightened tax burdens for sound commercial practices for adequate credit facilities for sympathetic concern for all agricultural problems for the omission of unnecessary interference of government with business for an end to governments experiment in business and for more efficient business in government administration how did harding intend to return americans to normalcy.
one of hardings most serious weaknesses was that he appointed personal friends the ohio gang who turned out to be dishonest.
one cabinet member the secretary of the interior leased oil rich government lands at teapot dome wyoming to two business friends in exchange for personal bribes.
the teapot dome scandal uncovered just after hardings death in 1923 was one of the worst scandals in u s history.
additional scandals emerged in other departments.
another of hardings appointments charles forbes stole millions from the construction of hospitals for returning war veterans.
because of hardings poor choices for cabinet positions these scandals have left a lasting stain on his reputation.
as governor of massachusetts calvin coolidge had come to national attention during the boston police strike of 1919.
in a telegram to samuel gompers president of the afl he wrote there is no right to strike against the public safety by anyone anywhere any time based on his record as governor coolidge was selected as hardings vice president.
he became president when harding died suddenly in 1923.
coolidge was then elected for another term in 1924.
name chapter 10 the roaring twenties 179 learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing some of the most important policies of the three republican presidents in the 1920s.
harding administration coolidge administration harding and coolidge presidential policies in the 1920s hoover administration mi name chapter 10 the roaring twenties 181 fords new assembly line production was so efficient he was able to double wages overnight while slashing prices ford wanted to give workers enough buying power to purchase the cars and other goods they were mass producing.
the rise of other new industries the 1920s saw new discoveries and inventions in almost every field laying the framework for many new businesses.
these inventions included improvements in transmitting electrical power improved motors and a new trans atlantic telephone service.
new household appliances like the vacuum cleaner refrigerator and toaster were also introduced.
radio and motion pictures became widespread.
the american chemical industry expanded and the use of oil and natural gas increased.
these new industries created new jobs and changed the ways americans lived.
glenn curtiss.
the first airplane using an engine similar to that in a car was flown by the wright brothers at kitty hawk north carolina in 1902.
glenn curtiss was an early aviation pioneer.
in 1908 he turned his attention to designing a seaplane that could take off and land on water.
three years later he successfully flew his hydroeroplane in san diego bay landing on a naval ship.
his landing marked the birth of u s naval aviation and convinced the secretary of the navy to buy the navys first aircraft.
in 1912 curtiss developed a larger flying boat in 1919 he constructed the first airplane to cross the atlantic ocean for the u s navy.
more efficient production techniques glenn curtiss 1878 1930 ford motors was the first to master the assembly line.
the 1920s saw remarkable improvements in manufacturing efficiency.
as you know ford had introduced electric conveyor belts to his assembly lines.
each car moved along the belt to different groups of workers who completed one small part of the assembly.
with this method production was suddenly six times faster.
use of the conveyer belt and other new techniques spread making industry generally more productive.
when manufacturers first adopted the assembly line to their production process they often achieved dramatic gains in productivity and consumers benefited from lower prices.
however one unforeseen consequence was a radical change in the nature of factory work.
skilled workers were no longer needed even in complex manufacturing operations like car assembly.
name chapter 10 the roaring twenties 183 applying what you have learned many historians believe the mass production of automobiles was the most important factor in the prosperity of the 1920s.
do you agree.
explain your answer.
did the use of buying on credit make the economy fragile.
learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing three factors that led to the prosperity of the 1920s.
name chapter 10 the roaring twenties 185 by 1933 most americans saw this experiment in morals as a failure.
many people had simply refused to accept the ban on alcohol.
although illegal alcoholic drinks were widely available at speakeasies and other underground drinking establishments.
even president harding drank alcohol in the white house.
fewer than fourteen years after the ban on alcoholic drinks went into effect prohibition was repealed by the twenty first amendment 1933.
the experience of prohibition demonstrated that unpopular laws are sometimes unenforceable.
the scopes monkey trial of 1925 an even greater clash between traditionalists and modernists took place in the 1920s in tennessee the first state to pass a law against the teaching of darwins theory of evolution.
state legislators believed that darwin had contradicted the biblical account of creation.
in 1925 john scopes a biology teacher was arrested for teaching his class about the theory of evolution.
scopes was arrested and put on trial.
the scopes monkey trial drew nationwide attention for pitting older religious beliefs against new scientific theories.
the state was represented by william jennings bryan as special prosecutor while the famed attorney clarence darrow defended scopes.
bryan and darrow were considered to be the greatest orators of their day and the scopes trial became the first in american history to be broadcast over national radio.
darrow cross examined bryan as an expert on the bible pointing to seeming contradictions in the biblical text.
in the end scopes was convicted for teaching evolution but his 1 fine was later set aside.
clarence darrow argues one of this points during the scopes monkey trial acting as an amateur historian journalist h l.
mencken wrote the following just before the trial no principle is at stake save the principle that school teachers like plumbers should stick to the job that is set before them and not go roving around the house breaking windows raiding the cellar and demoralizing children.
when a teacher takes his oath of office he renounces his right to free speech quite as certainly as a bishop does or a colonel in the army or an editorial writer of a newspaper.
he becomes a paid propagandist of certain definite doctrines and every time he departs from them deliberately he deliberately swindles his employers which side does mencken support and what were his reasons for doing so.
do you agree or disagree with this argument.
project without permission chapter 10 the roaring twenties 187 research one of the areas of traditional values discussed on the previous pages and give a powerpoint or photo story presentation to your class.
write a brief position paper on whether you believe in the basic ideas of eugenics.
support your position using research from the internet or from your school library.
in opposition to these traditional values were the newer modem values of the period which encouraged greater openness and self expression.
women the decade opened with the passage of the nineteenth amendment giving women the right to vote.
new household appliances reduced housework and greater numbers of women now went to college.
as more women worked they demonstrated a new economic independence and became more assertive.
this brought about changes in manners and morals.
young women began to smoke and drink in public.
they rejected restrictive clothing and instead adopted the new look of the flapper flappers wore short dresses that revealed their body shapes as well as their legs and arms.
their hair was short and choppy and they also wore a lot of make up.
young women went out on dates or to dances without a chaperone.
flappers enjoyed energetic popular dances like the charleston.
people began reading sigmund freud and treating sexuality more openly.
the flapper look.
tin pan alley after the civil war thousands of pianos were sold to individuals.
as a result the demand for sheet music exploded.
around 1910 new york city began to emerge as the capital of popular music publishing.
tin pan alley a section of new york city was the area where song writing and musical ideas mixed together to form american popular music.
various styles such as blues jazz and ragtime were melded together.
publishers were surprised to discover that sheet music for popular tunes was being bought up by ordinary people who just wanted to play these songs at home.
during this same period vaudeville became the most popular form of stage entertainment.
vaudeville shows had a great need for music and the publishing houses of tin pan alley were glad to provide them since a great deal of money was made by selling the songs they popularized.
chapter 10 the roaring twenties 189 in the first two decades of the twentieth century chicagos african american population more than doubled clevelands grew by three times and detroits increased sixfold.
african americans were still greeted by racism housing shortages and crime even in the north but they also found organizations such as the national urban league and the naacp which were dedicated to helping them adjust to their new lives.
confined to allblack neighborhoods african americans created cities within cities.
the largest of these was harlem in upper manhattan of new york city.
about 200 000 african americans lived together there in one of the most vibrant communities of the 1920s.
the harlem renaissance the 1920s is often referred to as the jazz age reflecting the great importance of this new form of african american music.
the general awakening of african american culture in these years has become known as the harlem renaissance.
the harlem renaissance was begun by a rising middle class of african americans.
it was more than simply about music.
it reached into other forms of art such as dance and visual arts.
it sought to bring recognition to the african american community.
it was an era in which many african americans felt as though they famous hot spots included the cotton club and the apollo theater.
langston hughes 1902 1962 had liberated themselves from a past marked by self doubt and uncertainty.
they shared an unprecedented level of optimism a pride in all things black and a confidence in their own future that reached beyond harlem to other african american communities.
poets and writers like langston hughes 1902 1967 and alain locke expressed this new pride in their heritage while attacking racism.
they felt their accomplishments in literature and art demonstrated their value as a people.
hughes is recognized as one of americas best poets.
bom in missouri he was drawn to harlem like other african american artists and writers.
hughes drew on his personal experiences in writing about what it was like to be an african american growing up in america.
his poems novels plays and newspaper columns made him one of the most popular writers of the harlem renaissance.
his writings expressed the new mood of rugged determination to overcome racial prejudice.
countee cullen was another leading poet who won more major literary prizes than any other african american writer of the 1920s.
zora neale hurston became one the first successful african american women authors.
in 1937 she published what is considered her greatest novel their eyes watching god.
name chapter 10 the roaring twenties 191 acting as an amateur historian lindberghs flight served as a bridge between tradition and modernity.
john ward wrote an essay the meaning of lindberghs flight in which he looked at the impact of his flight on history lindbergh in every remark about his flight and in his writings resisted the tendency to exploit the flight as the achievement of an individual.
he never said i he always said we but there was always the fact that his exploit was a victory of the machine over nature.
there was another aspect one in which the public celebrated the machine and the society of which it was a product.
by calling lindbergh a pioneer people could read into history the need for turning back to the frontier past.
yet people could also read history in terms of progress into the future.
they did this by emphasizing the machine involved in lindberghs flight what did ward think was the one of the meanings of lindberghs flight.
the harlem renaissance a crucial event for african americans in the 1920s.
complete the graphic organizer below by describing four of its aspects.
name chapter 10 the roaring twenties 193 chapt w io concbpt checking your understanding directions put a circle around the letter that best answers the question.
1 why was national attention drawn to william jennings bryan and clarence darrow in the scopes trial of 1925.
a the case represented a conflict between modem science and religion.
hist 6 b b the case reversed a previous supreme court decision on free speech.
c the case upheld the right of veterans to protest in washington d c d the case revealed the extent of prejudice against immigrants.
project without permission chapter 10 the roaring twenties 195 use the information in the timeline and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
the influence of the automobile 1923 1932 country club plaza the first shopping center opens in kansas city.
in november 16 833 cars cross the st john s river to florida as the start of winter sees motor pilgrimages to florida.
v 1923 1924 1930 1931 a 1932 a census data suggests southern cities are becoming more racially segregated as car owning whites move to suburbs that have no public transportation.
king kullen opens its first supermarket in queens new york as an outgrowth of the auto age since pedestrians cannot carry large amounts of groceries home.
one room rural schools decline as school districts operate 63 000 school buses.
6 based on this timeline which conclusion can be drawn about the influence of the automobile.
f automobiles created large scale unemployment in certain cities.
jeon 16 a g the automobile had little economic impact on the united states.
h the growth of automobiles had a dramatic effect on life in the united states.
j henry ford produced automobiles at a price many americans could afford.
7 prohibition established by the eighteenth amendment stated that a only imported alcoholic beverages could be sold.
hist 6 a b the manufacture and sale of u s alcoholic beverages was banned c americans must be 18 years old to purchase alcoholic beverages d alcoholic beverages could be sold only in government run stores 8 during the 1920s congress passed a series of immigration laws that were primarily designed to f increase immigration from asia.
hist 6 a g expand the workforce for the growing economy h limit immigration from southern and eastern europe j prohibit immigration from latin america 9 which development in the 1920s was inconsistent with much of the racial and ethnic intolerance of the decade.
a red scare c harlem renaissance f cult 25 8 y b revival of the ku klux kian d trial of sacco and vanzetti 10 which event represented an expression of nativism during the 1920s.
f trial of john scopes for teaching evolution hist 6 a g adoption of a quota system to limit immigration h charles lindberghs solo transatlantic flight j the rise in popularity of spectator sports name chapter 10 the roaring twenties 197 use the chart and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
immigration before and after quota laws from northern and western europe from southern and eastern europe and asia average annual number of immigrants 1907 1914 176 983 685 531 immigration act of 1921 198 082 158 367 immigration act of 1924 140 999 21 847 immigration act of 1929 132 323 20 251 source historical statistics of the united states 16 based on this chart what effect did the passage of immigration laws have on immigration to the united states.
f they ended all immigration to the united states.
t econ 15 c i g they had little effect on the flow of immigrants entering the united states.
h the number of immigrants from southern and eastern europe and asia declined dramatically.
j the number of immigrants from northern and western europe increased.
use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
we were tried during a time when there was resentment and hate against the foreigner and it seems to me lam positive that you have done all that was in your power in order to agitate still more the passion of the jurors the prejudice of the jurors against us.
but my conviction is that i have suffered not for things that i am guilty of.
i am suffering because i am a radical and indeed i am a radical i have suffered because i was an italian and indeed i am italian i have suffered more for my family than for myself bartolomeo vanzetti to the judge on being sentenced to death sacco vanzetti case 1927 17 according to vanzetti why was he found guilty at his trial.
a he had strongly supported eugenic laws.
hist 6 a i b he was the victim of a scandal from the harding administration.
c he was convicted because he was an immigrant with radical views.
d he violated the eighteenth amendment calling for prohibition.
18 which individual encouraged african americans to own their own businesses and once said that a people without the knowledge of their past history origin and culture is like a tree without roots.
f charles lindbergh f hist 6 b g marcus garvey h glenn curtiss j william jennings bryan name the great depression and the new deal n teks covered in chapter 11 history 2 d explain the significance of the following years as turning points 1929 the great depression begins geography 12 a analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the dust bowl economics 15 e describe the emergence of monetary policy in the united states including the federal reserve act of 1913 and the shifting trend from a gold standard to fiat money.
economics 16 b identify the causes of the great depression including the impact of tariffs on world trade stock market speculation bank failures and the monetary policy of the federal reserve system.
economics 16 c analyze the effects of the great depression on the u s economy and society such as widespread unemployment and deportation and repatriation of people of european and mexican heritage and others.
economics 16 d compare the new deal policies and its opponents approaches to resolving the economic effects of the great depression.
economics 16 e describe how various new deal agencies and programs including the federal deposit insurance corporation the securities and exchange commission and the social security administration continue to affect the lives of u s citizens.
government 19 a evaluate the impact of new deal legislation on the historical roles of state and federal government.
government 19 b explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events including the great depression.
government 20 b evaluate the impact of relationships among the legislative executive and judicial branches of government including franklin d roosevelt s attempt to increase the number of u s supreme court justices culture 26 d identify the political social and economic contributions of women such as eleanor roosevelt to american society.
in this chapter you will leam how the prosperity of the 1920s was suddenly cut short by the great depression.
under president franklin d roosevelt the federal government intervened on a massive scale to revitalize the economy.
key terms and people in this chapter creat pepression hoovervilles civilian conservation corps herbert hoover fireside chats federal reserve franklin p roosevelt eleanor roosevelt cold standard john steinbeck relief recovery reform rat money porothea lange national recovery adm twenty second amendment pustbowl banking crisis schechter poultry v u s new peal agric.
adjustment acts court packing plan 199 name chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal 201 ess al questions owhat were the causes of the great depression.
o z why was herbert hoover unable to cope with the great depression.
o what were the effects of the great depression.
o how did the new deal offer a new approach to confronting the depression.
economies historically pass through good and bad periods that regularly repeat themselves.
these up and down periods of business activity are referred to as the business cycle.
the bad times are called depressions characterized by business failures high unemployment and falling prices.
the great depression was the worst depression in our nations history.
a variety of factors caused the economy to move from the prosperity of the 1920s to the severe depression of the 1930s.
overproduction the 1920s had witnessed rapid economic expansion as manufacturers made and sold new products like cars radios and refrigerators.
many consumers however lacked the money to buy these goods.
manufacturers were soon producing more goods than they could sell.
speculation in the 1920s stocks soared in value.
as you learned in chapter 10 many people bought stocks hoping to get rich quick this drove stock prices ever higher.
each day the speculative boom on the stock market saw more people investing in wall street.
by 1929 stock prices had tripled since 1920.
buying on margin.
in the 1920s stocks could be purchased for a 10 down payment called a margin.
the rest of the price was financed by a loan from the stock broker.
it was similar to making a purchase on the installment plan.
the buyer paid only 10 of the stocks value and promised to pay the rest when the stock was sold.
prices on the new york stock market 1928 1933 350 poo 250 8 200 ilso o 100 s 50 0 la na a 1 r i k w 1 2 c cft cft c r t v i r uj r o.
ft c t r jj r ft c c ft c i 3 c 0 ft c 1 r 3 r ft c f 1 5 c n r ft c i r c 4 r c 3 o r n m r ft cft c 1 r f r j r 4 t r n m r ft cft c t i t v i 5 c c f c 4 v r m cm c n m c ft cft c t l r.
q m c o r ft c 1 r s c m co n m 2 2 f i i j name chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal from wall street to main street after the stock market crash corporations could no longer raise funds.
people who lost their money in the stock market could not repay their loans or rents leading to bank failures.
thousands of people lost their life savings.
in this new economic climate the demand for goods decreased.
as prices fell factories closed and workers lost their jobs.
demand was reduced still further causing prices to fall even more.
other factories closed and the country became caught in the grips of a vicious downward spiral.
people could not pay their rents or mortgages and people lost their homes.
there was no one to buy the foreclosed houses and home prices plummeted downward.
without any kind of safety net such as unemployment insurance hundreds of thousands of american workers found themselves living on the street or in makeshift shacks.
203 many americans lost their homes in the depression.
the human impact of the depression the great depression was a national nightmare.
during the 1920s many americans had started to equate their self worth with their material possessions.
when the great depression struck people felt worthless.
the reality of economic chaos and confusion replaced the nations traditional optimistic outlook.
people waited for events to turn spinning in circles as they fought for their daily survival.
businesses failed farmers lost their farms banks failed and millions of people were out of work.
there was no unemployment insurance or bank deposit insurance.
private charities were overwhelmed.
people were homeless and went hungry.
millions depended on soup kitchens for their food.
writers like john steinbeck and photographers like dorothea lange recorded the misery of the great depression.
name chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal 205 acting as an amateur historian in 1932 a young lyricist named e y.
harburg wrote the song that became the anthem of the great depression brother can you spare a dime they used to tell me i was building a dream and so i followed the mob when there was earth to plow or guns to bear i was always there right on the job.
they used to tell me i was building a dream with peace and glory ahead why should i be standing in line just waiting for bread.
once i built a railroad i made it run made it race against time.
once i built a railroad now its done.
brother can you spare a dime.
once i built a tower up to the sun brick and rivet and lime once i built a tower now its done.
brother can you spare a dime fc the song lists several accomplishments of the singer i built a railroad i built a tower what point was the songwriter trying to make.
one key phrase seems to summarize harburgs message brother can you spare a dime why does that phrase continue to speak to listeners even today.
a farm buried under a sea of dust.
the dust bowl during the 1930s farmers on the great plains faced a natural disaster as well as financial disaster.
since the 1870s farmers had been tilling the great plains cutting the grasses covering the topsoil and tapping underground water supplies.
a series of droughts long periods without rain in the early 1930s dried up crops and topsoil turning the soil to dust.
the ground cover that had held the soil in place was now gone.
lasting for a decade heavy winds carried topsoil across hundreds of miles burying homes and destroying harvests.
unable to grow enough to pay their bills farmers were forced to abandon their farms.
many farmers moved west to california.
over one million farmers were driven from their lands by the dust bowl john steinbeck wrote a series of articles on these oakies farmers from oklahoma who moved to migrant worker camps in california.
in 1936 steinbeck published the harvest gypsies a series of articles first printed in the san francisco news based on his own research on migrant workers living in california during the great depression.
this research later provided the background for his famous novel the grapes of wrath.
name chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal 207 acting as an amateur.
historian employers pushed repatriation efforts as private charities and government agencies provided railroad transportation for tens of thousands of mexicans to their homeland immigration officials put all the people in the boxcars instead of inside the trains a witness recalled.
they were in here illegally but the moral part of it the separation and putting them in boxcars ill never forget it as long as i live.
many of the repatriates were children bom in the united states.
the los angeles chamber of commerce estimated that 60 percent of the repatriated children were american citizens without much hope of ever coming back to the united states.
repatriation was an employment program for whites a way to remove surplus mexican laborers and preserve the few remaining jobs for white workers.
even as they supported repatriation however employers viewed the action as temporary.
the border existed only when mexican labor was not needed professor ronald takaki a different mirror a history of multicultural america 1993.
what are this historians feelings about the mexican repatriation program.
explain your answer.
it suppose you were a lawyer who had to argue before the u s supreme court either for or against the mexican repatriation program.
write a brief a short written argument for either side.
in the months leading up to the presidential election of 1928 herbert hoover had conducted a study of american society.
he had hoped to use this information to promote national economic development and to relieve poverty.
but by 1932 the leader who had once been one of the most respected men in the nation had become one of the most despised.
hoovers name became identified with the great depression.
despite the spiraling economic catastrophe president hoover had remained true to his conviction in laissez faire capitalism.
hoover s philosophy despite rising unemployment hoover had rejected demands for the federal government to provide direct payments to the unemployed and needy.
he believed that this would reduce the incentive to work undermining americans rugged individualism instead hoover believed that voluntary private organizations should provide such emergency relief.
hoover believed it was not the role of government to step in for voluntary philanthropy.
name chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal learning with graphic organizers 209 complete the graphic organizer below by describing the principal causes and effects of the great depression.
overproduction speculation and the stock market crash causes banking practices trade restrictions the great depression business failures unemployment effects bank failures foreclosures name chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal 211 women in the great depression women often experienced the depression as mothers and homemakers.
while men tried to find new jobs women had the quiet but demanding task of making ends meet cooking cleaning and caring for children.
in 1933 eleanor roosevelt rallied women with her book its up to the women.
she called on them to pull their families through the crisis the women know that life must go on and the needs of life must be met and it is their courage which time and again have pulled us through worse crises than the present one eleanor roosevelt 1884 1962 another prominent woman reformer frances perkins became the first female member of the u s.
cabinet when she was appointed secretary of labor in 1933.
perkins remained at this post for 12 years overseeing the civil conservation corps and the public works administration.
she played a key role in the passage of the fair labor standards act the national labor relations act and the social security act.
in his first inaugural address president roosevelt attempted to calm the american people reassuring them that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself he also blamed the selfishness of bankers and financiers for the current crisis.
as soon as roosevelt took office he called congress into special session.
roosevelt then pushed through legislation that would have been difficult to pass in less critical times.
the president immediately began to submit a flood of measures for congressional approval.
virtually all of the important bills he submitted in these first hundred days were enacted by congress.
roosevelt explained these new deal measures in terms of the three rs relief recovery and reform.
relief relief measures were short term actions designed to tide people over until the economy recovered.
they were especially important in the first years of the new deal.
the banking crisis.
if depositors feared a bank was unsound they would remove their funds.
often this news would spread to others causing bank customers to also withdraw their money before it was too late.
these runs on banks were widespread during the early days of the depression.
ten thousand banks had failed during the great depression.
to stabilize the banking situation and restore consumer confidence roosevelt immediately declared a bank holiday closing all of the nations banks.
each bank was permitted to reopen only after government inspectors found the bank to be financially sound.
name chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal 213 reform reform measures were aimed at remedying defects in the structure of the american economy in order to ensure that such a severe depression would never strike again.
many reform measures were based on the belief that government should protect individuals against risks they could not handle on their own.
federal deposit insurance corporation 1933 insured bank deposits so that people would not lose their savings in the event of a bank failure.
legislation during the new deal tennessee valley authority 1933 built 21 government owned dams along the tennessee river controlling floods and producing electricity.
some feared the tva as a form of socialism.
securities and exchange commission 1934 was i created to watch over the stock market prevent j fraud and guard against another stock market collapse.
national labor relations act 1935 often called the wagner act gave workers the right to form unions to bargain collectively and to submit grievances to a national labor relations board.
social security act 1935 was probably the most important measure of the new deal.
it provided workers with unemployment insurance old age pensions and insurance if they died early.
workers and their employers each paid new contributions to fund these benefits.
ft acting as an amateur historian in 1935 secretary of labor frances perkins delivered a radio broadcast to explain social security to the american people the process of recovery is not simple.
we cannot be satisfied merely with arrangements which will tide us over the present emergencies.
we must devise plans that will not merely lessen the ills of today but prevent as far as it is possible their recurrence in the future.
the task of recovery is inseparable from the task of social reconstruction.
among the objectives of that reconstruction president roosevelt in his message to congress placed the security of the men women and children of the nation first he went on to suggest that social insurances will provide safeguards against misfortunes which cannot be wholly eliminated in this man made world of ours social security the securities and exchange commission sec the federal deposit insurance corporation fdic and the tennessee valley authority tva still affect us today.
choose one of these programs and explain how it continues to affect us.
name chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal 215 the greatest growth in union membership in american history took place in the 1930s as a result of the new deal.
roosevelt sought to raise the wages of labor to help fight the depression.
norris laguardia act 1932 prohibited the use of injunctions against peaceful strikes.
new deal legislation favorable to labor 1 national industrial recovery act 1933 guaranteed workers the right to form unions.
employers could not refuse to hire union members.
this act was declared unconstitutional in 1935 but was replaced by the wagner act.
wagner act 1935 greatly stimulated the unionization of american workers by protecting the right of unions to bargain collectively with their employers.
union membership grew rapidly with this new law.
although the new deal was generally popular roosevelt did face criticism.
some of his critics proposed alternative approaches to dealing with the depression.
conservative critics like the liberty league charged roosevelt with being a traitor to his class and attempting to establish a popular dictatorship.
radical critics felt that roosevelt did not go far enough in reforming the american economy.
dr francis townsend wanted to give citizens over 65 years old a pension of 200 a month to be spent within the month.
townsend believed these pensioners would soon spend the money and this would create new jobs bringing an end to the depression.
senator and former governor of louisiana huey long promised to give each american family an income of 5 000 a year to be paid for by taxing the rich.
long was assassinated before he was able to mount his campaign against fdr.
huey long was a fiery speaker who riled up crowds.
father coughlin gave radio addresses to millions calling for the nationalization of banks and utilities.
coughlin was also violently anti semitic prejudiced against jewish people.
coughlin found an audience among nativists and those who distrusted wall street bankers.
eventually the catholic church ordered an end to coughlins broadcasts.
name chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal 217 in your opinion was franklin roosevelt a hero to be admired or someone who wrongly overstepped his constitutional authority.
explain your answer.
learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by summarizing the most important legislation of roosevelts new deal refi orm chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal 219 chapter it concept map people lost their homes v hl factories closed down v y john steinbeck h y wrote the grapes of wrath j h.
established reconstruction finance corp rugged individualism checking your unperstanping directions put a circle around the letter that best answers the question.
1 what is the main idea of the cartoon.
a president roosevelt used a system of trial and error to mend the economy.
b congress and the president were unable to cope with the great depression.
c president roosevelt always followed the rec ommendations of the congress.
d the president and congress constantly fought over depression era programs.
econ 16 d of course we may have to change remedies if we dont get results name chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal use the cartoon and your knowledge of social stud lets harmonize ies to answer the following question.
6 the cartoonist is commenting on president franklin d roosevelts efforts to f win congressional approval for his court packing scheme g gain supreme court support for his legislative program h set up a retirement plan for supreme court justices j keep members of congress off the supreme court govt 19 3 221 source gene elderman wahington post january 9 1937 adapted 7 the new deal changed american political thinking because it was based on the principle that the a economy will fix itself if left alone govt is a b federal government should attempt to solve social and economic problems c political parties must work together to deal with national problems d states should take a leadership position in solving social issues 8 what problem were both the civilian conservation corps ccc and the works progress administration wpa developed to address.
f excessive stock market speculation econ i6 d g high unemployment h increased use of credit j limited income of senior citizens 9 what was roosevelts goal in creating the securities and exchange commission sec and the federal deposit insurance corporation fdic.
a stimulate economic growth econ 16 e b increase the governments tax revenue c provide jobs for the unemployed d restore the publics faith in financial institutions 10 which economic factor contributed directly to the start of the great depression.
f low worker productivity econ 16 b g decreasing tariff rates h high income taxes j buying stocks on margin name chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal 223 16 which aspect of the new deal was a continuation of progressive era policies.
f free health care for all americans govt i9 a g government regulation of business activities h restoration of the cultural traditions of native american indians j government purchase of surplus farm products 17 during the new deal period congress blocked president franklin d roosevelts attempt to a pay farmers not to produce crops govt 19 b b decrease federal spending c regulate the banking industry d appoint additional justices to the supreme court 18 the dust bowls described by john steinbeck in the grapes of wrath u sog 12 a had the greatest impact on f residents of urban slums h workers in factory sweatshops g plantation owners in the rural south j farmers on the great plains 19 what is the primary function of the federal reserve system.
a to prevent abuses in stock market trading econ 15 e b to preserve competition in business c to provide a stable supply of money and credit d to insure savings account deposits in member banks 20 after the election of 1932 a friend told president franklin d roosevelt that if he succeeded he would go down in history as the greatest american president.
roosevelt replied yet if i fail i may be the last one this response reflected president roosevelts belief that the f constitution limited him to two terms in the presidency ucon is c g great depression threatened the peoples faith in democracy h military was considering a takeover of the government j american people were opposed to major changes in the role of government 21 one difference between the administrations of president franklin d roosevelt and president herbert hoover was that roosevelt was a unwilling to allow government agencies to establish jobs programs ccn 16 d b unable to win congressional support for his economic program c able to ignore economic issues for most of his first term in office d more willing to use government intervention to solve economic problems 22 what was the main intent of the mexican repatriation act.
f to send mexican american immigrants back to mexico 16 c j g to encourage mexican american immigrants to work in the united states h to eliminate discrimination against mexican americans in the united states j to grant citizenship to mexican americans living in the u s for 5 years 225 a.
conditions in europe after world war i were favorable to the rise of dictatorships.
the russian revolution led to the worlds first communist state in the soviet union.
the dissolution of the german and austro hungarian empires led to the creation of fragile new democracies in other parts of europe.
b benito mussolini formed the fascist party which took power in italy in 1922.
adolf hitler took power in germany in 1933 after the high unemployment caused by the great depression.
these new dictatorships glorified violence obedience to leaders and extreme nationalism.
they arrested imprisoned and often killed their opponents.
hitlers nazi party condemned jews and others.
c hitler had an expansionist foreign policy.
he re armed germany helped spanish dictator francisco franco annexed austria and demanded the sudentenland in czechoslovakia in 1938.
the league of nations failed to stop aggressors.
british and french leaders gave in to hitlers demands in an attempt at appeasement.
hitler took the rest of czechoslovakia and then demanded part of poland in 1939.
this time british and french leaders refused to give in.
after signing a non aggression pact with stalin hitler attacked poland starting world war ii in europe.
in asia japanese military leaders had already occupied manchuria in 1931 and had invaded eastern china in 1937.
d the german army developed a new form of offensive warfare the blitzkrieg.
rapid coordinated movements of airplanes tanks mechanized troop carriers and infantry made it possible to advance at rapid speed.
germany quickly conquered poland defeated france and controlled most of europe by 1940.
in 1941 germany violated its non aggression pact and invaded the soviet union.
e americans at first tried to stay neutral in the war.
after world war i there had been a return to isolationism.
congress passed the neutrality acts prohibiting americans from traveling on ships of nations at war or selling arms to nations at war.
they could only sell non military goods on a cash and carry basis.
f president roosevelt was concerned at the rise of totalitarian states and the threat it presented to democracy.
when japan attacked china in 1937 he proposed that peaceful states quarantine aggressive nations.
american volunteers also formed the flying tigers a squadron of airplanes that helped keep supply lines to china open.
after germany occupied france congress passed the first peace time draft.
in 1941 congress passed the lend lease act in order to sell rent or lend wartime equipment to britain which stood alone in facing the terror of nazi germany.
in 1941 roosevelt secretly met churchill and they agreed to the atlantic charter laying the foundation for the future united nations.
g surprisingly events in asia rather than europe brought the united states into the war.
roosevelt threatened an embargo to force japan to give up some of its conquests.
japanese leaders wanted to seize indonesia for its oil.
on december 7 1941 japanese planes launched a surprise attack on the u s fleet at pearl harbor.
the next day roosevelt asked for a declaration of war against japan.
chapter 12 america in world war ii 227 adolf hitler tuskegee airmen holocaust appeasement executive order 9066 bataan peath march neutrality acts korewatsu k u s navajo code talkers flying tigers george patton battle of midway pearl harbor pwight eisenhower nuremberg trials rationing george marshall pouglas macarthur victory gardens vernon baker harry truman office of war information omar bradley hiroshima nagasaki j essdent ial questions cj z what factors led to the outbreak of world war ii.
o how were the united states and its allies able to win victory in world war ii.
what were the major effects of world war ii on america and the world.
after world war i americans had returned to their traditional policy of isolation.
they were more concerned with events at home than abroad.
they felt safe behind the oceans separating them from europe and asia.
they raised tariffs restricted immigration and even insisted that their wartime allies france and britain pay back the war debts owed to americans.
there were notable exceptions to this trend towards isolationism.
in 1921 president harding hosted the washington naval conference in which leading world powers agreed to limit the size of their navies.
in 1928 the united states also promoted the kellog briand peace pact signed by 62 nations renouncing the use of war.
presidents herbert hoover and franklin d roosevelt both also tried to improve u s relations with latin america.
under the good neighbor policy the united states agreed not to interfere in the internal affairs of latin american nations and relations between the united states and the countries of latin america began to improve.
the origins of worio war b world war i and the great depression had profound effects on europe just as they did on the united states.
within two decades europe was again at war.
chapter 12 america in world war ii 229 applying what you have learned use the internet or your library to research american attitudes in the 1930s to the rise of dictators like mussolini hitler stalin and the military leaders of japan.
in 1939 hitler made new territorial demands in poland.
fearing hitler intended to dominate europe britain and france refused to give in.
hitler responded by signing a nonaggression pact with stalin in which the two secretly agreed to invade and divide poland.
when germany invaded poland in september 1939 britain and france declared war on germany.
world war ii had begun.
in poland the german army unveiled a new type of warfare the blitzkreig which consisted of rapid coordinated movements by airplanes tanks troop carriers and infantry.
the germans quickly defeated the poles and before long they had also defeated the french and taken over much of europe.
while the main advantage in battle in world war i had been with the defense the use of airplanes tanks and mechanized transport brought the advantage in warfare back to the offense during world war il the germans and later the allies also bombed civilians in cities to increase the terrors of war.
the german blitzkrieg in action.
shi lisa a igllbbb america preserves a cautious neutrality in the early 1930s americans were too absorbed with recovering from the great depression to be very involved in affairs overseas.
as tensions in europe rose congress passed a series of laws to keep the country out of war.
americans had been drawn into world war i when german submarines had attacked american ships.
to avoid similar events the neutrality acts 1935 1937 prohibited americans from traveling on the ships of nations at war.
americans were also prohibited from selling arms to countries at war.
americans could sell nonmilitary goods to britain and other nations opposed to aggression but only on a cash and carry basis.
when japan invaded china in 1937 president roosevelt delivered his quarantine speech.
he warned americans of the growing unrest in the world and told them that peaceful nations had to act together to quarantine isolate aggressive nations.
fdr delivering his quarantine speech.
name l j chapter 12 america in world war ii 231 ampbia pikpoa pup ilf bo rill president roosevelt believed that u s entry into the war was inevitable.
if hitler defeated britain many feared he would later attack the united states.
in 1941 armed american merchant ships were authorized to carry supplies directly to britain.
it seemed that u s involvement in the war was only a matter of time.
increasing united states japanese tensions surprisingly events in asia not europe finally brought the united states into the war.
just as german ambitions had triggered the war in europe japans aggressive designs led to war in asia.
japans late 19th century industrialization had been remarkably successful.
but japanese leaders needed raw materials and markets for their industries.
they also wished to replace european imperialism in asia with the imperialism of an asian power.
japans military began to influence japanese national policy.
in 1931 japan invaded manchuria.
in 1937 japan attacked the rest of china.
when japan occupied southern indochina in 1941 roosevelt reacted by freezing japanese assets in the united states and cutting off all trade with japan.
roosevelt offered to resume trade only if japan withdrew from china and indochina.
japanese leaders refused.
japan prepares a surprise attack japanese military leaders decided to attack indonesia to obtain oil for their war effort.
realizing such a move would bring america into the war they decided to attack first.
japanese leaders believed a surprise attack would catch the americans unprepared temporarily eliminate u s naval power from the pacific and allow japan to fortify its positions in the pacific.
the japanese assumed that before the united states could recover from this surprise blow japan would be able to achieve all of its objectives in east asia and the pacific.
uss arizona one of eight battleships damaged or sunk at pearl harbor.
name chapter 12 america in world war ii 233 applying what you have learned prepare a class play containing three brief acts 1 roosevelt and his advisors prepare to submit demands to japan 2 japanese military leaders plan the attack on pearl harbor 3 american sailors discuss their experiences at pearl harbor just after the attack.
with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing some of the more significant developments that led to american entry into world war ii.
rise of european dictatorships failure of the league of nations germany s invasion of poland japan s attack on peart harbor chapter 12 america in world war ii 235 the office of war information a primary focus of the federal government during the war was control of the content and imagery of war messages.
in 1942 the president created the office of war information owi.
among its wide ranging responsibilities was the production of pro allied anti axis propaganda such as movies and posters to make citizens aware of how they could help in the war effort.
the owi produced its own radio programs released its own newsreels and required that all movies produced during the war contribute in some way to the war effort.
owi messages asked citizens to contribute time and money to create products to conserve resources and to donate to the war effort in personal ways.
the owi also started the voice of america during the war sending messages overseas.
the owi tried to stir up distrust of german italian and japanese leaders to lower the morale of enemy troops and populations and to encourage their surrender.
for murder ill women in the work force for many women in america world war ii brought not only sacrifices but also new jobs new skills and new opportunities.
although prevented from enlisting in the regular armed forces women joined the new womens army corps or wacs in large numbers.
after basic training most of these women took clerical jobs in the military.
in civilian life many women replaced jobs formerly held by men such as in shipbuilding and aircraft production.
the idea was to have women fill jobs formerly held by men so that more men could be sent into combat.
songs like rosie the riveter celebrated womens new roles although some private contractors still refused to hire women.
between 1941 and 1945 more than 6 5 million women entered the work force.
millions of women entered the workforce when men were drafted into the military.
ethnic minorities opportunities and obstacles african americans.
like women members of minorities filled the workforce to replace men sent overseas.
many worked in war industries and government agencies.
african american soldiers also played a significant role in world war ii.
more than two and a half million registered for the draft of whom one million eventually served even though they were forced to serve in segregated units.
african americans had to battle on two fronts the enemy overseas and prejudice at home.
chapter 12 america in world war ii 237 actin as an amateur historian executive order 9066 by president roosevelt resulted in the internment of 110 000 japanese americans in camps for the duration of world war ii a s president and commander in chief of the army and navy i hereby authorize and direct the secretary of war and the military commanders whenever he or any designated commander deems such action to be necessary or desirable to order military areas in such places and of such extent as he or the appropriate commander may determine from which any or all persons may be excluded and with respect to which the right of any persons to enter remain in or leave shall be subject to whatever restriction the secretary of war or the appropriate military commander may impose in his discretion the mochida family await evacuation to an internment camp.
what did executive order 9066 authorize.
what arguments would you have used either in support of or against this order.
the relocation raised constitutional issues in wartime.
roosevelt justified the measures as a military necessity.
the supreme court upheld the relocations in korematsu v u s korematsu was a japanese american convicted of continuing to remain in a restricted area.
he believed his constitutional rights had been violated.
the supreme court upheld roosevelts order on the grounds that constitutional liberties may be limited in wartime.
fifty years later congress apologized to the interned japanese americans and voted to pay compensation to the families involved.
during the war a small number of german and italian resident aliens were also interned.
about 2 000 german alien residents were forcibly sent back to germany.
germans were also sent from latin america to the united states to be used in prisoner exchanges with germany.
applying what you have learned blliailib on the internet look up the findings of the commission on wartime relocation and internment of civilians especially chapter 12 of their report personal justice denied 1982.
write a brief summary of what you find.
use the internet to research conditions that existed in the u s internment camps housing japanese americans and others.
find two images that illustrate the conditions that existed.
make a copy of these images and describe what they show.
finally pretend you are a reporter.
write a news article about the conditions you found in your investigation based on your research.
chapter 12 america in world war ii 239 the war in europe although the japanese had attacked pearl harbor president roosevelt decided to focus american energies on defeating germany first.
by the time the americans entered the war hitler was in control of most of europe and north africa.
hitler made his greatest mistake when he invaded the soviet union in june 1941 and declared war on the united states before defeating britain.
by late 1941 the rapid german advance into the soviet union was stopped just short of moscow.
roosevelt and churchill promised stalin they would open a second front against germany in the west to relieve pressure on the soviet army.
axis expansion at its height 1942 the americans and british now began one of the greatest collaborations in military history.
churchill advised delay before invading europe.
in 1942 allied troops landed in north africa.
after defeating german forces they crossed the mediterranean and advanced into sicily and italy in 1943.
george patton was one of the commanders of the forces that invaded north africa and sicily.
he came from a military family had participated in the expedition against pancho villa and served under pershing in world war i.
he played an important role in the use of tanks.
patton told american soldiers they must have a killer instinct to succeed.
an uncon ventional military leader patton was given command of the general george patton american third army.
he was popular among his troops because he had high survival rates but he could also be harsh in his treatment of those under his command.
under pattons leadership the third army would quickly move through europe capturing large numbers of enemy soldiers and freeing a vast territory.
name chapter 12 america in world war ii 241 genocide is an effort to murder an entire people or nationality.
part of hitlers nazi philosophy was his intense hatred of jewish people on whom he blamed all of germanys problems.
the holocaust refers to the attempted genocide of the jews during world war ii.
after the outbreak of the war hitler and other nazi leaders decided to murder all european jews.
he called his plan the final solution at first jews were machine gunned next to open trenches they had been forced to when this method of extermination proved too slow for the nazis large concentration camps were built across europe.
jews from nazi controlled countries were sent in cramped railroad cattle cars to these camps.
when they arrived in the camps most were killed with poison gas and their bodies were burned in large ovens.
some were spared to do the work of running the camp.
these inmates were half starved and subjected to inhumane conditions.
about six million jews two thirds of those living in europe were killed during the holocaust.
six million gypsies slavs political prisoners elderly mentally disabled and others also died in nazi concentration camps.
dig themselves or gassed in trucks.
jewish men inside a nazi concentration camp.
liberation of the concentration camps.
during the last months of the war the allies advanced into germany where the true horror of nazi brutality was revealed.
american army units were the first to liberate concentration camps.
they were shocked to see the half starved dehydrated disease ridden prisoners.
acting as an amateur historian the following account is from woman prisoner t 917 at lenzing concentration camp now began a frightful time of waiting.
we were locked in the camp without food.
i was asleep when my sister wakened me.
she reported that in front of the camp were two young men.
they told us that they would get help from the american soldiers who were nearby but had no idea our camp was there.
it took a few hours until they arrived.
it was general pattons 3rd army.
the soldiers broke open the gate.
it must have been a shock for the soldiers when they saw us emaciated or swollen pale and dirty creatures.
they first provided us with their food rations and soap who do you think was more surprised at the meeting the concentration camp inmates or the american soldiers.
explain your answer.
chapter 12 america in world war ii 243 the war in asia and the pacific in these same years americans remained at war with japan.
geography played a critical role in the pacific campaign during world war il the united states and japan were separated by the vast pacific ocean.
after its attack on pearl harbor the japanese achieved quick victories in overrunning malaya burma indonesia singapore hong kong the philippines and the western pacific islands.
they soon threatened australia india midway and hawaii.
the bataan death march 1942 the philippines faced an invasion by the japanese army on the day pearl harbor was attacked.
a month later u s and filipino forces surrendered to the japanese.
the japanese forced their prisoners to undertake a 60 mile march through the jungle which became known as the bataan death march.
these prisoners of war faced starvation disease exposure to the sun and no water.
about 5 000 of the americans almost half died along the way.
some were bayoneted shot beheaded or just left to die along the side of the road.
american soldiers along the bataan death march.
in 1943 the tide began to turn against japan.
the united states regained naval superiority in the pacific and american forces by island hopping liberating pacific islands from japanese control one at a time.
the navajo code talkers one group of americans who played a key role in the pacific campaign were the navajo code talkers.
the american military needed an undecipherable code to communicate that could not be broken by the japanese.
the navajo language is unwritten and extremely complex.
by using this language american forces could transmit messages by telephone and radio in a code that the japanese were unable to break.
the battle of midway the battle of midway was the turning point of the war in the pacific.
the japanese were using their control of the western pacific to protect their home islands and vast new empire.
the japanese pacific fleet commander had devised a plan to lure the u s pacific fleet into a battle near midway a tiny mid pacific island where he believed he could destroy them.
however the u s navy could decipher japanese secret codes and knew that a surprise attack by the japanese fleet was at hand.
chapter 12 america in world war ii 245 his successor president harry truman feared that an invasion of japan might lead to a million american casualties.
truman preferred to use the atomic bomb against japan rather than to sustain such high losses.
he selected centers of japanese military production as targets.
on august 6 an atomic bomb was exploded over the japanese city of hiroshima.
three days later a second bomb was exploded over nagasaki.
about 230 000 people were killed in both explosions combined.
critics argued that truman could have exploded bombs on unoccupied islands in the pacific as demonstrations instead of on heavily populated cities.
japan surrendered shortly after the second explosion once american leaders agreed to allow the japanese emperor to remain on his throne.
smoke rises 60 000feet after an atom bomb is dropped on nagasaki august 1945.
acting as an amateur historian presidents roosevelt and truman had different leadership styles.
president roosevelt came from wealth had an elite education and had an abundance of self confidence.
a life long politician he excelled at communicating with the public.
this was sharply different from president truman who spent his early years running a small clothing business and served as a local judge before being elected as u s.
he was chosen by roosevelt as his vice president in 1944.
truman was vice president only 82 days when he suddenly found himself as president.
roosevelt rarely consulted with him and truman knew nothing at all about the development of the atomic bomb until after roosevelts death.
with limited foreign policy experience one might think that truman simply allowed his advisers to make decisions.
in fact nothing better describes his leadership style than the sign on his desk in the white house the buck stops here truman chaired morning staff meetings issued directions and assignments to his advisers and made all major policy decisions himself.
he tended to look at things as they were presented to him examined both sides of the issue and then made his decision much as during his earlier years as a judge.
select one of these presidents and evaluate his domestic and international leadership during world war ii.
conduct research on the internet or in your library for information.
you might consider how fdr forged a close relationship with churchill and mobilized americans for war.
or you might select how truman reached his decision to use the atomic bomb against japan.
then prepare a short report poster or oral presentation to communicate your conclusions about the leadership style of the president you researched.
chapter 12 america in world war ii 247 the nuremberg trials 1945 1946 the liberation of concentration camps in europe revealed millions of dead along with half starved survivors.
with the full extent of nazi brutality revealed the allies put surviving nazi leaders on trial for crimes against humanity in nuremberg germany.
those on trial defended themselves by claiming they had only been following orders.
many were found guilty of committing atrocities and were hanged or imprisoned.
the nuremberg trials demonstrated that individuals are responsible for their actions even in times of war.
german defendants on trial at nuremberg 1945 1946.
acting as an amateur historian read this statement by one of the u s prosecutors at the military trials at nuremberg.
germany became one vast torture chamber.
cries of its victims were heard round the world and brought shudders to civilized people.
i am one who received most atrocity tales with suspicion and doubt.
but the proof here will be so overwhelming that i predict these defendants will only deny personal responsibility.
the elements of the german population which were both decent and courageous were reduced to nothing.
those which were decent but weak were intimidated.
the nazis not only silenced discordant voices they practiced the leadership principle which centralized control of the party over the lives and thoughts of the german people.
this german state is incomprehensible to my people the united states public.
the prosecutor says these nazi leaders did not deserve mercy.
would you have agreed.
explain your answer.
and the division of germany after the war germany was divided into four zones by the u s britain france and the soviet union.
each occupied one zone.
the occupying powers introduced programs explaining the evils of nazi beliefs to the german people.
hitlers attempts to put his racist doctrines into practical effect also played a large role in discrediting racism anti semitism social darwinism eugenics and similar ideas worldwide.
the nazi nightmare showed where these ideas could lead.
this contributed to the later civil rights movement in the united states.
the occupation of japan general macarthur supreme commander of allied forces in the pacific was assigned the task of rebuilding and reforming post war japan.
under his leadership important changes were introduced to make japan less aggressive.
japans overseas empire was taken away and her military leaders were put on trial and punished.
japan renounced the use of nuclear weapons and the waging of war.
chapter 12 america in world war ii 249 chapter study cards.
j a return to a policy of isolationism the origins of world war ii u s refused to become a member of the league of nations passed high tariffs on european goods put quotas on european and asian immigrants and insisted on collecting war debts from britain and france.
exceptions to the policy of isolationism neutrality acts of 1935 1937.
cash and carry policy.
fdr s quarantine speech 1937.
flying tigers.
volunteer american flyers supplying china with war materials.
lend lease act 1941.
atlantic charter 1941.
four freedoms.
rise of fascism in europe.
benito mussolini seized power shortly after wwi.
glorified action obedience to leader and violence.
adolf hitler came to power due to shaky democracy and a rise in unemployment.
fascist leaders sought expansion through use of force.
failure of appeasement.
munich conference attempts to satisfy hitler s demands to avoid war.
germany invades poland in 1939 starting world war ii.
japan invaded manchuria 1931 china 1937 and indochina 1941.
the u s enters the war fighting in world war ii japanese attack on pearl harbor.
u s navy attacked december 7 1941 u s enters war against japan.
germany and italy declare war on u s home front rationing and the sale of war bonds.
victory gardens aided in growing food.
propaganda war role of owl women take a larger role in workforce.
minorities opportunities and obstacles.
internment of japanese americans.
fdr issued executive order 9066.
korematsu v l s.
constitutional issue.
war in europe.
holocaust killing of jews and others.
d day allies invade normandy france.
western allies and soviets invade germany.
war in the pacific.
bataan death march 1942.
navajo code talkers.
u s defeats japanese navy at the battle of midway 1943.
becomes a major turning point in the war.
atomic bombs dropped on japan.
hiroshima and nagasaki bombed.
japan surrenders war comes to an end.
key individuals in world war ii key individuals in wwii continued president franklin roosevelt.
was president during war elected to 4 terms worked closely with british prime minister winston churchill.
president harry truman.
president after fdr dies makes decision to use atomic bombs on japan to end war with japan.
vernon baker.
african american who later received the congressional medal of honor for bravery in 1945.
dwight eisenhower.
supreme commander of d day and allied invasion of europe.
general george marshall.
chief of staff who helped form and equip u s army.
general omar bradley.
commanded an army that landed in normandy invasion.
admiral chester nimitz.
commander the u s pacific fleet commanded u s forces in the battle of midway.
general douglas macarthur.
commander of u s army fighting in the pacific later was in charge of the u s occupation of japan.
general george patton.
commander of u s third army expert in tank warfare.
chapter 12 america in world war ii 251 examine the question.
this question tests your ability to apply outside knowledge to a poster.
you should examine the poster carefully.
then think about who made it and why.
recall what you know.
you should recall that during the war the office of war information owi was in charge of producing posters like this one to promote the war effort at home.
apply what you know.
the best answer is choice a.
choice 3 deals with the creation of japanese internment camps while choices c and d are agencies that were created during the new deal.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
use the map and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
2 the lend lease aid shown on the map was provided to f help the allied powers fight the axis powers g persuade other nations to join the united nations h provide technical assistance to developing nations j persuade other nations to pay their debts to the united states c hist 7 a 3 which was an example of appeasement.
a the u s neutrality acts of 1935 and 1937 hist 7 a b the conquest of poland in 1939 c the entry of the united states into world war ii in 1941 d the agreement of britain and france to give germany the sudetenland in 1938 4 which most accurately characterizes the policy followed by the united states in the years between world war i and world war ii.
f isolation from european military conflicts i hist 4 f j g containment of communism h active membership in the league of nations j military alliances with france and great britain i have returned many times to honor the valiant men who died serving me.
every man who set foot in normandy was a hero this was most likely said by a chester nimitz c b omar bradley d john j pershing douglas macarthur hist 7 f project without permission name chapter 12 america in world war ii 253 12 in 1939 president franklin d roosevelt exercised leadership when he responded to the start of world war ii in europe by f asking congress for a declaration of war hist 7 b g selling military supplies to the allied nations h urging continued appeasement of aggressor nations j attempting to negotiate a peaceful settlement of the hostilities use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
i also ask this congress for authority and for funds sufficient to manufacture additional munitions and war supplies to be turned over to those nations which are now at war with aggressor nations.
our most useful and immediate role is to act as an arsenal for them as well as for ourselves.
they do not need man power.
they do need billions of dollars of weapons for defense.
the time is near when they will not be able to pay for them in cash.
we cannot and we will not tell them that they must surrender merely because of their inability to pay for that which we know they must have president franklin d roosevelt annual message to congress january 6 1941 13 which program was president roosevelt proposing in this speech.
a the new deal c cash and carry hist 7 8 b neutrality act d lend lease 14 victory gardens were used by americans during world war ii as a way to f ensure adequate supplies of scarce natural resources i hist 7 6 g increase the number of exports h raise more food for home consumption j provide markets for american made products use the information and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
1 japan attacks pearl harbor.
2 office of war information created 3 germany invades poland 4 allies invade europe on d day 15 which sequence of these world war ii events is in the correct chronological order.
a 1 2 3 4 c 3 1 2 4 i hist 7 e b 2 3 44 1 d 4 wl w3 w2 16 what was an immediate effect of the bombing of hiroshima and nagasaki in japan.
f the outbreak of world war ii in asia i hist 7 d j g official entry of the united states into the war against japan h the surrender of japan to the united states j soviet troops left germany name chapter 12 america in world war ii 255 22 what did president trumans decision to use atomic weapons against cities in japan in world war ii show about his leadership.
f it illustrated his need to prove he was as tough as joseph stalin.
hist 7 b g it confirmed his fear of diverting u s forces from europe.
h it showed his desire to end the war while limiting the loss of u s lives.
j it confirmed that he was interested in punishing the japanese people.
use the posters and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question 23 these two posters were created during world war ii to encourage women in america to a serve in the armed forces b buy war bonds c exercise their vote d contribute to the war effort by working econ 17 a 24 which statement best explains why the u s mainland suffered little physical damage in world war ii.
f the policy of isolationism discouraged foreign attacks.
hist 7 g g latin america provided a buffer zone from acts of aggression by others.
h geographic isolation still kept america protected from most of the fighting.
j u s military fortifications prevented attacks on u s soil.
use the illustration and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
25 this card issued by the u s government was intended to a help the auto industry b provide military aid to european nations c increase the use of gasoline d conserve key resources in wartime econ 17 a me me ok me we me me me me wot but but mit but obit but mit mit uhfteo states of america of m fmwswmi qfi qlint ration card n.
6445685 form ofa jvwt b 3 wcotavci ano u fh3s cass conswsjn an that m wjl ob m w wus ano r g yi ati ns mwm as sv m of ja a h a t ornce js ft w.
c h ib styts 4 afoyl.
sat10n reao mstricto s revrs smc of this caro 26 president franklin d roosevelt spoke these words yesterday december 7 1941 a date which shall live in infamy to describe the f german invasion of poland th st 7 a g surprise attack on pearl harbor h d day invasion at normandy j atomic bombing of hiroshima name america in the cold war and civil rights years history 2 d explain the significance of the following years as turning points 1957 sputnik launch ignites u s soviet space race.
history 8 a describe u s responses to soviet aggression after world war ii including the truman doctrine the marshall plan the north atlantic treaty organization and the berlin airlift.
history 8 b describe how cold war tensions were intensified by the arms race the space race mccarthyism and the house un american activities committee kj huac the findings of which were confirmed by the venona papers.
history 8 c explain reasons and outcomes for u s involvement in the korean war and its relationship to the containment policy.
history 9 a trace the historical development of the civil rights movement in the 19th 20th and 21st centuries including the 19th amendments.
history 9 c identify the roles of significant leaders who supported various rights movements including martin luther king jr and rosa parks.
history 9 e discuss the impact of the writings of martin luther king jr such as his i have a dream speech and letter from a birmingham jail on the civil rights movement.
history 9 f describe presidential actions and congressional votes to address minority rights in the u s including desegregation of the armed forces civil rights acts of 1957 and 1964.
history 9 g describe the roles of individuals such as governors george wallace orval faubus and lester maddox and groups including the congressional bloc of southern democrats that sought to maintain the status quo.
history 9 h evaluate changes and events in the united states that have resulted from the civil rights movement including increased participation of minorities in the political process.
history 9 1 describe how litigation such as the landmark case of brown v board of education and sweatt v painter played a role in protecting the rights of the minority during the civil rights movement.
geography 12 b identify and explain reasons for changes in political boundaries such as those resulting from statehood and international conflicts.
economics 17 b identify the causes of prosperity in the 1950s including the baby boom and the impact of the gi bill servicemen s readjustment act of 1944 and the effects of prosperity in the 1950s such as increased consumption and the growth of agriculture and business.
economics 17 d identify actions of government and the private sector such as affirmative action to create economic opportunities for citizens and analyze the unintended consequences government 21 a analyze the effects of landmark u s supreme court decisions including brown v board of education and other supreme court decisions such as plessy v ferguson.
citizenship 23 a identify and analyze methods of expanding the right to participate in the democratic process including lobbying non violent protesting litigation and amendments to the u s constitution.
citizenship 24 b evaluate the contributions of significant political and social leaders in the united states such as thurgood marshall and billy graham science technology and society 27 b explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in medicine including vaccines.
in this chapter you will leam about the united states in the post war years.
americans became engaged in a global struggle to stop the spread of communism.
at home the 1950s saw the birth of the civil rights movement.
african americans used the courts to end racial segregation in public schools and other public places.
257 name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 259 continued m in 1963 king and others led a march on washington where he delivered his i have a dream speech.
this led to the civil rights act of 1964 making it illegal for hotels restaurants and other business to practice racial discrimination.
n african americans faced hostility in the south sometimes leading to violence.
governors george wallace lester maddox and orval faubus and the southern democrats in congress all opposed desegregation.
presidential actions and congressional legislation sought to address minority rights in the united states.
affirmative action programs required companies and institutions doing business with the federal government to actively recruit minority candidates.
key terms and people in this chapter cold war house un american thurgood marshall iron curtain activities committee martin luther king jr truman poctrine rosenberg trial rosa parks marshall plan venonapapers orval faubus lerlin airlift mccarthyism lester maddox containment policy jonas salk george wallace mao zedong civil rights movement civil rights acts korean war plessy k ferguson affirmative action sputnik rown v poard of education bsiiy graham y ess ential questions why did the united states and soviet union enter into the cold war.
why did the cold war last so long.
how did civil rights leaders change american society.
r although the united states and the soviet union had been allies during world war ii these two superpowers soon became rivals in the cold war.
this war was cold only in the sense that because of nuclear weapons the two superpowers never confronted each other directly in open warfare.
however their global competition led to frequent conflicts on every continent.
name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years the cold war begins after the war the soviets saw a growing threat from capitalist governments.
stalin wanted to insure the safety of the soviet union and greatly distrusted the west which had delayed invading france until 1944.
he decided to create a wall of satellite countries as a buffer against any future invasions.
as a result stalin refused to allow free elections in poland.
he had no intention of losing control over the country through which germany had invaded russia twice in the previous 30 years.
the united states also refused to share the secrets behind the atomic bomb.
the cold war now began in earnest.
soviet troops continued to occupy eastern europe.
they placed local communists in power in all the governments of eastern europe.
trade and contact between eastern and western europe was cut off.
an iron curtain fell over eastern europe closing it off from the west.
over the next forty years travel and communication between the east and west remained limited.
eastern european nations became satellites of the soviet union.
j sqviet satellites 1946 hungary v k a 261 adridtio sea albania mediterranean sea yugoslavia soviet union r 0 mile is 200 j romania black sea b bulgaria.
aegean jaji sea applying what you have learned llbbbil lllllllii speaking on a visit to missouri winston churchill told americans in 1946 that from stettin in the baltic to trieste in the adriatic an iron curtain has descended across the continent what did churchill mean by the phrase iron curtain.
american leaders responded to the soviet domination of eastern europe by developing a policy of containment.
under this policy they did not attempt to overturn communism where it already existed but they resolved to prevent it from spreading further.
when communist rebels threatened greece and stalin pressured turkey truman decided to offer these countries military aid.
he felt it was important not to make the same mistake as the appeasers in munich who failed to stand up to hitler in 1938.
name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 263 a divided germany and the berlin airlift 1948 in 1948 the french british and americans decided to merge their zones of occupation into a single state west germany.
berlin the old capital of germany was located in the soviet zone.
it had also been divided into four sectors each occupied by a different power.
the soviets reacted to the merging of the western zones by announcing a blockade of west berlin closing all highway and railroad links to the west.
the western allies refused to abandon west berlin.
they began a massive airlift to feed and supply the city.
within a year stalin lifted the soviet blockade.
the united states had met another test of the cold war.
the united states and its allies had shown that they would not retreat when faced with aggressive behavior by the soviet union.
the division of germany ijsisa asst applying what you have learned bbibi imagine you are working in the u s state department in the late 1940s.
prepare a position paper for president truman on the marshall plan or the berlin airlift.
specify the position you wish the president to take and support your position with reasons facts and evidence.
the formation of nato and the warsaw pact in response to cold war tensions the united states canada and ten western european countries formed the north atlantic treaty organization in 1949.
nato was based on the concept of collective security each nato member pledged to defend every other member if attacked.
through nato the united states extended its umbrella of protection from nuclear weapons to western europe.
the soviet union responded by creating the warsaw pact with its eastern european satellites in 1955.
members of nato and the warsaw pact s w h members of nato o members of warsaw pact name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 265 vp learning with graphic organizers w complete the graphic organizer below describing some of the events of the early cold war.
soviet vs american systems the truman doctrine the marshall plan roots of the cold war 1 the berlin airlift the formation of nato communist victory in china name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 267 when president truman refused his ideas macarthur criticized truman to a congressman who reported this to the news media.
faced with public criticism from a commander in the field truman relieved macarthur from his command.
truman believed this step was necessary to reassert civilian control over the military although the step was unpopular at the time.
map 1 a north koreans attack june 25 1950 b north koreans advance sept 1950 c u n landing at inchon sept 15 1950 d u n advance october 27 1950 map 2 e chinese advance nov 1950 f chinese advance jan 1951 g armistice line july 27 1953 in 1952 dwight eisenhower the former commander of allied forces invading western europe on d day was elected president.
a republican ike as he was popularly called pledged he would end the war if elected.
an armistice was signed between the united states and north korea in 1953.
the agreement provided for a demilitarized zone between north and south korea and a transfer of prisoners of war.
the armistice left korea divided exactly as it had been before the north korean invasion.
general harrison jr left table signs the armistice ending the korean war.
applying what yun learned write an essay on the reasons for the conflict in korea and its relationship to trumans containment policy.
pretend you are an editorial writer for a newspaper.
write an editorial about trumans controversy with macarthur.
your editorial should give your opinion on whether truman did the right thing in relieving macarthur of his command.
make your own hand drawn map of europe and asia.
indicate the main areas that became scenes of conflict during the early years of the cold war.
name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 269 as the cold war grew more intense americans became more concerned with their own internal security.
the house un american activities committee following world war ii americans feared a possible communist menace inside the united states.
president truman ordered the establishment of loyalty review boards to investigate individual un american activities such as participation in the american communist party.
many americans were accused of un american actions on very little evidence.
these victims were often unable to defend themselves or even to know who had accused them.
the process violated their constitutional rights.
congress decided to conduct its own loyalty checks through its special house un american activities committee.
this committee questioned actors directors writers and others about their possible communist sympathies.
those identified as present or former members of the communist party were frequently blacklisted and lost their jobs.
some like alger hiss were later prosecuted for perjury.
those who cooperated with the committee were often asked to inform on others.
the rosenberg trials in 1950 julius and ethel rosenberg were charged with selling national secrets to the soviet union about making the atomic bomb.
the rosenbergs were found guilty and executed for spying.
like the sacco and vanzetti case in the 1920s many americans doubted the rosenbergs guilt.
however in 1997 the national security agency released the venona papers.
this was a secret effort by the united states to gather and decode messages sent in the 1940s by soviet military intelligence agents.
the venona papers revealed the identities of several americans who had spied for the soviet union including julius rosenberg.
it showed that some soviet agents had in fact penetrated american government science and industry during the cold war.
the mccarthy hearings the fall of china increased fears of internal subversion.
in 1950 senator joseph mccarthy shocked americans by claiming that he knew the names of hundreds of communists who had infiltrated the u s state department and other government agencies.
like the red scare of the 1920s mccarthys allegations created fears of a communist conspiracy.
after three years of hearings mccarthy never provided any real proof for his charges.
he was censured formally criticized by the senate.
although mccarthy never proved any of his claims his witchhunt frightened many americans.
the term mccarthyism has become identified with making harsh accusations without evidence.
name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 271 president eisenhower gave control of foreign policy to his secretary of state john foster dulles a devoted anticommunist.
dulles sought to contain the spread of communism by preventing the soviets from gaining additional influence.
in 1957 eisenhower announced he would send u s forces to any middle eastern nation that requested help in defending against communism.
this extension of the containment policy became known as the eisenhower doctrine.
the united states also signed a series of treaties around the world to contain communism.
president dwight eisenhower the 1950s were a period of recovery and economic growth.
millions of veterans returned home from world war ii.
they benefited from special benefits for war veterans including low mortgage rates and educational grants.
people whose lives had been disrupted by the great depression and the war could now turn their attentions to work and raising families.
as in the 1920s products for consumers such as automobiles refrigerators washing machines and televisions helped stimulate economic growth.
eisenhower signed the interstate highway act 1956 which created a system of federal highways.
americans were not just producing for themselves but also for the rest of the world which was still recovering from wartime destruction.
because of the cold war defense spending remained high.
one result of this increased spending was a wave of prosperity and the growth of the middle class.
housing boom.
this was a time of high birth rates known as the baby boom.
this boom and the 6 1.
bill servicemen s readjustment act of 1944 helping veterans led developers to build cheaper mass produced housing.
home ownership increased by 50.
the movement of middle income families to the suburbs led to a declining urban tax base and decaying inner cities.
domestic developments during the eisenhower presidency economic prosperity.
the demand for consumer goods reached all time highs.
millions of autos and tv sets were sold.
the use of refrigerators and other appliances became widespread.
the gross domestic product doubled between 1945 and 1960.
america dominated world trade.
conformity.
in the 1950s there was a greater emphasis on conformity.
unusualideas were regarded with suspicion.
fear of communism strengthened the dislike of non conformist attitudes.
1 name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 273 at the end of the civil war the united states had held out the promise of equality to americans of all races but this promise was cut short in the aftermath of reconstruction.
many americans felt that the treatment received by african americans was inconsistent with the ideals of the declaration of independence and the constitution.
indeed it seemed ironic for america to pose as the defender of freedom and democracy around the world while denying equality to many of its citizens at home.
the truman years 1945 1953 in 1947 jackie robinson became the first african american baseball player to cross the color line and join the major leagues.
the same year the truman administration issued a report to secure these rights calling for civil rights laws.
the following year truman proposed civil rights legislation to congress that did not pass.
when he was re elected truman demanded his inauguration be integrated.
in 1948 he also issued executive orders to desegregate the armed forces and end discriminatory hiring practices in the federal government.
these orders set precedents for later civil rights legislation.
jackie robinson civil rights were won in large part through litigation resolving disputes in court.
the supreme courts decision in brown r board ofeducaton was central to the success of the civil rights movement.
background after reconstruction southern states passed laws requiring the segregation of races in public places including public schools.
in plessy v ferguson 1896 the u s supreme court had upheld the constitutionality of these state segregation laws.
the court had ruled that the separate but equal standard was constitutional.
states could provide segregated facilities to different races so long as they were equal in quality.
although schools were supposed to be equal most schools in the south were greatly inferior to white ones.
starting in the 1930s naacp lawyers began challenging this separate but equal doctrine through the american court system.
in sweatt v painter 1950 the naacp won a case involving the right of herman sweatt an african american to attend the law school at the university of texas at austin.
texas argued that its constitution prohibited integrated education.
texas even created a separate law school for african americans just to keep sweatt out.
the u s supreme court ruled that this separate school failed to qualify as separate but equal since differences in its facilities such as the isolation of its students from future lawyers being trained in austin with whom its students would later interact.
name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 275 in a subsequent ruling the court held that desegregation in public schools should be conducted with all deliberate speed enforcement of the decision was left to the lower federal courts which were to oversee that local school districts complied with the order.
because the phrase with all deliberate speed was vague many states were able to delay the courts order to desegregate their schools.
it would take many more years before the brown decision was fully implemented.
the supreme court had overturned legal racial segregation in the public schools but this still left other segregation laws known as jim crow laws in place throughout the south.
these laws prevented african americans from sharing beaches theaters restaurants water fountains or public buses with whites.
the montgomery bus boycott 1955 1956 in december 1955 rosa parks an african american seamstress and local naacp member refused to surrender her bus seat to a white passenger in montgomery alabama.
when parks was arrested for refusing to give up her seat local african american leaders began a boycott of the citys public buses.
dr martin luther king jr 1929 1968 a pastor in montgomery was the leader of the boycott.
the boycott lasted 13 months and brought rosa parks dr king and their cause before the attention of the world.
king rallied the boycotters at meetings in his church.
they car pooled to take each other to work.
king himself was arrested and his home was bombed but the boycott lasted and the case was eventually taken to federal court.
the court ruled that segregation on the buses operated by the city of montgomery violated the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment.
the boycott had shown that african americans could unite successfully to oppose segregation.
rosa parks rides in the front of the bus in defiance of segregation laws.
civil rights act of 1957 in 1957 the eisenhower administration passed the civil rights act to increase african american voting in the south.
the act created the civil rights commission and established a civil rights division in the u s justice department.
the law gave federal courts the power to register african american voters.
registration procedures were so complex the act proved ineffective but it helped set the pattern for later civil rights legislation.
little rock arkansas 1957 most southern states delayed putting the brown decision into effect.
governor orval faubus of arkansas was a world war ii veteran and a liberal democrat who favored segregation.
name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 277 congressional bloc of southern democrats throughout the 1950s and 1960s southern democrats in congress banded together to obstruct attempts to pass federal civil rights legislation.
many of these southern legislators held important committee chairmanships which gave them the power to prevent such legislation from even coming to the floor of congress for a vote.
sit ins and freedom rides in the south 1960 1961 in 1960 african american students held a sit in at a whites only lunch counter in north carolina.
the tactic was soon copied by other students throughout the south.
in 1961 interracial groups rode buses in freedom rides in the south.
as a result of these protests downtown stores finally agreed to desegregate lunch coun ters and hire african american workers.
the african american college students sitting down freedom riders sought to overturn racial seg at the whites only lunch counter.
regation on public transportation.
they created confrontations so that the federal government would be forced to intervene.
these riders often faced the risk of violence and even death from those who opposed integration.
king s letter from a birmingham jail 1963 dr martin luther king jr emerged in the late 1950s as the leader of the civil rights movement.
like thoreau and gandhi before him king believed in non violence that passive resistance to unjust laws could change the attitudes of oppressors.
during the 1950s and 1960s king achieved international fame for carrying out resistance to injustice through civil disobedience.
king believed that if the government passed an unjust law people should oppose it with non violent tactics such as peaceful marches boycotts picketing and demonstrations.
when dr martin luther king led a march in birmingham alabama he was arrested.
television then revealed to the nation the brutal tactics often used by the police to break up peaceful demonstrations.
dr king wrote a letter from a birmingham jail explaining the reasons why african americans could no longer patiently wait for their constitutional rights.
his critics felt that the fight against racial segregation should take place in the courts and not in the street.
king argued that civil disobedience was justified not only because it was effective but because everyone has a moral dr king in the birmingham city jail.
responsibility to disobey unjust laws name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 279 civil rights act of 1964 on the plane ride back to washington d c vice president lyndon b johnson was immediately sworn in as president.
a texan johnson had been the democratic leader in the senate in 1957 and had helped to steer the civil rights act of 1957 through congress.
with the lobbying efforts of civil rights supporters president johnson was now able to push an even more important bill through congress.
the southern democratic bloc tried to stop the bill with ceaseless speeches but they were prevented by a vote of two thirds of the senate.
the resulting civil rights act of 1964 prohibited discrimination based on race color religion or ethnic origin in hotels restaurants and all places of employment doing business with the federal government or engaged in interstate commerce.
the act cut off federal aid to school districts with segregated schools.
finally the act gave the federal government the power to register voters and to establish the equal employment opportunity commission to enforce the acts provisions.
what this meant was that all businesses involved in interstate commerce could no longer discriminate.
the struggle to achieve voting rights after passage of the civil rights act of 1964 civil rights leaders turned their energies to registering african american voters and encouraging them to vote.
twenty fourth amendment 1964 eliminated poll taxes in federal elections.
the road to equal voting rights f selma marches.
in 1965 dr king went to selma alabama to organize a march demanding the vote for african americans.
when demonstrators were attacked president johnson reacted by introducing a voting rights bill.
voting rights act of 1965.
this act ended poll taxes suspended literacy tests where they were used to prevent african americans from voting and led to a substantial increase in the number of african american voters.
affirmative action 1965 in 1965 president johnson signed an executive order requiring employers with federal contracts to take positive steps to raise the number of their minority employees to correct past imbalances.
later women were added.
this went beyond not discriminating companies and institutions were now required to actively recruit minority candidates.
affirmative action programs increased minority representation in colleges the professions and many businesses.
the act had some unintended consequences.
some critics challenged these programs as a form of reverse discrimination.
in regents of university of california v bakke the u s supreme court upheld affirmative action but not the use of racial quotas.
many affirmative action programs have been phased out over time as america has become a more pluralistic society.
name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 281 s jsbsafrftoom wijj affirmative action name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 283 dr martin luther king jr other important individuals major beliefs of dr king.
belief in non violent civil disobedience.
modeled his actions after those of thoreau and gandhi.
montgomery bus boycott 1955.
ended segregated buses in montgomery.
raised rosa parks to national prominence.
letter from a birmingham jail.
king explained why african americans could no longer wait for equality.
march on washington 1963.
delivered his i have a dream speech.
eventually led to passage of the civil rights act of 1964.
george marshall.
army chief of staff to fdr secretary of state to truman creator of the i marshall plan.
douglas macarthur.
led u s forces in i pacific and korea dispute with truman over nuclear weapons led to his dismissal.
1 joseph mccarthy.
held hearings on commu i nists he said infiltrated u s government.
thurgood marshall.
naacp attorney was i first african american on supreme court.
j rosa parks.
montgomery bus boycott.
j southern governors resisting integration i george wallace orval faubus and lester maddox.
i chapter 13 concept map name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 285 use the information in the cartoon and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
3 which event of 1948 1949 is illustrated by the cartoon.
a the berlin airlift b the collapse of the berlin wall c the reunification of germany d the allied invasion of germany f hist 8 a 4 what was confirmed by the publication of the venona papers.
f thousands of american citizens who believed in communism hist 8 b j were jailed or deported.
g the reputations of many people were ruined by false accusations of disloyalty.
h some americans in government and industry had in fact been helping the soviet union.
j organized groups of communists had been responsible for violent terrorism.
5 the successful launching of sputnik by the soviet union in 1957 sparked a the cold war with the united states hist 8 b b soviet aggression in eastern europe c disarmament discussions between the superpowers d american fears that the soviets had achieved technological superiority 6 the term mccarthyism is sometimes used to describe f removing members of congress for abuses of power y hist 8 a j g investigating civil service employees for corruption h using illegal means to obtain evidence in criminal trials j accusing people of subversive activities without sufficient evidence 7 immediately after world war ii the relationship between the united states and the soviet union became strained because a the united states used military force in korea j b the united states blocked the soviet union from joining the united nations c each country believed that the other one was a threat to its security d both nations were competing for supremacy in space exploration 8 which civil rights leader also became the first african american to serve on the u s supreme court.
du bois citi 24 b g martin luther king jr h thurgood marshall j rosa parks name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years use the information in the map and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
15 which statement accurately describes the trend of african american voter registration in the map.
a the voting rights act had little impact on voter registration in the south.
b voter registration increased in the south after the voting rights act passed.
c fewer african americans registered to vote.
d passage of the voting rights act ended racial discrimination in the south.
c hist 9 f 287 percent of african americans registered to vote before and after the voting rights act 16 during the cold war the united states and the soviet union f broke all diplomatic ties hist 8 a g refused to trade with each other h formed competing military alliances j clashed over control of the mediterranean sea 17 the primary goal of southern democrats in congress was to a end the practice of racial segregation in the south f hist 9 6 b maintain the status quo in the south c litigate for equal rights for all races in the south d integrate the public schools throughout the south use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
and when this happens when we allow freedom to ring when we let it ring from every village and every hamlet from every state and every city yes we will be able to speed up that day when all of gods children black men and white men jews and gentiles protestants and catholics will be able to join hands and sing in the words of the old negro spiritual free at last.
free at last.
thank god almighty we are free at last 18 which statement best summarizes the message of this passage.
f freedom of religion is our most precious freedom.
q hist 9 c g some groups are better than others.
h equality and respect for others will benefit all americans.
j african americans should lead the civil rights movement.
name the sixties a decade of protest and change history 2 d explain the significance of the following years as turning points 1968 1969 martin luther king jr assassination and u s lands on the moon.
history 6 a analyze causes and effects of events and social issues such as race relations and the changing role of women.
history 7 g explain the opportunities and obstacles for women and ethnic minorities.
history 8 a describe u s responses to soviet aggression after world war ii including john f kennedy s role in the cuban missile crisis.
history 8 d explain reasons and outcomes for u s involvement in foreign countries and their relationship to the domino theory including the vietnam war.
history 8 e analyze the major issues and events of the vietnam war such as the tet offensive the escalation of forces vietnamization and the fall of saigon.
history 8 f describe the responses to the vietnam war such as the draft the 26th amendment the role of the media the credibility gap the silent majority and the anti war movement.
history 9 b describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights including ones from chicano american indian women s and other civil rights movements.
history 9 c identify the roles of significant leaders who supported various rights movements including cesar chavez hector p garcia and betty friedan.
history 9 d compare and contrast the approach taken by some civil rights groups such as the black panthers with the nonviolent approach of martin luther king jr history 9 f describe presidential actions and congressional votes to address minority rights in the united states including the civil rights acts of 1957 and 1964 and the voting rights act of 1965.
history 9 1 describe how litigation such as the landmark cases of mendez v westminster hernandez v texas delgado v bastrop i s d and edgewood i s d.
v kirby played a role in protecting the rights of the minority during the civil rights movement.
economics 17 d identify actions of government and the private sector such as the great society affirmative action and title ix to create economic opportunities for citizens and analyze the unintended consequences of each.
government 19 b explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events including the 1960s.
government 20 a describe the impact of events such as the gulf of tonkin resolution and the war powers act on the relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government.
government 21 a analyze the effects of landmark u s supreme court decisions including u s supreme court decisions such as hernandez v texas wisconsin v yoder and white v regester.
citizenship 23 a identify and analyze methods of expanding the right to participate in the democratic process including lobbying non violent protesting litigation and amendments to the u s constitution.
citizenship 23 b evaluate various means of achieving equality of political rights including the 24th and 26th amendment citizenship 24 b evaluate the contributions of significant political leaders in the united states such as barry goldwater h continued j covered in chapter 14 289 name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 291 important ideas continued g mexican americans also struggled for equal rights.
chicano wall murals celebrated their culture.
organizers like cesar chavez and dolores huerta fought for the rights of migrant farm workers most of whom were mexican americans.
hector perez garcia fought discrimination against mexican americans.
h a series of various court cases ended the segregation of mexican american children in public schools and the exclusion of mexican americans from juries.
i american indians organized the american indian movement or aim.
young people in the sixties sought greater personal freedom.
the right to vote to all citizens over 18 years old was given by the twenty sixth amendment.
k in 1954 vietnam in southeast asia was divided in two north vietnam came under communist control while south vietnam had the support of the west.
when south vietnamese leaders decided to oppose elections to re unify the country the vietcong launched a guerilla war to win control of the country.
l after congress passed the gulf of tonkin resolution 1964 president johnson sent in thousands of u s ground troops.
even so the vietcong were able to launch attacks on south vietnamese cities during the tet offensive 1968.
m in the u s the war became very divisive.
the anti war movement staged demonstrations throughout the country.
president richard nixon elected in 1968 escalated the war.
he bombed the north and began a policy of vietnamization to give the south vietnamese a larger stake in the war.
the u s signed an agreement with north vietnam withdrawing its forces from vietnam.
fighting continued until the fall of saigon in 1975 when vietnam was re united under communist rule.
n in the 1960s american youths challenged the conforming behavior of their parents.
the beat poets and writers like allen ginsberg and jack kerouac were forerunners of this new counter culture.
john f kennedy black power movement white k kegester johnclenn black panthers vietnam war pay of pigs invasion chicano movement pomino theory coban missile crisis hector carcia coif of tonkin resolution lyndon b johnson cesar chavez vietnamization creat society polores horerta roy benavidez barry coldwater am.
indian movement tet offensive anti war movement mendez m westminister credibility cap feminist movement hernandez k texas silent majority betty friedan pelgado v pastrop isp fall of saigon title ix edgewood isp v kirby beat ceneration name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 293 space exploration has led to advances in technology that have improved the quality of our lives.
for example as a result of space exploration we now have satellites with improved television and radio signals.
these satellites help us communicate faster predict the weather and forecast impending tsunamis cyclones hurricanes and tornadoes.
they also allow us to make telephone calls overseas and to use gps global positioning systems.
the space program also has led to the invention of high performance solar cells new lubricants infrared ear thermometers enriched baby food cordless power tools and tempur pedic foam for mattresses and pillows like truman and eisenhower president kennedy staunchly opposed communism and pledged to contain it.
one of the greatest challenges kennedy faced was in cuba only 90 miles from florida.
in 1959 while eisenhower was president fidel castro led an uprising to overthrow the brutal cuban dictator general batista.
at first americans looked at castros revolution as an attempt to introduce democracy into cuba.
however shortly after taking power castro made new agreements with the soviet union.
president eisenhower reduced the amount of sugar cuba could sell to the united states and castro nationalized american businesses in cuba.
then he announced his plans to make cuba a pro soviet communist nation.
land holding was limited and opponents were thrown in jail.
fidel castro bay of pigs invasion 1961 president eisenhower approved a plan to overthrow castro.
this included secretly training a group of cuban exiles in the united states and guatemala to invade the island.
when kennedy became president he let the plan continue but he refused to provide air power which would openly tie the invasion to the united states.
the exiles landed in cuba three months after kennedy took office but were quickly defeated by the cuban military.
this was an embarrassing foreign policy failure for president kennedy.
sbiii applying what you have learned if you had been president during the invasion at the bay of pigs would you have used u s airpower to overthrow castro.
explain your answer.
alliance for progress 1961 to meet the communist challenge kennedy created a program of grants and loans to latin american nations to promote economic progress land reform and trade.
name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 295 acting as an amateur.
historian on october 22 1962 president kennedy spoke to the nation this secret and extraordinary buildup of communist missiles in an area known to have a special relationship to the united states and the nations of the western hemisphere in violation of soviet assurances and in defiance of american and hemispheric policy this decision to station weapons for the first time outside of soviet soil is an unjustified change in the status quo which cannot be accepted by this country in your opinion did president kennedy choose the right course of action during the cuban missile crisis.
explain your answer.
president kennedy reiterated his commitment to resisting communism when he visited west berlin in 1963.
he told its citizens ich bin ein berliner i am a berliner reassuring west germans of the u s commitment to their safety and freedom.
the nation was shocked when kennedy was assassinated in dallas on november 22 1963.
vice president lyndon b johnson became the next president.
the great society soon after becoming president johnson proposed the most far ranging program of social legislation since the new deal.
johnson proposed federal legislation designed to transform american society.
johnsons goal was to turn the nation into a great society by opening up opportunities and improving the quality of life for all americans.
his great society programs included equality of opportunity enrichment of urban life restoration of natural beauty expansion of education ending poverty health care for the elderly and greater racial equality.
civil rights.
as you learned in chapter 13 johnson pushed through a broad program of civil rights legislation including the civil rights art 1964 and the voting rights art 1965.
he also introduced affirmative action.
war on poverty.
johnson called for a war on poverty.
the economic opportunity act 1964 created a new government office to administer programs established by the act.
these included the job corps to train underprivileged youths and a domestic peace corps to help in depressed areas.
johnson s great society programs 1 medicare act of 1965.
social security was expanded to provide medical care hospital insurance and post hospital nursing for people over age 65.
aid to cities.
a new cabinet post was created to help the nation s cities.
money was provided for urban planning slum clearance rental assistance for the poor and the reconstruction of buildings.
name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 297 applying what you have learned half century later poverty in america is still an important problem.
was president johnson too optimistic in believing that poverty could be reduced or even eliminated by federal programs.
explain your answer.
learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing some of the key events of the kennedy and johnson presidencies.
the space race bay of pigs invasion cuban missile crisis berlin wall the great society election of 1964 name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 299 acting as an amateur historian in her book friedan challenged the belief that all women were content leading lives as mothers and housewives each suburban wife struggles with it alone.
as she made the beds shopped for groceries matched slipcover material ate peanut butter sandwiches with her children chauffeured cub scouts and brownies and lay beside her husband at night she was afraid to ask even of herself the silent question is this all some criticized betty friedan for limiting her focus to middle class educated women.
they claimed she ignored other womens voices.
do you think this was a valid criticism.
explain your answer.
achievements of the women s liberation movement feminist goals were far reaching.
women sought greater freedom and a fuller social and economic life.
as a result of affirmative action universities receiving federal support could no longer discriminate on the basis of sex in their admissions policy.
most colleges became co educational and hired women professors.
in fact they had to hire more women faculty quickly because most professors were males.
greater gender equality was also achieved in admissions to military academies law schools and medical schools.
employment.
feminists sought to end discrimination in hiring to establish equal job opportunities for women and to place women in positions of greater responsibility.
in 1963 congress passed the equal pay act requiring companies to pay women the same wages as men for the same work.
new attitudes.
feminists objected to beauty contests and introduced the title ms to replace miss and mrs they opposed sexist language policeman and fireman the use of women as sex objects in advertising or the idea that men cannot do housework.
womens leaders opposed sexual discrimination in textbooks that ignored womens contributions.
they lobbied for more funds to research womens diseases like breast cancer.
name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 301 learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing some of the key developments of the womens liberation movement.
betty friedan new attitudes name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 303 the ghettos erupt 1968 in the north african americans often faced segregation based on residential living patterns rather than on state laws.
homeowners in middle class white communities often refused to sell their homes to african americans.
many african americans were confined to ethnic communities known as ghettos in decaying inner cities.
landlords often failed to maintain their buildings and city officials cut back on inspections.
african american frustration erupted in a series of riots that shook northern cities three summers in a row.
in april 1968 dr martin luther king was assassinated by a white supremacist in memphis tennessee.
kings assassination led to an outpouring of anger among young african americans as well as a period of national mourning.
kings death sparked race riots across the nation that cost dozens of lives destroyed property and led to hundreds of millions of dollars in damage.
rioters smashed windows overturned cars and started fires.
a commission investigating the causes of the unrest found that the lack of job opportunities for african americans urban poverty and cities like detroit erupted in riots following the assassination of dr king.
white racism were the chief factors behind the riots.
the riots showed that there was still work to be done to eliminate racism and introduce equality of opportunity in america.
acting as an amateur.
historian research the views of dr martin luther king jr malcolm x and leaders of the black panthers such as huey newton and bobby seale.
then make your own chart comparing and contrasting these divergent points of view.
psychologists have given various explanations for the political violence that followed kings assassination.
they have pointed to rising expectations african americans had expected more rapid change economic deprivation and general frustration.
do you think any of these reasons can explain the violence.
if not what do you think were the main causes of the rioting.
like african americans mexican americans also known as chicanos had often faced discrimination racism and exploitation in the united states.
in the 1960s a chicano movement emerged its main focus was on such issues as farm workers voting and political rights.
name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change murals soon became an important artistic medium to support identity and justice in mexican american communities.
wall murals provided a visual presence to people who often lacked representation in public life with few voices on city councils or school boards.
in el paso alone more than a hundred chicano wall murals were completed.
these murals show taiano legends and heroes like cesar chavez.
305 an example of a wall mural in el paso texas.
american indians also grew restless in the 1960s.
back in 1953 the federal government had transferred its responsibility for those american indians still living on reservations to state governments.
lacking sufficient funds many states were unable to provide the same level of services previously provided by the federal government.
the new policy turned out to be largely a failure.
in 1963 the federal government reversed its policy and began encouraging tribal life on the reservations.
the civil rights act of 1964 prohibited discrimination against native americans.
in 1970 president nixon announced the federal government would honor its treaty obligations.
nevertheless many american indians still felt they were being mistreated.
under the slogan red power they formed the american indian movement to mobilize public opinion in their favor.
american indians sought greater respect for their heritage.
they introduced the term native american and protested against textbooks television shows and movies that showed anti american indian bias.
they dramatized the plight of american indians by temporarily occupying government monuments on alcatraz island and at wounded knee south dakota.
applying what you have learned create a chart comparing the roles of various political organizations that supported civil rights in this period.
for example you might compare the national organization of women the united farm workers and aim.
name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 307 a not only legislation the passage of new laws like the civil rights act of 1964 but also litigation disputes settled by courts has played a key role in the expansion of civil rights for minority groups in the united states.
this is clear not only from the supreme courts decision in brown v board of education you can see this case in the last chapter but also from a series of cases in which courts ruled on mexican american rights.
how does a court rule on a case.
it is important to recall just how courts in the united states work.
a case involving a federal law or right can be brought before a federal district court.
the court listens to the witnesses and arguments for each side.
then it applies the law to the facts of the case.
the law consists of any laws passed by the state legislature or congress prior court precedents and requirements of the u s constitution.
the room where cases are heard before the supreme court.
appealing a decision the losing side may appeal the decision to a u s court of appeals.
the twelve courts of appeal are organized by region and each region is known as a circuit.
finally the side that loses in the u s court of appeals can appeal the decision to the u s supreme court.
in a typical year approximately 10 000 cases are appealed to the supreme court.
however the supreme court only accepts about 100 cases each year.
the cases the supreme court decides to hear usually involve important questions about the u s constitution or federal law.
f t t if a mendez v westminster school district 1947 in 1945 some places in california sent mexican american children to separate public schools.
several mexican american parents challenged this practice in u s district court.
the district court ruled that this practice violated the fourteenth amendment which guarantees citizens the right to the equal protection of the laws.
westminster school district appealed to the u s court of appeals.
the latter concluded that the case did not involve a constitutional question.
california law at the time required the segregation of chinese or japanese children but did not include segregation of school children because of their mexican blood the court held that separation within a race was not permitted if not required by a specific state law.
the court thus did not need to rule on the fourteenth amendment.
later that year california repealed its school segregation laws.
name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 311 at the same time south vietnam was far from a democracy.
its president was a dictator who was opposed by vietnams buddhists.
in 1963 he was overthrown and murdered in a coup.
president elsenhower had suggested that the fall of french indochina might create a domino effect.
according to this domino theory if south vietnam fell to communism neighboring southeast asian countries would also fall to communism like a row of dominos.
after taking vietnam cambodia and laos communists would threaten thailand to the west and the strait of malacca to the south.
resisting the communists in vietnam might prevent this collapse.
the domino theory greatly affected president kennedys thinking.
responding to requests from the south vietnamese government for help kennedy sent aid and u s military advisers to assist south vietnam in fighting the vietcong.
kennedy also felt that a successful democracy in south vietnam might serve as a model for other developing countries in asia africa and latin america.
under president johnson the united states became even more deeply involved in vietnam.
gulf of tonkin resolution 1964 in 1964 johnson announced that the north vietnamese had attacked u s ships in international waters in the gulf of tonkin.
congress voted to give johnson full military powers to stop north vietnams aggression.
years later it was revealed that the u s ships had actually been in north vietnamese waters in cooperation with south vietnamese warships that were bombing north vietnam.
johnson escalates the war although congress had not officially declared war president johnson used the gulf of tonkin resolution to escalate increase the war.
name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 313 the difficulties of guerilla warfare most american soldiers were unfamiliar with the vietnamese language people or physical environment.
american forces were unable to tell who was friendly and who was the enemy.
the jungles of vietnam provided an ideal cover for guerilla warfare and secret enemy movements.
vietnams location made it easy for communists to send a steady flow of supplies through neighboring countries.
growing discontent the anti war movement the media newspapers radio television had a great influence in shaping public opinion.
it was the first time american audiences could watch the destructiveness of the war on their television sets while sitting at home.
president johnson told americans they were winning the war but journalists reported otherwise.
this created a credibility gap many americans lost faith in their governments reliability.
nowhere was this discontent more evident than among young americans who objected to the countrys involvement in protesters burn their draft cards to show their opposition to the war.
mass anti war movements occurred throughout the country from 1965 onwards.
young people burned their draft cards marched on the pentagon held rallies and staged demonstrations.
by 1968 millions of young people were actively protesting the war.
the anti war movement greatly influenced u s military policy.
american doves wanted the united states to withdraw since they saw the contest as a civil war between the north and south vietnamese.
they believed american leaders were acting immorally by bombing civilians and burning villages.
the hawks supported the war which they saw as an attempt to defend free vietnamese from communist repression.
division among democrats over the war the assassination of robert f kennedy younger brother of president kennedy and violence at the democratic national convention in chicago in 1968 led to the election of republican richard nixon as president.
during the campaign nixon a staunch anti communist promised americans peace with honor in vietnam.
however the war dragged on for five more years under nixon.
during these years nixon aided by henry kissinger adopted a complex approach in vietnam consisting of vietnamization increased bombing and diplomacy.
name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 315 vietnam battles japanese invaders france is forced out of vietnam the u s sends 16 000 advisers to vietnam 500 000 u s troops sent to fight in vietnam anti war protestors march on washington u s withdraws from vietnam v v v 7 7 1940 1954 1963 1967 1971 1973 by 1975 what remained of the south vietnamese army was incapable of preventing the advance of the north vietnamese.
in april 1975 saigon finally fell to north vietnamese forces.
the fall of saigon today called ho chi minh city marked the end of the vietnam war.
south vietnamese government officials military officers and soldiers who had supported the american presence in vietnam were sent to communist re education camps where they faced torture disease and malnutrition.
learned have your class stage a debate resolved americas leaders made a mistake in engaging in the war in vietnam.
appoint teams for and against the resolution.
or pretend to be having a debate between hawks and doves in 1969.
the war in vietnam had many important effects death and destruction.
over 58 000 americans died and many others suffered physical and psychological injuries.
over a million vietnamese were killed while many more were left homeless.
impact of the war on the u s and abroad.
wartime expenses led to the end of some great society programs and brought rising inflation.
the war demonstrated that government actions can be greatly affected by public opinion.
it also led to a crisis of american self confidence.
next to the civil war the vietnam war was the most divisive war in u s history.
as a result americans became more aware of the limits of u s power and cautious about where they should act abroad.
limits on presidential power.
in both korea and vietnam presidents had sent american troops into extended combat without first obtaining a declaration of war from congress.
in 1973 congress attempted to re claim its constitutional powers by passing over nixons veto the war powers resolution.
this set limits on presidential power in a conflict without a formal declaration of war by congress.
the act requires the president to inform congress within 48 hours of sending troops to fight overseas.
if within 60 days the congress does not approve of the use of these overseas forces the president must withdraw them.
name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 317 american literature has been marked by movements of varying styles and directions.
some of the best writing just after world war ii dealt with the war experience itself including such works as norman mailers the naked and the dead 1948 describing the capture of an island from the japanese and james jones from here to eternity 1951 showing army life in hawaii up to the pearl harbor attack.
allen ginsberg in the 1950s the beat generation rebelled against the conformity of their era.
this movement began with a small and tightly connected group of young writers who were college students together in new york city and later most moved to san francisco.
they showed a care free often reckless and fresh approach to literature.
two of the founders of the movement allen ginsberg and jack kerouac began giving public readings of their works in the mid 1950s.
they became even more well known after gins bergs best known poem howl 1955 was seized for obscenity.
the beats opposed the conventions of the 1950s and saw the solution to the lifeless materialism of the fifties in the heightened sense of freedom and spirituality in their own works.
kerouacs novel on the road tells the story of the narrators adventures crossing the country in a car several times with a character named dean moriarty.
kerouacs theme was the experience of life itself.
the beats experimented with both sexuality and drugs.
from the name beat a newspaper columnist coined the term beatnik which became associated with artistic lifestyles in the 1950s in which young men wore beards berets and sandals while young women dressed in leotards.
they recited poetry and discussed european philosophy.
the beatniks represented an early form of what would later become known as the counter culture.
by the 1960s the counter culture was in full swing.
two late world war ii novels joseph hellers catch 22 1961 and kurt vonneguts slaughterhouse five 1969 challenged mainstream thinking by exposing the absurdity of armed conflict.
mailer became a critic of the vietnam war as shown in his novel why are we in vietnam.
1967 and also wrote books on anti war protests such as armies of the night 1968.
in the 1960s literature also became much more open in its treatment of human consciousness and sexuality as demonstrated by the novels and short stories of philip roth including goodbye columbus 1959 and portnoys complaint 1969.
in a much later work american pastoral 1997 roth dealt with coming to terms with the middle class radicalism of the 1960s.
name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 319 the kennedy and johnson presidencies the sixties a decade of change president john f kennedy 1961 1963.
space race sent john glenn into space.
alliance for progress peace corps.
bay of pigs invasion 1961.
cuban missile crisis 1962.
president lyndon b johnson 1963 1968.
proposed the great society.
civil rights act of 1964.
medicare act of 1965.
war on poverty and aid to the cities.
instituted changes in immigration policy.
involvement in vietnam war.
space race.
armstrong and aldrin land on moon 1969.
new lifestyles.
impact of music beatles.
challenged materialism establishment.
birth of anti war movement.
youth objected to vietnam war.
influenced u s policy.
twenty sixth amendment.
lowered the voting age from 21 to 18.
women s liberation movement.
objected to traditional roles of women.
focus gain economic and social equality.
betty friedan the feminine mystique.
promoted gender equality in high school and college education.
rising ethnic dissent among minorities african american militancy.
ghettos erupted with assassination of dr king in 1968.
a commission looked into cause of unrest and found a lack of job opportunities.
black power movement.
one leader was malcolm x.
sought african american control of their own communities to free themselves from domination of white culture.
emergence of black panthers.
rising ethnic dissent among minorities chicano movement.
mexican americans.
sought to correct past discrimination and racism against mexican americans.
leaders of movement hector garcia.
challenged discrimination.
cesar chavez organized farm workers using non violent methods.
american indian movement aim.
red power raise respect for indians.
occupation of alcatraz wounded knee.
the battle for racial equality in the courts vietnam war 1954 1973 mendez v westminister school district.
no segregation of mexican american children without specific state law.
hernandez v texas 1954.
mexican americans cannot be systematically excluded in practice from juries.
delgado v bastrop isd 1948.
segregation of mexican american children in schools in texas is illegal.
edgewood isd v kirby 1984.
state must revise its school funding system.
vietcong with north vietnamese support attacked south vietnamese government.
u s intervened to stop fall of a row of dominoes to communism.
highlights.
gulf of tonkin resolution 1964.
tet offensive 1968.
fall of saigon 1975.
large number of u s casualties.
distrust of american leaders.
led to passing war powers resolution.
name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 321 examine the question.
this question tests your ability to identify the purpose behind the three legislative acts shown on the chart.
you should read each act and its description carefully.
recall what you know.
you should recall that all three of these acts were part of johnsons great society programs.
apply what you know.
the best answer is choice 13.
all three of these great society programs were focused on the goal of eliminating either poverty or discrimination in america.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 during the 1940s and 1950s the primary goal of mexican american litigation was to f eliminate the legal segregation of mexican americans y hist 9 i g form a new nation for mexican americans h create separate mexican american economic and social institutions j establish affirmative action programs to compensate for past wrongs use the statement and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
t he war against poverty will not be won here in washington.
it must be won in the field in every private home in every public office from the courthouse to the white house president lyndon b johnson state of the union address january 8 1964 3 this statement expresses president lyndon b johnsons belief that the a federal government is solely responsible for the war on poverty i econ 17 d j b court system must be held accountable for poverty c problem of poverty is easily solved d entire country must help in the struggle against poverty 4 the court decisions in delgado v bastrop isd and hernandez v texas held that f racially segregated schools are inherently unequal c histep j g a student has no guaranteed rights while in a public school h a students right to privacy is limited under certain conditions j mexican americans were entitled to protection from discrimination under the fourteenth amendment 5 the movements led by dr martin luther king jr and ceasar chavez were similar in that both a supported attempts to overthrow the established government hist 9 c b used civil disobedience to bring about social change c boycotted agricultural crops d were elected to national political office name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change use the graph and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question 11 which action led to the changes shown in the bar graph.
a passage of the civil rights act of 1964 b the passage of title ix of the education amendments act c the introduction of head start programs d an increase in the number of nonpublic schools econ 17 d 323 12 the united states began a trade embargo against cuba in the 1960s to f encourage political change in cuba c hjst 8 a j g promote domestic industries in cuba h motivate cubans to immigrate to the united states j end the domination of the sugar industry by cuba use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
we choose to go to the moon in this decade and do the other things not because they are easy but because they are hard because that goal will serve to organize and measure the best of our energies and skills because that challenge is one that we are willing to accept one we are unwilling to postpone and one which we intend to win and the others too president john f kennedy speech at rice university september 12 1962 13 the main purpose of this speech was to win public support for a establishing a missile defense system on the moon i sts 28 bj b cooperating with communist countries in exploring space c surpassing the soviet union in the space race d controlling the spread of nuclear weapons 14 what was the main objective of the american indian movements occupation of alcatraz island and wounded knee.
f to draw attention to their conditions hist 9 b g to obtain the right to vote h to reclaim lost lands j to protest the vietnam war name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 325 use the table and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question median earnings of men and women in the united states 1960 1990 year women men women s earnings as a percent of men s earnings gap in constant 1990 dollars 1960 3 257 5 368 60 7 8 569 1970 5 323 8 966 59 4 11 529 1980 11 612 18 612 60 2 11 776 1990 19 822 27 678 71 6 7 856 19 the data in the chart shows that between 1960 and 1990 a womens earnings compared to mens remained unchanged c hist 7 g b most higher paying jobs were still not legally open to women c the government passed laws that successfully gave women equal jobs d the earnings gap between men and women only slightly improved 20 what has been an impact of the chicano mural movement on american society.
f it has raised fears of increased bias against mexican americans.
k cult 25 b g it brought about alarm of another culture influencing the united states.
h it led people to a heightened appreciation of mexican american culture.
j it expanded the constitutional rights of most mexican americans.
21 which best summarizes the main reason why the united states became involved in the vietnam war.
a to prevent the spread of communism in indochina i hist 8 d b to reduce french influence in vietnam c to stop communist china from annexing vietnam d to support the government of north vietnam 22 according to the domino theory if south vietnam fell to communism then f neighboring countries would soon follow t hist 8 d g large numbers of refugees would seek u s entry h anti communist forces would win it back j the united nations would be forced to intervene 23 what was president john f kennedys response to soviet plans to install nuclear missiles in cuba in 1962.
a he attacked the missile silos with strategic air strikes.
hist 8 a b he had the army seize control of cuba.
c he placed a blockade around cuba and threatened war.
d he negotiated an agreement with fidel castro.
name crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 history 10 a describe richard m nixon s leadership in the normalization of relations with china and the policy of detente.
history 10 b describe ronald reagan s leadership in domestic and international policies including reaganomics and peace through strength.
history 10 c compare the impact of energy on the american way of life over time.
history 10 d describe u s involvement in the middle east such as support for israel the camp david accords the iran contra affair marines in lebanon and the iran hostage crisis.
history 10 e describe the causes and key organizations and individuals of the conservative resurgence of the 1980s and 1990s including phyllis schlafly the contract with america the heritage foundation the moral majority and the national rifle association.
history 10 f describe significant societal issues of this time period.
history 11 a describe u s involvement in world affairs including the end of the cold war the persian gulf war and the balkans crisis.
history 11 b identify significant social and political advocacy organizations leaders and issues across the political spectrum.
geography 13 a analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from migration within the united states including the rust belt to the sun belt.
geography 14 b identify the roles of governmental entities and private citizens in managing the environment such as the environmental protection agency epa and the endangered species act.
economics 17 c describe the economic impact of defense spending on the business cycle and education priorities from 1945 to the 1990s.
economics 17 e describe the dynamic relationship between u s international trade policies and the u s free enterprise system such as the organization of petroleum exporting countries opec oil embargo the general agreement of tariffs and trade gatt and the north american free trade agreement nafta.
economics 18 a discuss the role of american entrepreneurs such as bill gates sam walton estee lauder robert johnson lionel sosa and millions of small business entrepreneurs who achieved the american dream.
government 19 c describe the effects of political scandals watergate and bill clinton s impeachment on the views of u s citizens concerning trust in the federal government and its leaders.
government 19 d discuss the role of contemporary government legislation in the private and public sectors such as the community reinvestment act of 1977.
government 19 e evaluate the pros and cons of u s participation in international organizations and treaties.
government 21 a analyze the effects of landmark u s supreme court decisions including tinker v des moines and wisconsin v yoder.
citizenship 24 b evaluate the contributions of significant political and social leaders in the united states such as sandra day o connor and hillary clinton.
327 chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 329 important ideas continued j.
with the reagan doctrine president reagan announced he would not just contain communism but try to roll it back.
he sent u s forces to grenada and provided anti communist rebels in nicaragua and afghanistan with funds.
k reagan introduced the strategic defense initiative star wars a research program to protect america from nuclear attack by the soviet union.
l iran contra affair officials sold weapons to iran to free hostages the proceeds helped to supply contras in nicaragua despite a congressional ban.
m president george h w.
bush continued reagans policies.
the cold war ended during his presidency.
bush sent troops into panama kuwait and somalia.
n president bill clinton attempted to enact a comprehensive health care reform but failed to do so.
reduced defense spending after the cold war coupled with a rise in the computer industry made the 1990s a time of general prosperity.
o impeachment charges were brought against president clinton for lying about an affair he had with a white house intern.
attempts to convict him of these charges failed in the senate.
clinton was able to successfully push nafta through congress and saw the creation of the world trade organization.
p a talented and hard working group of diverse entrepreneurs including bill gates sam walton estee lauder robert johnson and lionel sosa helped the american economy.
key terms and people in this chapter richard nixon iran hostage crisis moral majority tinker v pes moines newt gingrich iran contra affair wisconsin k yoder ronald reagan contract with america phyllis schlafly sun pelt george h w lush environmental peace through strength rust pelt protection act epa star wars persian gulf war endangered species reaganomics lill clinton act reagan poctrine impeachment petente sandra pay o connor hillary clinton watergate scandal catt wto lill gates gerald ford nafta sam walton opec national rifle estee lauder jimmy carter association nra robert johnson camp pavid accords heritage foundation lionel sosa chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 331 first amendment rights.
during nixons presidency the supreme court continued to protect first amendment rights.
in tinker r des moines 1969 john tinker and his sister were suspended from school for wearing black armbands to protest the vietnam war.
the supreme court ruled that this violated the students first amendment rights and that students have the right to wear armbands to protest the war.
in wisconsin r yoder 1972 the u s supreme court struck down a wisconsin state law that required amish children to attend school beyond grade 8.
the court found that this state law violated the parents freedom of religion since the states secondary education conflicted with amish values and beliefs and was contrary to their way of life.
the 1970s saw rising prices a new trade deficit and rising unemployment.
to combat inflation nixon cut spending on social programs and took america off the gold standard.
when these measures did not work he imposed the first peacetime wage and price controls.
all of these attempts to control inflation proved unsuccessful.
the environmental protection agency epa president nixon signed a law that created the environmental protection agency or epa to protect the environment.
the epa sets air and water pollution standards for cities and engages in monitoring and enforcement activities.
new construction projects must pass through detailed environmental impact reviews before being approved.
private citizens can file lawsuits against polluters under the epa.
nixon also signed the endangered species act 1973.
this law requires the fish and wildlife service to list species of plants and animals that are threatened with extinction and then to take further steps to protect them.
the equal rights amendment era in 1923 alice paul a suffragist leader and founder of the national womans party proposed the equal rights amendment equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of sex for almost fifty years the amendment was introduced in each session of congress but it failed to pass.
in 1972 the amendment was finally approved by congress and sent to the states with a seven year time limit for ratification.
the deadline was extended to 1982 but the amendments still fell three states short of the support needed for ratification.
it has been reintroduced into every congress since that time.
one outspoken critic of the womens liberation movement was phyllis schlafly.
her book attacking liberal republicans was used by goldwater supporters in his 1964 presidential campaign.
schlafly also campaigned against the equal rights amendment which she believed would reduce the rights of wives and harm family life.
schlafly further claimed it would deprive women of the right to be supported and protected by men.
for example schlafly believed the amendment might lead to unisex restrooms and require women to serve in combat roles.
name chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 333 meanwhile in 1972 a group of former cia agents working for nixons re election as president were caught breaking into democratic party headquarters at the watergate complex in washington d c.
this would soon lead to an even greater scandal than agnews resignation.
the cover up president nixon tried to cover up an investigation of the watergate break in on the grounds that it involved national security.
two investigative reporters were the first to report possible links between the break in and the white house.
the senate appointed a committee to investigate the incident.
the attorney general also appointed a special prosecutor to examine possible wrongdoing.
the watergate tapes in the senate hearings a presidential aide stated that nixon had participated in the cover up.
next it was revealed that nixon had secretly recorded all of his own white house conversations.
when the senate committee asked to listen to the tapes nixon refused claiming executive privilege.
nixon asserted that congress had no authority to question members of the executive branch about internal communications advising the president without presidential approval.
in the case of united states v nixon 1974 nixon further contended that if he obeyed the district court order to turn over the tape recordings it would lead to judicial control of the presidency violating the separation of powers in the constitution.
when the case was appealed to the u s supreme court it ruled that nixon must turn over the tapes reaffirming the principle that no one is above the law.
woodward r and bernstein won a pulitzer for their investigative reporting in the case.
instead of the tapes nixon offered up transcripts of the conversations.
nixon resigns when the tapes were made public they revealed that nixon had in fact lied when he said he was not involved in the cover up.
based on this and other allegations the house of representatives moved to impeach nixon.
fearing removal from office by the u s senate nixon became the first president to resign.
nixon leaves the white house for the last time.
chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 335 acting as an amateur historian ford later said he intended to spare mr nixon and the nation from further turmoil as a result of the watergate scandals.
in his autobiography he wrote i simply was not convinced that the country wanted to see an ex president behind bars.
we are not a vengeful people forgiveness is one of the roots of the american tradition.
and nixon in my opinion had already suffered enormously.
but i wasnt motivated by concern over the state of his health.
it was the state of the countrys health at home and around the world that worried me do you think president ford was truthful when said he was more concerned with the health of the country than that of nixon.
explain your answer.
do you think president ford in pardoning nixon did the right thing.
explain your answer.
continuing stagflation once in office fords main worries were economic ones.
economists had always believed that inflation rising prices accompanied economic growth and full employment not recession this was because when most workers had jobs they would ask to raise their wages when consumers were actively buying goods manufacturers would tend to raise their prices.
but now americans suffered from stagflation high unemployment combined with inflation.
the organization of petroleum exporting countries opec had been formed by oil producing countries in 1960.
most opec members were arab countries.
in 1973 the arab nations of opec used oil as a political weapon by imposing an oil embargo on the united states and western european for siding with israel in the 1973 war.
overnight the price of oil shot up.
even when the war ended the members of opec continued to push oil prices higher to enrich their own economies.
the higher cost of energy had a significant impact on the american economy from the cost of heating a home to the prices of food electricity and gasoline.
member nations of opec member nations of opec drivers line up to buy gas during the embargo.
name chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 337 many banks excluded people in low income neighborhoods from loans and other financial services.
this practice was sometimes known as redlining because it was possible to draw a red line on a map clearly delineating these neighborhoods.
the practice especially affected minorities.
carter pushed through congress the community reinvestment act 1977 which required banks to make credit available in poor communities preventing the decay of low income neighborhoods in inner cities.
foreign policy in foreign policy carter wanted the united states to set a moral example for other nations.
carter made human rights a high priority he condemned apartheid in south africa pressured the soviet union to allow its jews to emigrate and cut aid to dictatorships that violated human rights.
the panama canal treaty 1977 carter wanted to set an example by having the united states act fairly in its dealings with panama.
he signed a treaty returning control of all of the canal zone except for the canal itself to panama.
the united states further agreed to turn over the canal to panama by the end of the century.
camp david accords 1977 israel had been established as a homeland for the jewish people by the united nations in 1948 in the aftermath of the holocaust.
many jews had already been living in the area but there were also many palestinian arabs.
truman had strongly supported the creation of israel and ever since 1948 u s policy had been generally supportive of israel a pro western democracy in the middle east.
u s israeli relations were also influenced by the strong support of american jews for israel.
israel relied on u s economic and military aid for its survival.
egypt and israel had fought one another in a series of wars ever since the creation of israel back in 1948.
in 1977 president carter invited anwar sadat the president of egypt and menachem begin the prime minister of israel to the presidential retreat at camp david in maryland.
after face to face negotiations an agreement between the two leaders was reached.
under the camp david accords israel agreed to return the sinai peninsula to egypt which israel had taken in the six day war in 1967.
in exchange egypt offered a peace treaty and the establishment of normal diplomatic relations with israel ending thirty years of warfare.
israel and the palestinian authority today name chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 339 learning with graphic organizers the 1970s were a time of crisis and achievement for american presidents.
complete the balance sheet below by describing some of the problems and accomplishments of the nixon ford and carter presidencies.
balance sheet on the presidency 1969 1978 o o o accomplishments problems crises openinq of rod china.
waterqate scandal.
a l i m vrt detente with soviets.
stagflation.
panama canal treaty.
fall of saigon.
camp david accords.
tran hostaqe crisis.
name chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 341 reagan supporter charlton heston later became president of the nra.
after the problems faced by recent presidents conservative beliefs suddenly enjoyed an unexpected resurgence in the united states in the 1980s.
in great britain margaret thatcher had come into office in 1979 with similar ideas combating unions reducing taxes cutting government spending and reducing the amount of government regulations.
in the 1980 presidential election ronald reagan received the support of a number of leading american conservative groups national rifle association the nra was begun to promote rifle shooting and marksmanship skills.
after the assassinations of president kennedy his brother robert and dr martin luther king jr congress enacted the gun control act of 1968.
the nra had traditionally steered clear of politics but now it became more political.
most of its members tended to be politically conservative.
in the 1980 election the nra endorsed ronald reagan marking the first time in its history the nra supported a presidential candidate.
jerry falwell the moral majority another highly influential conservative group that helped elect reagan was the moral majority mainly composed of fundamentalist christians.
begun in 1979 by evangelist rev.
jerry falwell the moral majority favored a strict interpretation of the bible and an agenda that was socially conservative and anti communist.
the group also opposed the equal rights amendment.
the moral majority made telephone calls and held rallies to help get ronald reagan elected as president.
the group was dissolved in 1989 when falwell announced that our mission is accomplished.
heritage foundation many of reagan s policies were strongly influenced by the heritage foundation a think tank based in washington d c.
the heritage foundation seeks to promote conservative policies based on the principles of free enterprise limited government individual freedom values and a strong national defense.
it provides an example of a non profit lobbying group that attempts to influence legislators on various bills.
z name chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 343 immigration policy.
president reagan introduced new changes to our immigration laws.
to deal with the problem of illegal immigration the mazzoli simpson act 1986 legalized illegal aliens who had lived continuously in the united states since 1981.
sandra day o connor.
in 1981 president reagan nominated sandra day oconnor as the first woman justice on the u s supreme court.
bom in el paso texas she studied in california before moving to arizona.
oconnor had served as arizonas assistant attorney general state senator and a superior court judge.
during her early years on the u s supreme court she was a conservative who preferred judicial restraint she emerged in the late 1990s as a swing vote between the conservative and liberal groups on the court.
projected population changes 1980 2000 until the 1970s most americans lived in the northeast and midwest with its hot summers and cold winters.
the southeast was considered too hot and humid in summers while the west was too dry and remote.
a number of technological developments altered this situation.
government built dams made more water available to western cities.
with rising oil prices more americans preferred mild winters over frigid and snowy ones.
lastly air conditioning and hydro electric power made it possible to keep homes offices and factories cool in the summer.
hi population decline growth of 0 5 growth of j growth of 28 50 growth over 50 as a result the west and south known as the sun belt saw a sharp rise in their populations.
since the 1960s when air conditioning first came in wider use the northeast and midwest have increased in population just 27 while the south and west have grown more than four times as much.
california and texas have become the nation s largest states while urban regions like atlanta and las vegas are the nation s fastest growing urban centers.
as the population density of cities in the sun belt grew the environment of the area changed.
shopping malls and factories sprang up in place of grasslands mountains and deserts.
cities demanded more scarce supplies of water and energy which sometimes had to be brought from great distances placing a greater burden on the environment.
ne chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 345 the iran contra affair the iran contra affair arose out of a secret foreign policy operation by officials in the reagan white house.
in 1986 officials in the reagan administration acted against the policy of refusing to negotiate with terrorists by secretly selling arms to iran as part of a deal in exchange for the release of american hostages in lebanon.
profits from the sales of the arms to iran were then diverted to support the anti communist contra rebels fighting the communist government of nicaragua.
this was done even though congress had specifically prohibited any u s aid to the contras.
when the affair was revealed it shocked the nation since the reagan administration had denounced iran as a supporter of global terrorism.
an investigation cleared the president of any direct wrong doing although he had failed to monitor the actions of some of his top officials.
several officials were convicted of lying to congress and sent to prison.
the iran contra affair greatly tarnished americas credibility in the world.
after the watergate scandal it led many citizens to seriously question their trust in their government officials.
nevertheless president reagan continued to enjoy strong support among many members of the american public.
reagans second term witnessed the triumph of democracy in many parts of the world.
in the philippines and latin america dictatorships and military governments were suddenly replaced by democratically elected civilian governments.
the final years of the reagan presidency saw the beginnings of the end of the cold war.
early in his presidency reagan had called the soviet union an evil empire mikhail gorbachev became head of the soviet communist party in 1985.
the failure of the soviet economic and political system forced gorbachev to introduce reforms inside the soviet union.
gorbachev also agreed to withdraw soviet troops from afghanistan and to allow peaceful changes to take place in eastern europe.
reagan and gorbachev then held a series of conferences and even signed an agreement dismantling thousands of nuclear missiles.
historians hold conflicting views on reagans role in winding down the cold war.
his critics contend that reagan was an accidental beneficiary of gorbachevs reforms and that he does not deserve credit for winning the cold war.
reagans supporters believe he played an essential role in this process.
they point to reagans forthright defense of freedom and democracy his policy of roll back and the threat of the star wars program all of which placed so much economic and military pressure on soviet leaders that they felt compelled to reform their system.
reagan speaks at the berlin wall in germany.
chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 347 the next president george h w.
bush had served two terms as reagans vice president.
bush promised to continue reagans policies but with greater compassion in dealing with the homeless and the poor.
he also promised to improve education and fight drug use.
bushs previous experience had mainly been in foreign policy but he faced several important challenges at home.
his greatest domestic challenge was to reduce the growing budget deficit.
events in eastern europe and the soviet union permitted cuts in military spending.
in late 1990 bush agreed to increase income taxes on the wealthy but he was never able to make a significant reduction in the budget deficit.
the impact of defense spending on the u s economy.
experts disagree on the impact that military spending can have on a countrys economy.
it can provide a shortterm stimulus pushing the nation through the business cycle from recession to prosperity.
for example military expenditures in world war ii helped achieve full employment after the great depression.
on the other hand military spending can divert or crowd out resources from other more productive uses and may thus slow long term economic growth.
heavy military spending can mean less investment in peacetime projects higher budget deficits and more borrowing or higher taxes.
less money will be available for example for education.
when president johnson increased american involvement in vietnam he thus had to cut back on many great society programs.
supreme court appointments.
president bush made several appointments to the supreme court leading to a conservative majority on the court.
the new supreme court toughened the rules for criminal defendants reduced the scope of abortion rights and introduced other important changes.
the recession.
the united states gradually moved back into a recession by 1990.
economists blamed the economic downturn on reduced spending by consumers corporations and federal and state governments.
in addition greater foreign competition led to less demand for some american products.
this resulted in lay offs in several key industries.
while the 1970s and 1980s witnessed increases in population in the sunbelt the opposite was true of the rust belt areas of the northeast and midwest with coal and iron resources which had once been the center of american industry.
with the collapse of the u s steel industry cities such as gary indiana detroit michigan and milwaukee wisconsin have suffered a steady loss of manufacturing jobs to mexico and overseas.
name chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 349 president bush declared a cease fire but refused to go further by removing saddam hussein from power.
the crisis was significant as the first major challenge to world order after the end of the cold war.
american prestige in the middle east was greatly enhanced by its success in the war.
bush used americas new stature to initiate peace talks between israel and its arab neighbors in late 1991.
in 1992 president bush began a humanitarian airlift of food and supplies to war tom somalia in northeast africa where millions of people faced starvation.
when local warlords and bandits continued to steal and threaten food shipments bush sent in u s troops in the final month of his presidency.
select one incident or aspect of the domestic or foreign policy of president george h w.
bush and create a graphic organizer describing it in greater detail.
bill clinton came from a poor arkansas background.
he studied as a rhodes scholar in england and attended yale law school where he met his wife hillary clinton.
after law school clinton entered politics.
he was elected governor of arkansas.
the presidential election of 1992 saw clinton successfully unite different groups within the democratic party as well as attract independent voters.
many americans believed bush was not doing enough to fight the recession.
the criticisms of a third party candidate ross perot further weakened bushs authority.
perot received about 20 of the total vote making him one of the most successful third party candidates in history.
president clinton addresses congress.
clinton promised americans an ambitious agenda of reform.
however like many presidents he found difficulty in obtaining congressional support for many of his proposals.
although democrats controlled congress during the first two years of his presidency clinton had difficulty passing his early budgets.
his first budget limited federal spending increased income taxes to 40 on the richest americans cut taxes for low income americans and introduced a federal gasoline tax.
chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 351 acting as an amateur historian the first republican speaker of the house of representatives in 40 years newt gingrich wrote about the contract with america that there is no comparable congressional document in our two hundred year history we intend to restore accountability to congress.
on the first meeting of congress the new republican majority will immediately pass the following reforms aimed at restoring the trust of the american people in their government first require all laws that apply to the country also apply equally to congress second select an independent auditing firm to conduct a comprehensive audit of congress for waste fraud or abuse third cut the number of house committees and cut committee staff by one third fourth limit the terms of all committee chairmen fifth require committee meetings to be open to the public.
sixth require a three fifths majority vote to pass a tax increase which of these do you think was most important.
explain your choice.
it would our current u s congress benefit from a similar contract today.
explain your answer.
united states senate ski r f 4r t f t k eh f a ticket to the clinton impeachment trial.
1 president clinton became the subject of a major scandal in his second term of office in 1999 for the second time in history the senate conducted an impeachment trial of a president.
an independent prosecutor had uncovered a sexual affair between clinton and a white house intern.
after finding that clinton had lied about the affair under oath the prosecutor recommended impeachment.
removing the president from office requires a formal accusation or impeachment by the house of representatives and a trial and conviction by the senate.
impeachment requires a majority vote of the house conviction is more difficult requiring a two thirds vote in the senate.
voting along party lines the republican house of representatives impeached the president.
in the senate the republicans fell short of the required two thirds votes needed to remove the president.
once again americans felt they could not trust their elected leaders.
unlike bush clinton came to the white house with little experience in foreign affairs.
nevertheless some of his greatest successes were in foreign policy.
chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 353 benefits of participation in international organizations global cooperation helps all countries improve their economies and security.
it promotes peace in the nuclear age.
1 participation provides the united states with a place to state its views.
r cooperation in organizations strengthens the relationship of the united states to other members.
international cooperation is required to tackle many global problems such as the environment.
participation helps americans spread their brand of democracy around the world.
costs risks of participation in international organizations participation in international organizations may place voluntary limits on a nation s own sovereignty.
international organizations in volve the united states in problems around the world.
international organizations cost the united states billions of dollars to support.
at first president clinton tried to protect human rights in china by proposing to link u s trade with china to the promotion of democracy and human rights.
he abandoned this policy when it appeared to have no effect on china except hurting u s economic interests.
although clinton continued to press china for human rights reform he separated this demand from trade issues.
in 1999 u s missiles accidentally hit the chinese embassy in yugoslavia.
chinese nationalists suspicious that this incident was no accident marched on the u s embassy in beijing throwing rocks and chanting anti u s slogans.
u s chinese relations suffered a setback but there was no attempt to halt u s chinese trade.
by the end of the year u s officials even helped china join the world trade organization further cementing economic ties.
president clinton s other foreign policy initiatives russia.
both george h w.
bush and bill clinton followed a policy of maintaining friendly relations with russian president boris yeltsin.
israel theclinton administration followed bush s lead in working towards peace between israel and its earlier opponents the plo and jordan.
american and united nations forces were unable to end the fighting between rival war lords in somalia.
president clinton withdrew u s troops when no further progress was in sight.
haitian military leaders threw out jean bertrand aristide a priest who had won u n supervised free elections in 1990.
clinton sent u s troops to haiti resulting in the return of aristide to power in 1994.
clinton airlifted u s troops to the middle east to pressure dictator saddam hussein to withdraw iraqi troops from along the kuwait border.
later he took steps to force hussein to allow u n inspectors to enter iraq to continue their inspections for nuclear and biological weapons.
name chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 355 learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing some of the key developments of the reagan bush and clinton presidencies.
president ronald reagars reaganomics star wars iran contra affair president george h w.
bush persian gulf war end of the cold war americans with disabilities act president bill clinton economic recovery chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 357 chapter15 concept map achieving american dream the clinton presidency the ford presidency 1974 1976 tt 7 the carter presidency the nixon presidency panama canal treaty emergence of renewed conservative movement grew federal deficit the reagan presidency 1981 1989 a reaganomics i deregulation tax cuts iyoi t trade imbalance iran contra a a r reagan d arms doctrine k to iran increased military spending used money for contras war on terrorism nato in the george h w.
bush presidency roll back communism foreign policy invasion of panama end of cold war nafta z international organizations a v j 1 prevent ethnic cleansing u s economy recession rz 6att united nations rust belt could not cut deficit domestic policy x7 raised taxes on wealthy persian gulf war invasion of iraq victory increased u s prestige iilllil x x checking your unperstanping directions put a circle around the letter that best answers the question.
use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
i think it will be a safer world and a better world if we have a strong and healthy united states europe soviet union china japan each balancing the other not playing one against the other an even balance richard nixon 1972 1 president nixon put this idea into practice by a expanding relations with communist nations hist io a b abandoning his policy of detente c declaring an end to the korean war d ending collective security agreements name chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 359 use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
interests in the persian gulf are vital to our national security.
these interests include access to oil and the security of key states in the region.
the united states will defend its vital interests in the area through the use of force if necessary against any power with interests unfriendly to our own.
the united states will support the defense of friendly countries in the area to enable them to play a more active role in their own defense.
the united states will encourage the participation of our allies and other friendly states to promote our mutual interests in the persian gulf region natl security directive u s.
policy in response to the iraqi invasion of kuwait 6 based on the reasoning in this directive why did the united states became involved in the persian gulf war in 1991.
f the united states was forced into the war by its treaty obligations.
g the united states sought to end violations to the rights of the iraqi people.
h the united states sought to remove saddam hussein from power in iraq.
j the united states saw the invasion of kuwait as a threat to its national interests.
7 the north american free trade agreement nafta and the general agreement on trade and tariffs gatt have encouraged countries to a engage in more international trade econ i.
e i b create a uniform international currency c accept similar wage and price controls d regulate multinational corporations from the middle east 8 what did the events of the persian gulf war and the balkan crisis in the 1990s indicate about the foreign policy goals of american leaders.
f they desire greater stability in the middle east.
hist ii a i g they wish to expand trade with middle eastern nations.
h they want to help maintain peace and stop oppression around the world.
j they only act where american access to scarce resources is at stake.
use the information in the boxes and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
reopening of diplomatic relations with communist china introduction of a policy of detente with the soviet union r president clinton orders u s forces to bosnia and kosovo the events shown above illustrate attempts by the united states to a further the interests of peace in the world hist ii a.
b protect its interests in the middle east c deliver humanitarian aid to europe d contain the spread of communism in asia 9 name chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 361 use the graphs and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
united states budgets showing the percentage spent on defense 1940 1990 1940 1950 1960 1990 15 what does the trend shown in these graphs indicate.
a the cold war had a great impact on defense spending.
econ 17 c b the federal government was working to reduce the unfavorable balance of trade.
c increasing benefits to the military would be too expensive for american taxpayers.
d there has been little support for a reduction in defense spending.
16 what is the function of the environmental protection agency epa.
f to develop americas natural resources i geog u b g to reduce air and water pollution and protect the environment h to protect americans from acts of terrorism j to manage the nations parks and forests 17 what has been an important consequence of the invention of air conditioning the construction of federal highways and the building of dams and aqueducts.
a farmers have been unable to irrigate their crops.
geog 13 a b rust belt cities have been able to resume their manufacturing.
c the american population has shifted towards the south and west.
d the u s population has shifted from the south to the midwest.
18 which american entrepreneur helped to develop the software running most computers today.
f lionel sosa aeon is a g bill gates h robert johnson j sandra day oconnor 19 how did president ronald reagan believe he could tackle the problem of stagflation facing the american economy in 1980.
a increasing public spending on education and infrastructure hist io b j b raising the taxes of wealthier americans c reducing taxes and relaxing federal regulations so that producers would create a larger supply of goods d increasing tariffs so that consumers would be encouraged to buy american name america in the new millennium history 2 d explain the significance of the following years as turning points 2001 terrorist attacks on world trade center and the pentagon and 2008 election of the first black president barack obama.
history 10 c compare the impact of energy on the american way of life.
history 10 f describe significant societal issues of this time period.
history 11 a describe u s involvement in world affairs including 9 11 and the global war on terror.
history 11 d analyze the impact of third parties on presidential elections.
history 11 e discuss the historical significance of the 2008 presidential election.
geography 12 a analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the levee failure in new orleans after hurricane katrina.
geography 13 b analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from legal and illegal immigration to the united states.
economics 18 b identify the impact of international events multinational corporations government policies and individuals on the 21st century economy.
government 19 b explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events including 9 11.
government 19 d discuss the role of contemporary government legislation in the private and public sectors such as the usa patriot act of 2001 and the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009.
government 20 b evaluate the impact of relationships among the legislative executive and judicial branches of government including the presidential election of 2000.
culture 25 a describe how the characteristics and issues in u s history have been reflected in various genres of art music and film.
culture 25 c identify the impact of popular american culture on the world over time.
culture 25 d analyze the global diffusion of american culture through the entertainment industry via various media.
culture 26 c explain how the contributions of people of various racial ethnic gender and religious groups shape american culture.
culture 26 d identify the political social and economic contributions of women such as sonia sotomayor and oprah winfrey to american society.
science technology and society 27 a explain the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations such as computers on the economic development of the u s science technology and society 27 b explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture the military and medicine including vaccines.
science technology and society 27 c understand the impact of technological and management innovations and their applications in the workplace and the resulting productivity enhancements for business and labor such as time study analysis robotics computer management and just in time inventory management.
science technology and society 28 a analyze how scientific discoveries technological innovations and the application of these by the free enterprise system including those in transportation and communication improve the standard of living in the united states.
science technology and society 28 c understand how the free enterprise system drives technological innovation and its application in the marketplace such as cell phones inexpensive personal computers and global positioning products.
