chapter 29 wilsonian progressivism at home and abroad 1912 1916 wilsons new freedom by contrast favored small enterprise entrepreneurship and the free functioning of unregulated and unmonopolized markets.
the democrats shunned social welfare proposals and pinned their economic faith on competition on the man on the make as wilson put it.
the keynote of wilsons campaign was not regulation but fragmentation of the big industrial combines chiey by means of vigorous enforcement of the antitrust laws.
the election of 1912 thus offered the voters a choice not merely of policies but of political and economic philosophies a rarity in u s history.
the heat of the campaign cooled a bit when in milwaukee roosevelt was shot in the chest by a fanatic.
the rough rider suspended active campaigning for more than two weeks after delivering with bull moose gameness and a bloody shirt his scheduled speech.
woodrow wilson a minority president former professor wilson won handily with 435 electoral votes and 6 296 547 popular votes.
the thirdparty candidate roosevelt nished second receiving 88 electoral votes and 4 118 571 popular votes.
taft won only 8 electoral votes and 3 486 720 popular votes see map 29 1.
the election gures are fascinating.
wilson with only 41 percent of the popular vote was clearly a minority president though his party won a majority in congress.
his popular total was actually smaller than bryan had amassed in any of his three defeats despite the increase in population.
taft and roosevelt together polled over 1 25 million more votes than the demo wash n h vt d 4 p 7 mont.
d 6 d 5 oregon minn d 8 mass.
p 12 idaho s dak.
d 13 d 3 nebr.
d 13 d 8 calif r 4 ill d 29 colo d 6 kansas d 3 n mex.
d 10 d 3 d 15 ohio n j d 7 d 14 d 3 w va va d 12 d 13 md.
d 8 n c tenn d 12 d 12 s c ark.
d 9 d 9 miss.
d 10 texas conn del.
d 24 ky d 18 okla ind.
p 38 d 8 mo.
d 10 ariz r i d 5 pa iowa utah p 11 d 2 d 45 mich p 15 nev d 3 d 18 n y ala d 12 ga d 14 la.
d 20 d 10 fla d 6 candidate party electoral vote popular vote wilson democrat 82 0 6 296 547 41 9 16 5 4 118 571 27 4 taft republican 1 5 3 486 720 23 2 debs socialist 0 0 900 672 6 0 roosevelt progressive no returns unsettled etc.
map 29 1 presidential election of 1912 showing votes by county with electoral vote by state the republican split surely boosted wilson to victory as he failed to win a clear majority in any state outside the old confederacy.
the election gave the democrats solid control of the white house and both houses of congress for the rst time since the civil war.
interactive map wilson in the white house crats.
progressivism rather than wilson was the runaway winner.
although the democratic total obviously included many conser vatives in the solid south the combined progressive vote for wilson and roosevelt totaling 68 percent far exceeded the tally of the more conser vative taft who got only 23 percent.
to the progressive tally must be added some support for the socialist candidate the persistent eugene v debs who rolled up 900 672 votes 6 percent of the total cast or more than twice as many as he had netted four years earlier.
starry eyed socialists dreamed of being in the white house within eight years.
roosevelts lone wolf course was tragic both for himself and for his former republican associates.
perhaps to rephrase william allen white he had bitten himself and gone mad.
the progressive party which was primarily a one man show had no future because it had elected few candidates to state and local ofces the socialists in contrast elected more than a thousand.
without patronage plums to hand out to faithful workers death by slow starvation was inevitable for the upstart party.
yet the progressives made a tremendous showing for a hastily orga nized third party and helped spur the enactment of many of their pet reforms by the wilsonian democrats.
as for the republicans they were thrust into unaccustomed minority status in congress for the next six years and were frozen out of the white house for eight years.
taft himself had a fruitful old age.
he taught law for eight pleasant years at yale university and in 1921 became chief justice of the supreme court a job for which he was far more happily suited than the presidency.
wilson the idealist in politics thomas woodrow wilson the second democratic president since 1861 looked like the ascetic intellectual he was with his clean cut features pinched on eyeglasses and trim gure.
born in virginia shortly before the civil war and reared in georgia and the carolinas the professor politician was the rst man from one of the seceded southern states to reach the white house since zachary taylor sixty four years earlier.
the impact of dixieland on young tommy wilson was profound.
he sympathized with the confederacys gallant attempt to win its independence a sentiment that partly inspired his ideal of self determination for people of other countries.
steeped in the traditions of jeffersonian democracy he shared jeffersons faith in the masses if they were properly informed.
son of a presbyterian minister wilson was reared in an at mosphere of fervent piety.
he later used the presidential pulpit to preach his inspirational political sermons.
a moving orator wilson could rise on the wings of spiritual power to soaring eloquence.
skillfully using a persuasive voice he relied not on arm waving but on sincerity and moral appeal.
as a lifelong student of nely chiseled words he turned out to be a phraseocrat who coined many noble epigrams.
someone has remarked that he was born halfway between the bible and the dictionary and never strayed far from either.
a profound student of government wilson believed that the chief executive should play a dynamic role.
he was convinced that congress could not function properly unless the president like a kind of prime minister got out in front and provided leadership.
he enjoyed dramatic success both as governor and as president in appealing over the heads of legislators to the sovereign people.
splendid though wilsons intellectual equipment was he suffered from serious defects of personality.
though jovial and witty in private he could be cold and standofsh in public.
incapable of unbending and acting the showman like teddy roosevelt he lacked the common touch.
he loved humanity in the mass rather than the individual in person.
his academic background caused him to feel most at home with scholars although he had to work with politicians.
an austere and somewhat arrogant intellectual he looked down his nose through pince nez glasses upon lesser minds including journalists.
he was especially intolerant of stupid senators whose bungalow minds made him sick wilsons burning idealism especially his desire to reform ever present wickedness drove him forward faster than lesser spirits were willing to go.
his sense of moral righteousness was such that he often found compromise difcult black was black wrong was wrong and one should never compromise with wrong.
president wilsons scottish presbyterian ancestors had passed on to him an inexible stubbornness.
when convinced that he was right the principled wilson would break before he would bend unlike the pragmatic roosevelt.
wilson tackles the tariff few presidents have arrived at the white house with a clearer program than wilsons or one destined to be so chapter 29 wilsonian progressivism at home and abroad 1912 1916 completely achieved.
the new president called for an all out assault on what he called the triple wall of privilege the tariff the banks and the trusts.
he tackled the tariff rst summoning congress into special session in early 1913.
in a precedentshattering move he did not send his presidential message over to the capitol to be read loudly by a bored clerk as had been the custom since jeffersons day.
instead he appeared in person before a joint session of congress and presented his appeal with stunning eloquence and effectiveness.
moved by wilsons aggressive leadership the house swiftly passed the underwood tariff which provided for a substantial reduction of rates.
when a swarm of lobbyists descended on the senate seeking to disembowel the bill wilson promptly issued a combative message to the people urging them to hold their elected representatives in line.
the tactic worked.
the force of public opinion aroused by the presidents oratory secured late in 1913 nal approval of the bill wilson wanted.
the new underwood tariff substantially reduced import fees.
it also was a landmark in tax legislation.
under authority granted by the recently ratied sixteenth amendment congress enacted a graduated income tax beginning with a modest levy on incomes over 3 000 then considerably higher than the average familys income.
by 1917 revenue from the income tax shot ahead of receipts from the tariff.
this gap has since been vastly widened.
wilson battles the bankers woodrow wilson 1856 1924 at princeton commencement with andrew carnegie 1906 before his election to the presidency of the united states in 1912 wilson left served as president of princeton university 1902 1910 and governor of new jersey 1910 1912.
in all three ofces he undertook substantial reforms.
fighting desperately later for the league of nations at the cost of his health wilson said i would rather fail in a cause that i know some day will triumph than to win in a cause that i know some day will fail a second bastion of the triple wall of privilege was the antiquated and inadequate banking and currency system long since outgrown by the republics lusty economic expansion.
the countrys nancial structure still creaking along under the civil war national banking act revealed glaring defects.
its most serious shortcoming as exposed by the panic of 1907 was the inelasticity of the currency.
banking reserves were heavily concentrated in new york and a handful of other large cities and could not be mobilized in times of nancial stress into areas that were badly pinched.
in 1908 congress had authorized an investigation headed by a mossback banker republican senator aldrich.
three years later aldrichs special commission recommended a gigantic bank with numerous branches in effect a third bank of the united states.
for their part democratic banking reformers heeded the ndings of a house committee chaired by congressman arsene pujo which traced the tentacles of the money monster into the hidden vaults of american banking and business.
president wilsons condant progressive minded massachusetts attorney louis d brandeis further fanned the ames of reform with his incendiary though scholarly book other peoples money and how the bankers use it 1914.
in june 1913 in a second dramatic personal appearance before both houses of congress the president delivered a stirring plea for sweeping reform of the banking system.
he ringingly endorsed demo wilsons economic reforms the amount of money in circulation could be swiftly increased as needed for the legitimate requirements of business.
the federal reserve act was a red letter achievement.
it carried the nation with ying banners through the nancial crises of the first world war of 1914 1918.
without it the republics progress toward the modern economic age would have been seriously retarded.
the president tames the trusts reading the death warrant this cartoon appeared in a new york newspaper soon after woodrow wilson called for dramatic reform of the banking system before both houses of congress.
with the money trust of bankers and businessmen cowed wilson was able to win popular and congressional support for the federal reserve act of 1913 cratic proposals for a decentralized bank in government hands as opposed to republican demands for a huge private bank with fteen branches.
again appealing to the sovereign people wilson scored another triumph.
in 1913 he signed the epochal federal reserve act the most important piece of economic legislation between the civil war and the new deal.
the new federal reserve board appointed by the president oversaw a nationwide system of twelve regional reserve districts each with its own central bank.
although these regional banks were actually bankers banks owned by member nancial institutions the nal authority of the federal reserve board guaranteed a substantial mea sure of public control.
the board was also empowered to issue paper money federal reserve notes backed by commercial paper such as promissory notes of businesspeople.
thus without pausing for breath wilson pushed toward the last remaining rampart in the triple wall of privilege the trusts.
early in 1914 he again went before congress in a personal appearance that still carried drama.
nine months and thousands of words later congress responded with the federal trade commission act of 1914.
the new law empowered a presidentially appointed commission to turn a searchlight on industries engaged in interstate commerce such as the meatpackers.
the commissioners were expected to crush monopoly at the source by rooting out unfair trade practices including unlawful competition false advertising mislabeling adulteration and bribery.
the knot of monopoly was further cut by the clayton anti trust act of 1914.
it lengthened the shopworn sherman acts list of business practices that were deemed objectionable including price discrimination and interlocking directorates whereby the same individuals served as directors of supposedly competing rms an end often achieved through holding companies see figure 29 1.
the clayton act also conferred long overdue benets on labor.
conservative courts had unexpectedly voting stock super holding company other stock holds more than 50 of voting stock holding company a holding company b holding company c holds more than 50 of voting stock corp a corp b corp c corp d corp e corp f corp g corp h corp.
i figure 29 1 organization of holding companies keep in mind that the voting stock of a corporation is often only a fraction of the total stock.
chapter 29 wilsonian progressivism at home and abroad 1912 1916 been ruling that trade unions fell under the antimonopoly restraints of the sherman act.
a classic case involved striking hatmakers in danbury connecticut who were assessed triple damages of more than 250 000 which resulted in the loss of their savings and homes.
the clayton act therefore sought to exempt labor and agricultural orga ni zations from antitrust prosecution while explicitly legalizing strikes and peaceful picketing.
union leader samuel gompers hailed the act as the magna carta of labor because it legally lifted human labor out of the category of a commodity or article of commerce but the rejoicing was premature as conservative judges in later years continued to clip the wings of the union movement.
wilsonian progressivism at high tide energetically scaling the triple wall of privilege woodrow wilson had treated the nation to a dazzling demonstration of vigorous presidential leadership.
he proved nearly irresistible in his rst eighteen months in ofce.
for once a political creed was matched by deed as the progressive reformers racked up victory after victory.
standing at the peak of his powers at the head of the progressive forces wilson pressed ahead with further reforms.
the federal farm loan act of 1916 made credit available to farmers at low rates of interest as long demanded by the populists.
the warehouse act of 1916 authorized loans on the security of staple crops another populist idea.
other laws beneted rural america by providing for highway construction and the establishment of agricultural extension work in the state colleges.
sweaty laborers also made gains as the progressive wave foamed forward.
sailors treated brutally from cat o nine tails days onward were given relief by the la follette seamans act of 1915.
it required decent treatment and a living wage on american merchant ships.
one unhappy result of this well intentioned law was the crippling of americas merchant marine as freight rates spiraled upward with the crews wages.
wilson further helped the workers with the workingmens compensation act of 1916 granting assistance to federal civil service employees during periods of disability.
in the same year the president approved an act restricting child labor on products owing into interstate commerce though the stand pat supreme court soon invalidated the law.
railroad workers num bering about 1 7 million were not sidetracked.
the adamson act of 1916 established an eight hour day for all employees on trains in interstate commerce with extra pay for overtime.
wilson earned the enmity of businesspeople and bigots but endeared himself to progressives when in 1916 he nominated for the supreme court the prominent reformer louis d brandeis the rst jew to be called to the high bench.
yet even wilsons progressivism had its limits and it clearly stopped short of better treatment for blacks.
the southern bred wilson actually presided over accelerated segregation in the federal bureaucracy.
when a delegation of black leaders personally protested to him the schoolmasterish president virtually froze them out of his ofce.
despite these limitations wilson knew that to be reelected in 1916 he needed to identify himself clearly as the candidate of progressivism.
he appeased business people by making conser vative appointments to the federal reserve board and the federal trade commission but he devoted most of his energy to cultivating progressive support.
wilsons election in 1912 had been something of a uke owing largely to the taftroosevelt split in the republican ranks.
to remain in the white house the president would have to woo the bull moose voters into the democratic fold.
new directions in foreign policy in one important area wilson chose not to answer the trumpet call of the bull moosers.
in contrast to roosevelt and even taft wilson recoiled from an aggressive foreign policy.
hating imperialism he was repelled by trs big stickism.
suspicious of wall street he detested the so called dollar diplomacy of taft.
in ofce only a week wilson declared war on dollar diplomacy.
he proclaimed that the government would no longer offer special support to american investors in latin america and china.
shivering from this wilsonian bucket of cold water american bankers pulled out of the taft engineered six nation loan to china the next day.
in a similarly self denying vein wilson persuaded congress in early 1914 to repeal the panama canal tolls act of 1912 which had exempted american coastwise shipping from tolls and thereby provoked sharp protests from injured britain.
the president further chimed in with the anti imperial song of bryan and other democrats when he signed the jones act in 1916.
it granted to the philippines the boon of territorial status and prom wilsons foreign policy ised independence as soon as a stable government could be established.
wilsons racial prejudices however made it difcult for him to anticipate anything other than a long political tutelage for the filipinos.
indeed not until july 4 1946 thirty years later did the united states accept philippine independence.
wilson also partially defused a menacing crisis with japan in 1913.
the california legislature still seeking to rid the golden state of japanese settlers prohibited them from owning land.
tokyo understandably irritated lodged vigorous protests.
at fortress corregidor in the philippines american gunners were put on around the clock alert.
but when wilson dispatched secretary of state william jennings bryan to plead with the cal i fornia legislature to soften its stand tensions eased somewhat.
political turmoil in haiti soon forced wilson to eat some of his anti imperialist words.
the climax of the disorders came in 1914 1915 when an outraged populace literally tore to pieces the brutal haitian president.
in 1915 wilson reluctantly dispatched marines to protect american lives and property.
they remained for nineteen years making haiti an american protectorate.
in 1916 he stole a page from roosevelts corollary to the monroe doctrine and concluded a treaty with haiti providing for u s supervision of nances and the police.
in the same year he sent the leathernecked marines to quell riots in the dominican republic and that debt cursed land came under the shadow of the american eagles wings for the next eight years.
in 1917 wilson purchased from denmark the virgin islands in the west indies tightening the grip of uncle sam in these shark infested waters.
increasingly the caribbean sea with its vital approaches to the nownavigable panama canal was taking on the earmarks of a yankee preserve see map 29 2.
map 29 2 the united states in the caribbean 1898 1941 this map explains why many latin americans accused the united states of turning the caribbean sea into a yankee lake it also suggests that uncle sam was much less isolationist in his own backyard than he was in faraway europe or asia.
interactive map 100w columbus u s expeditionary force 1916 1917 sonor a 30n 90w u n i t e d s tat e s alabama miss.
texas 80w georgia 400 mi.
at l a n t i c o c e a n sinking of maine 1898 gulf of mexico u s troops 1915 1934 financial supervision 1916 1941 miami revolutions 1868 1878 1895 1898 u s troops 1898 1902 1906 1909 1912 1917 1922 platt amendment 1903 1934 u s exports to 1865 1917 1 6 billion tropic of cancer 400 km.
florida new orleans santa ysabel parral la.
houston u s attempted to buy 1869 u s troops 1916 1924 financial supervision 1905 1941 bahamas gr.
havana cuba purchased from denmark 1917 tampico mexico guantnamo u s attack 1914 dominican puerto republic rico haiti u s naval base 1903 20n mexico city veracruz revolution 1910 americans controlled 43 of mexican property 1910 u s exports to 1865 1917 1 3 billion br.
honduras guatemala caribbean sea u s possession after 1898 puerto ricans became u s citizens 1917 el salvador u s.
zone 10n 60w caracas u s leased corn is 1914 costa rica colon u s acquired canal zone 1903 canal completed 1914 barbados gr.
trinidad gr.
nicaragua caribbean sea martinique fr.
u s troops 1909 1910 1912 1925 1926 1933 financial supervision 1911 1924 canal option 1916 honduras united fruit co organized for banana trade 1899 pacific ocean virgin is.
jamaica gr.
u s troops 1924 1925 guadeloupe fr.
venezuela n venezuelan crisis 1895 1896 panama bogat united states possession united states protectorate or quasi protectorate panama city canal zone gulf of panama colombia 70w brazil chapter 29 wilsonian progressivism at home and abroad 1912 1916 u s marines in haiti 1919 the united states sent the marines to haiti in 1915 to protect american economic interests.
they remained for nineteen years.
moralistic diplomacy in mexico rie bullets whining across the southern border served as a constant reminder that all was not quiet in mexico.
for decades mexico had been sorely exploited by foreign investors in oil railroads and mines.
by 1913 american capitalists had sunk about a billion dollars into the underdeveloped but generously endowed country.
but if mexico was rich the mexicans were poor.
fed up with their miserable lot they at last revolted.
their revolution took an ugly turn in early 1913 when a conscienceless clique with the support of president tafts ambassador to mexico murdered the popular new revolutionary president and installed general victoriano huerta an indian in the presidents chair.
all this chaos accelerated a massive migration of mexicans to the united states.
more than a million spanishspeaking newcomers tramped across the southern border in the rst three decades of the twentieth century.
settling mostly in texas new mexico arizona and cal i fornia they swung picks building highways and railroads or followed the fruit harvests as pickers.
though often segregated in spanish speaking enclaves they helped to create a unique borderland culture that blended mexican and american folkways.
the revolutionary bloodshed also menaced american lives and property in mexico.
cries for intervention burst from the lips of american jingoes.
prominent among those chanting for war was the inuential chain newspaper publisher william randolph hearst whose views presumably were colored by his ownership of a mexican ranch larger than rhode island.
yet once again president wilson refused to practice the same old dollar diplomacy of his predecessors deeming it perilous to determine foreign policy in the terms of material interest wilson strove as best he could to steer a moral course in mexico.
he sent his aggressive ambassador packing imposed an arms embargo and refused to recognize ofcially the murderous government of that brute huerta even though most foreign powers acknowledged huertas bloody handed regime.
i am going to teach the south american republics to elect the mexican imbroglio good men the former professor declared.
he put his munitions where his mouth was in 1914 when he allowed american arms to ow to huertas principal rivals white bearded venustiano carranza and the rebrand francisco pancho villa.
the mexican volcano erupted at the atlantic seaport of tampico in april 1914 when a small party of american sailors was arrested.
the mexicans promptly released the captives and apologized but they refused the affronted american admirals demand for a salute of twenty one guns.
wilson heavy hearted but stubbornly determined to eliminate huerta asked congress for authority to use force against mexico.
before congress could act wilson ordered the navy to seize the mexican port of veracruz to thwart the arrival of a german steamer carrying huerta bound guns and ammunition.
huerta as well as carranza hotly protested against this high handed yankee maneuver.
just as a full dress shooting con ict seemed inevitable wilson was rescued by an offer of mediation from the abc powers argentina brazil and chile.
huerta collapsed in july 1914 under pressure from within and without.
he was succeeded by his archrival venustiano carranza still ercely resentful of wilsons military meddling.
the whole sorry tampico incident did not augur well for the future of united states mexican relations.
pancho villa a combination of bandit and robin hood had meanwhile stolen the spotlight.
he emerged as the chief rival to president carranza whom wilson now reluctantly supported.
challenging carranzas authority while also punishing the gringos villas men ruthlessly hauled sixteen young american mining en in october 1913 president woodrow wilson 1856 1924 addressed the southern commercial congress in mobile alabama and drew a connection between the battle against the trusts at home and the travails of countries south of the border we have seen material interests threaten constitutional freedom in the united states.
therefore we will now know how to sympathize with those in the rest of latin america who have to contend with such powers not only from within their borders but from outside their borders also.
wilson confronts huerta a mexican view of the tense standoff between wilson and the mexican president victoriano huerta.
the artists rendering seems to reect the famous observation of long time mexican leader porrio diaz poor mexico.
so far from god so close to the united states gineers off a train traveling through northern mexico in january 1916 and killed them.
a month later villa and his followers hoping to provoke a war between wilson and carranza blazed across the border into columbus new mexico and murdered another nineteen americans.
general john j.
black jack pershing a grimfaced and ramrod erect veteran of the cuban and philippine campaigns was ordered to break up the bandit band.
his hastily orga nized force of several so called from his earlier ser vice as an ofcer with the crack black 10th cavalry.
chapter 29 wilsonian progressivism at home and abroad 1912 1916 pancho villa with his ragtag army in mexico ca.
1916 his daring impetuosity and horsemanship made villa a hero to the masses of northern mexico.
yet he proved to be a violent and ineffective crusader against social abuses and he was assassinated in 1923 thousand mounted troops penetrated deep into rugged mexico with surprising speed.
they clashed with carranzas forces and mauled the villistas but missed capturing villa himself.
as the threat of war with germany loomed larger the invading army was withdrawn in january 1917.
thunder across the sea europes powder magazine long smoldering blew up in the summer of 1914 when the aming pistol of a serb patriot killed the heir to the throne of austriahungary in sarajevo.
an outraged vienna government backed by germany forthwith presented a stern ultimatum to neighboring serbia.
an explosive chain reaction followed.
tiny serbia backed by its powerful slav neighbor russia refused to bend the knee sufciently.
the russian tsar began to mobilize his ponderous war machine menacing germany on the east even as his ally france confronted germany on the west.
in alarm the germans struck suddenly at france through unoffending belgium their objective was to knock their ancient enemy out of action so that they would have two free hands to repel russia.
great britain its coastline jeopardized by the assault on belgium was sucked into the conagration on the side of france.
almost overnight most of europe was locked in a ght to the death.
on one side were arrayed the cen tral powers germany and austria hungary and later turkey and bulgaria.
on the other side were the allies principally france britain and russia and later japan and italy.
americans thanked god for the ocean moats and self righteously congratulated themselves on having had ancestors wise enough to have abandoned the hell pits of europe.
america felt strong snug smug and secure but not for long.
a precarious neutrality president wilsons grief at the outbreak of war was compounded by the recent death of his wife.
he sorrowfully issued the routine neutrality proclamation and called on americans to be neutral in thought as well as deed.
but such scrupulous evenhandedness proved difcult.
both sides wooed the united states the great neutral in the west.
the british enjoyed the boon of close cultural linguistic and economic ties with america and had the added advantage of controlling most of the transatlantic cables.
their censors sheared away war stories harmful to the allies and drenched the united states with tales of german bestiality.
the germans and the austro hungarians counted on the natural sympathies of their transplanted countrymen in america.
including persons with at least one foreign born parent people with blood ties to the war breaks out in europe table 29 1 principal foreign elements in the united states census of 1910 country of origin foreign born natives with two foreign born parents natives with one foreign born parent total central powers germany austria hungary 2 501 181 1 670 524 3 911 847 900 129 1 869 590 131 133 8 282 61 2 701 786 allied powers great britain ireland russia italy 1 219 968 1 352 155 1 732 421 1 343 070 852 610 2 141 577 949 316 695 187 1 158 474 1 010 628 70 938 60 103 3 231 052 4 504 360 2 752 675 2 098 360 13 345 545 12 916 311 5 981 526 32 243 282 14 5 14 0 6 5 35 0 total for all foreign countries including those not listed percentage of total u s population 91 972 266 ireland was not yet independent.
central powers numbered some 11 million in 1914.
some of these recent immigrants expressed noisy sympathy for the fatherland but most were simply grateful to be so distant from the fray see table 29 1.
most americans were anti german from the outset.
with his villainous upturned mustache kaiser wilhelm ii seemed the embodiment of arrogant autocracy an impression strengthened by germanys ruthless strike at neutral belgium.
german and austrian agents further tarnished the image of the central powers in american eyes when they resorted to violence in american factories and ports.
when a german operative in 1915 absentmindedly left his briefcase on a new york elevated car its documents detailing plans for industrial sabotage were quickly discovered and publicized.
american opinion already ill disposed was further inamed against the kaiser and germany.
yet the great majority of americans earnestly hoped to stay out of the horrible war.
america earns blood money when europe burst into ames in 1914 the united states was bogged down in a worrisome business recession.
but as fate would have it british and french war orders soon pulled american industry out of the morass of hard times and onto a peak of war born prosperity see table 29 2.
part of this boom was nanced by american bankers notably the wall street rm of j p morgan and company which eventually advanced to the allies the enormous sum of 2 3 billion during the period of american neutrality.
the central powers protested bitterly against the immense trade between america and the allies but this trafc did not in fact violate the international neutrality laws.
germany was technically free to trade with the united states.
it was prevented from doing so not by american policy but by geography and the british navy.
trade between germany and america had to move across the atlantic but the british controlled the sea lanes and they threw a noose tight blockade of mines and ships across the north sea gateway to german ports.
over the unavailing protests of american shippers farmers and manufacturers the british began forcing american vessels off the high seas and into their ports.
this harassment of american shipping proved highly effective as trade between germany and the united states virtually ceased.
hard pressed germany did not tamely consent to being starved out.
in retaliation for the british blockade in february 1915 berlin announced a submarine war area around the british isles see map 29 3.
the submarine was a weapon so new that existing international law could not be made to t it.
the old rule that a warship must stop and board a merchantman chapter 29 wilsonian progressivism at home and abroad 1912 1916 table 29 2 u s exports to belligerents 1914 1916 belligerent britain france italy germany 594 271 863 159 818 924 74 235 012 344 794 276 911 794 954 369 397 170 184 819 688 28 863 354 1 526 685 102 628 851 988 269 246 105 288 899 1916 figure as a percentage of 1914 figure 257 0 08 italy joined the allies in april 1915 could hardly apply to submarines which could easily be rammed or sunk if they surfaced.
the cigar shaped marauders posed a dire threat to the united states so long as wilson insisted on maintaining americas neutral rights.
berlin ofcials declared that they would try not to sink neutral shipping but they warned that mistakes would probably occur.
wilson now determined on a policy of calculated risk.
he would continue to claim protable neutral 20w 70n 10w british military area 0 german submarine war zone n allied powers iceland central powers neutral nations 400 km.
10e at l a n t i c ocean 60n norway 20e ic b a y rm an neth.
lusitania torpedoed may 7 1915 denmark ge 50n north sea lt united kingdom sea sweden trading rights while hoping that no high seas incident would force his hand to grasp the sword of war.
setting his peninsular jaw he emphatically warned germany that it would be held to strict accountability for any attacks on american vessels or citizens.
the german submarines known as u boats from the german unterseeboot or undersea boat meanwhile began their deadly work.
in the rst months of 1915 they sank about ninety ships in the war zone.
then the submarine issue became acute when the british passenger liner lusitania was torpedoed and sank off the coast of ireland on may 7 1915 with the loss of 1 198 lives including 128 americans.
the lusitania was carrying forty two hundred cases of small arms ammunition a fact the germans used to justify the sinking.
but americans were swept by a wave of shock and anger at this act of mass murder and piracy the eastern united states closer to the war seethed with talk of ghting but the rest of the country showed a strong distaste for hostilities.
the peace loving wilson had no stomach for leading a disunited nation into war.
he well remembered the mistake in 1812 of his fellow princetonian james madison.
instead by a series of increasingly strong notes wilson attempted to bring the german warlords sharply to book.
even this mea sured approach was too the fatherland the chief german american propaganda newspaper in the united states cried france switz.
map 29 3 british military area declared november 3 1914 and german submarine war zone declared february 4 1915 interactive map we americans prattle about humanity while we manufacture poisoned shrapnel and picric acid for prot.
ten thousand german widows ten thousand orphans ten thousand graves bear the legend made in america american neutrality a german u boat this deadly new weapon rendered useless existing rules of naval warfare eventually pushing the united states to declare war against germany in 1917 much for secretary of state bryan who resigned rather than sign a protestation that might spell shooting.
but wilson resolutely stood his ground.
there is such a thing he declared as a man being too proud to ght this kind of talk incensed the war thirsty theodore roosevelt.
the rough rider assailed the spineless simperers who heeded the weasel words of the pacistic professor in the white house.
yet wilson sticking to his verbal guns made some diplomatic progress.
after another british liner the arabic was sunk in august 1915 with the loss of two american lives berlin reluctantly agreed not to sink unarmed and unresisting passenger ships without warning.
advertisement from the new york herald may 1 1915 six days later the lusitania was sunk.
note the german warning.
chapter 29 wilsonian progressivism at home and abroad 1912 1916 wilson wins reelection in 1916 heres money for your americans.
i may drown some more germany expressed profound regret for the deaths of 128 americans aboard the torpedoed passenger liner lusitania in 1915 but the incident helped feed a mounting anti german sentiment in the united states.
this pledge appeared to be violated in march 1916 when the germans torpedoed a french passenger steamer the sussex.
the infuriated wilson informed the germans that unless they renounced the inhuman practice of sinking merchant ships without warning he would break diplomatic relations an almost certain prelude to war.
germany reluctantly knuckled under to president wilsons sussex ultimatum agreeing not to sink passenger ships and merchant vessels without giving warning.
but the germans attached a long string to their sussex pledge the united states would have to persuade the allies to modify what berlin regarded as their illegal blockade.
this obviously was something that washington could not do.
wilson promptly accepted the german pledge without accepting the string he thus won a temporary but precarious diplomatic victory precarious because germany could pull the string whenever it chose and the president might suddenly nd himself tugged over the cliff of war.
against this ominous backdrop the presidential campaign of 1916 gathered speed.
both the bull moose progressives and the republicans met in chicago.
the progressives uproariously renominated theodore roosevelt but the rough rider who loathed wilson and all his works had no stomach for splitting the republicans again and ensuring the reelection of his hated rival.
in refusing to run he sounded the death knell of the progressive party.
roosevelts republican admirers also clamored for teddy but the old guard detested the renegade who had ruptured the party in 1912.
instead they drafted supreme court justice charles evans hughes a cold intellectual who had achieved a solid liberal record when he was governor of new york.
the republican platform condemned the democratic tariff assaults on the trusts and wilsons wishy washiness in dealing with mexico and germany.
the thick whiskered hughes an animated feather duster left the bench for the campaign stump where he was not at home.
in anti german areas of the country he assailed wilson for not standing up to the kaiser whereas in isolationist areas he took a softer line.
this fence straddling operation led to the jeer charles evasive hughes hughes was further plagued by roosevelt who was delivering a series of skin em alive speeches against that damned presbyterian hypocrite wilson frothing for war tr privately scoffed at hughes as a whiskered wilson the only difference between the two he said was a shave wilson nominated by acclamation at the democratic convention in st louis ignored hughes on the theory that one should not try to murder a man who is committing suicide.
his campaign was built on the slogan he kept us out of war democratic orators warned that by electing charles evans hughes the nation would be electing a ght with a certain frustrated rough rider leading the charge.
a democratic advertisement appealing to the american working people read you are working not fighting.
alive and happy not cannon fodder.
wilson and peace with honor.
or hughes with roosevelt and war.
the campaign of 1916 on election day hughes swept the east and looked like a sure re winner.
wilson went to bed that night prepared to accept defeat while the new york newspapers displayed huge portraits of the presidentelect charles evans hughes but the rest of the country turned the tide.
midwesterners and westerners attracted by wilsons progressive reforms and antiwar policies ocked to the polls for the president.
the nal result in doubt for several days hinged on cal i fornia which wilson carried by some 3 800 votes out of about a million cast.
wilson barely squeaked through with a nal vote of 277 to 254 in the electoral college and 9 127 695 to 8 533 507 in the popular column see map 29 4.
the pro labor wilson received strong support from the working class and from renegade bull moosers whom republicans failed to lure back into their camp.
wilson wa mt or id nv ca nd wy sd co wi ia ne ut az mn ks ok nm tx il mi in mo tn ar la oh 24 wv r 7 d 1 ky ms al ga me vt 4 nh ma ny 4 18 ri pa nj ct 5 14 7 va nc de md sc fl candidate party electoral vote wilson democrat 52 2 popular vote 9 127 695 51 7 hughes republican 47 8 8 533 507 48 3 map 29 4 presidential election of 1916 with electoral vote by state wilson was so worried about being a lame duck president in a time of great international tensions that he drew up a plan whereby hughes if victorious would be appointed secretary of state wilson and the vice president would resign and hughes would thus succeed immediately to the presidency.
interactive map had not specically promised to keep the country out of war but probably enough voters relied on such implicit assurances to ensure his victory.
their hopeful expectations were soon rudely shattered.
during the 1916 campaign j.
a oleary the head of a pro german and pro irish organization sent a scorching telegram to wilson condemning him for having been pro british in approving war loans and ammunition trafc.
wilson shot back an answer theodore roosevelt war hawk the former president clamored for american intervention in the european war but the country preferred peace in 1916.
ironically roosevelts archrival woodrow wilson would take the country into the war just months after the 1916 election.
your telegram received.
i would feel deeply mortied to have you or anybody like you vote for me.
since you have access to many disloyal americans and i have not i will ask you to convey this message to them.
president wilsons devastating and somewhat insulting response probably won him more votes than it lost.
chapter 29 wilsonian progressivism at home and abroad 1912 1916 chronology wilson defeats taft and roosevelt for presidency underwood tariff act sixteenth amendment income tax federal reserve act huerta takes power in mexico seventeenth amendment direct election of senators clayton anti trust act federal trade commission established u s seizes port of veracruz mexico world war i begins in europe sussex ultimatum and pledge u s exports to european belligerents skyrocket workingmens compensation act federal farm loan act warehouse act adamson act pancho villa raids new mexico brandeis appointed to supreme court jones act u s marines sent to dominican republic wilson defeats hughes for presidency united states buys virgin islands from denmark la follette seamans act lusitania torpedoed and sunk by german u boat u s marines sent to haiti germany declares submarine war area around british isles key terms new freedom 729 new nationalism 729 underwood tariff 732 federal reserve act 733 federal trade commission act 733 clayton anti trust act 733 holding companies 733 people to know workingmens compensation act 734 adamson act 734 jones act 734 tampico incident 737 central powers 738 allies 738 u boats 740 lusitania 740 herbert croly louis d brandeis victoriano huerta venustiano carranza francisco pancho villa john black jack pershing charles evans hughes who were the progressives.
d ebate about progressivism has revolved mainly around a question that is simple to ask but devilishly difcult to answer who were the progressives.
it was once taken for granted that progressive reformers were simply the heirs of the jeffersonian jacksonianpopulist reform crusades they were the oppressed and downtrodden common folk who nally erupted in wrath and demanded their due.
but in his inuential age of reform 1955 richard hofstadter astutely challenged that view.
progressive leaders he argued were not drawn from the ranks of societys poor and marginalized.
rather they were to learn more middle class people threatened from above by the emerging power of new corporate elites and from below by a restless working class.
it was not economic deprivation but status anxiety hofstadter insisted that prompted these people to become reformers.
their psychological motivation hofstadter concluded rendered many of their reform efforts quirky and ineffectual.
by contrast new left historians notably gabriel kolko argued that progressivism was dominated by established business leaders who successfully directed reform to their own conser vative ends.
in this view government regulation as embodied in new agencies like the federal reserve board and the federal tariff commission and in legislation like the meat inspection act simply accomplished what two generations of private efforts had failed to do dampen cutthroat competition stabilize markets and make america safe for monopoly capitalism.
still other scholars notably robert h wiebe and samuel p hays argued that the progressives were neither the psychologically or economically disadvantaged nor the old capitalist elite but were rather members of a rapidly emerging self condent social class possessed of the new techniques of scientic management technological ex per tise and orga ni zational know how.
this orga ni zational school of historians did not see progressivism as a struggle of the people against the interests as a confused and nostalgic campaign by status threatened reformers or as a conser vative coup dtat.
the progressive movement in this view was by and large an effort to rationalize and modernize many social institutions by introducing the wise and impartial hand of government regulation.
this view had much to recommend it.
yet despite its widespread acceptance among historians it could not adequately account for the titanic political struggles of the progressive era over the very reforms that the orga ni zational school regarded as simple adjustments to modernity.
it also brushed over the deep philosophical differences that divided progressives themselves such as between roosevelts new nationalism and wilsons new freedom.
in addition the orga ni zational approach did not account for the important role of women in advocating progressive reforms as demonstrated by robyn muncy linda gordon and theda skocpol.
building the american welfare state in the early twentieth century they have argued was fundamentally a gendered activity inspired by a female dominion of social workers and social feminists scholars such as daniel t rodgers have added that essential inspiration also came from across the atlantic.
in european countries vibrant labor movements sought a welfare state to benet the working class whereas in the united states the strength of female reformers promoted welfare programs aimed at protecting women and children.
all the same american programs frequently were modeled after policies adopted in london paris and berlin.
to learn more michael c adams the great adventure male desire and the coming of world war i 1990 john w chambers the tyranny of change america in the progressive era 1900 1917 rev.
ed 2000 john m cooper the warrior and the priest woodrow wilson and theodore roosevelt 1983 alexander l george and juliette l george woodrow wilson and colonel house 1956 henry may the end of american innocence a study of the first years of our time 1959 frank a ninkovich the wilsonian century u s foreign policy since 1900 1999 mary renda taking haiti military occupation and the culture of u s.
imperialism 1915 1940 2001 edward stettner shaping modern liberalism herbert croly and progressive thought 1993 philippa strum brandeis justice for the people 1985 eileen welsome the general and the jaguar pershings hunt for pancho villa 2006 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the war to end war 1917 1918 the world must be made safe for democracy.
its peace must be planted upon the tested foundations of political liberty.
we have no selsh ends to serve.
we desire no conquest no dominion.
we seek no indemnities for ourselves no material compensation for the sacrices we shall freely make.
d estiny dealt cruelly with woodrow wilson.
the lover of peace as fate would have it was forced to lead a hesitant and peace loving nation into war.
as the last days of 1916 slipped through the hourglass the president made one nal futile attempt to mediate between the embattled belligerents.
on january 22 1917 he delivered one of his most moving addresses restating americas commitment to neutral rights and declaring that only a negotiated peace without victory would prove durable.
germanys warlords responded with a blow of the mailed st.
on january 31 1917 they announced to an astonished world their decision to wage unrestricted submarine warfare sinking all ships including americas in the war zone.
why this rash act.
war with america was the last thing germany wanted.
but after three ghastly years in the trenches germanys leaders decided the distinction between combatants and noncombatants was a luxury they could no longer afford.
thus they jerked on the string they had attached to their sussex pledge in 1916 desperately hoping to bring britain to its knees before the united states entered the war.
wilson his bluff called broke diplomatic relations with germany but refused to move closer to war unless the germans undertook overt acts against american lives.
war by act of germany to defend american interests short of war the president asked congress for authority to arm american merchant ships.
when a band of midwestern senators launched a libuster to block the mea sure wilson denounced them as a little group of willful men who were rendering a great nation helpless and contemptible but their obstruction was a powerful reminder of the continuing strength of american isolationism.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website a war for ideals war.
attacks by german submarines nally forced wilsons hand and he asked congress for a declaration of war on april 2 1917.
four days later after considerable debate and with fty six dissenting votes congress obliged the president.
meanwhile the sensational zimmermann note was intercepted and published on march 1 1917 infuriating americans especially westerners.
german foreign secretary arthur zimmermann had secretly proposed a german mexican alliance tempting antiyankee mexico with veiled promises of recovering texas new mexico and arizona.
on the heels of this provocation came the longdreaded overt acts in the atlantic where german u boats sank four unarmed american merchant vessels in the rst two weeks of march.
as one philadelphia newspaper observed the difference between war and what we have now is that now we arent ghting back simultaneously came the rousing news that a revolution in russia had toppled the cruel regime of the tsars.
america could now ght foursquare for democracy on the side of the allies without the black sheep of russian despotism in the allied fold.
subdued and solemn wilson at last stood before a hushed joint session of congress on the evening of april 2 1917 and asked for a declaration of war.
he had lost his gamble that america could pursue the profits of neutral trade without being sucked into the ghastly maelstrom.
a myth developed in later years that america was dragged unwittingly into war by munitions makers and wall street bankers desperate to protect their prots and loans.
yet the weapons merchants and nanciers were already thriving unhampered by wartime government restrictions and heavy taxation.
their slogan might well have been neutrality forever the simple truth is that british harassment of amer ican commerce had been galling but endurable germany had resorted to the mass kill ing of civilians.
the difference was like that between a gang of thieves and a gang of murderers.
president wilson had drawn a clear if risky line against the depredations of the submarine.
the german high command in a last desperate throw of the dice chose to cross it.
in a gurative sense americas war declaration of april 6 1917 bore the unambiguous trademark made in germany wilsonian idealism enthroned it is a fearful thing to lead this great peaceful people into war wilson said in his war message.
it was fearful indeed not least of all because of the formidable challenge it posed to wilsons leadership skills.
ironically it fell to the scholarly wilson deeply respectful of american traditions to shatter one of the most sacred of those traditions by entangling america in a distant european war.
how could the president arouse the american people to shoulder this unprecedented burden.
for more than a century they had prided themselves on their isolationism from the periodic outbursts of militarized violence that af icted the old world.
since 1914 their pride had been reinforced by the bountiful prots gained through neutrality.
german u boats had now roughly shoved a wavering america into the abyss but ominously no fewer than six senators and fty representatives including the rst congresswoman jeannette rankin of montana had voted against the war resolution.
wilson could whip up no enthusiasm especially in the landlocked midwest by calling on the nation to ght to make the world safe from the submarine.
chapter 28 progressivism and the republican roosevelt 1901 1912 room in a tenement flat 1910 tenement life on the lower east side of new york city was exposed by the camera of jacob riis who compiled a large photographic archive of turn of the century urban life.
many families counted themselves lucky to share a single room no matter how squalid.
reforms modeled on european examples importing policy ideas from berlin to baltimore.
feminists in multiplying numbers added social justice to suffrage on their list of needed reforms.
with urban pioneers like jane addams in chicago and lillian wald in new york blazing the way women entered the ght to improve the lot of families living and working in the festering cities.
raking muck with the muckrakers beginning about 1902 the exposing of evil became a ourishing industry among american publishers.
a group of aggressive ten and fteen cent popular magazines surged to the front notably mcclures cosmopolitan colliers and everybodys.
waging erce circulation wars they dug deep for the dirt that the public loved to hate.
enterprising editors nanced extensive research and encouraged pugnacious writing by their bright young reporters whom president roosevelt branded as muckrakers in 1906.
annoyed by their excess of zeal he compared the mudslinging magazine dirt diggers to the gure in bunyans pilgrims progress who was so intent on raking manure that he could not see the celestial crown dangling overhead.
despite presidential scolding these muckrakers boomed circulation and some of their most scandalous exposures were published as best selling books.
the reformer writers ranged far wide and deep in their crusade to lay bare the muck of iniquity in american society.
in 1902 a brilliant new york reporter lincoln steffens launched a series of articles in mcclures titled the shame of the cities he fearlessly unmasked the corrupt alliance between big business and municipal government.
steffens was followed in the same magazine by ida m tarbell a pioneering journalist who published a devastating but factual expos of the standard oil company.
her father had been ruined by the oil interests.
in his muckraker speech 1906 theodore roosevelt 1858 1919 said now it is very necessary that we should not inch from seeing what is vile and debasing.
there is lth on the oor and it must be scraped up with the muck rake and there are times and places where this service is the most needed of all the services that can be performed.
but the man who never does anything else who never thinks or speaks or writes save of his feats with the muck rake speedily becomes not a help to society not an incitement to good but one of the most potent forces for evil.
progressives battle corruption and corporations in his muckraking classic the shame of the cities 1904 lincoln steffens 1866 1936 decried the great threat posed by new york citys tammany machine bribery is no ordinary felony but treason.
corruption which breaks out here and there and now and then is not an occasional offense but a common practice and.
the effect of it is literally to change the form of our government from one that is representative of the people to an oligarchy representative of special interests.
ida tarbell 1857 1944 in her ofce tarbell was the most eminent woman in the muckraking movement and one of the most respected business historians of her generation.
in 1904 she earned a national reputation for publishing a scathing history of the standard oil company the mother of trusts two years later she joined ray stannard baker william allen white and other muckrakers in purchasing the american magazine which became a journalistic podium in their campaign for honest government and an end to business abuses.
plucky muckrakers fearlessly tilted their pen lances at varied targets.
they assailed the malpractices of life insurance companies and tariff lobbies.
they roasted the beef trust the money trust the railroad barons and the corrupt amassing of american fortunes.
thomas w lawson an erratic speculator who had himself made 50 million on the stock market laid bare the practices of his accomplices in frenzied finance a series of articles that appeared in everybodys.
lawson by fouling his own nest made many enemies among his rich associates and he died a poor man.
david g phillips shocked an already startled nation by his series in cosmopolitan titled the treason of the senate 1906.
he boldly charged that seventy ve of the ninety senators did not represent the people at all but the railroads and trusts.
this withering indictment buttressed by facts impressed president roosevelt.
phillips continued his attacks through novels and was fatally shot in 1911 by a deranged young man whose family he had allegedly maligned.
some of the most effective re of the muckrakers was directed at social evils.
the ugly list included the immoral white slave trafc in women the rickety slums and the appalling number of industrial accidents.
the sorry subjugation of americas 9 million blacks of whom 90 percent still lived in the south and one third were illiterate was spotlighted in ray stannard bakers following the color line 1908.
the abuses of child labor were brought luridly to light by john spargos the bitter cry of the children 1906.
vendors of potent patent medicines often heavily spiked with alcohol likewise came in for bitter criticism.
these conscienceless vultures sold incredible quantities of adulterated or habit forming drugs while doping the press with lavish advertising.
muckraking attacks in colliers were ably reinforced by dr harvey w wiley chief chemist of the department of agriculture who with his famous poison squad performed experiments on himself.
full of sound and fury the muckrakers signied much about the nature of the progressive reform movement.
they were long on lamentation but stopped short of revolutionary remedies.
to right social wrongs they counted on publicity and an aroused public conscience not drastic political change.
they sought not to overthrow capitalism but to cleanse it.
the cure for the ills of american democracy they earnestly believed was more democracy.
thinking globally why is there no socialism in the united states t he industrial revolution that began in britain in the late eighteenth century had by 1900 utterly transformed life in the western world and beyond.
it also had spawned a powerful theory of history grounded in the writings of karl marx.
marxists believed that historys driving engine was class conict that in the industrial era that conict had been starkly reduced to the contest between capitalists and workers the bourgeoisie and the proletariat and that an inevitable socialist revolution would result in the triumph of the proletariat and the emergence of a classless society.
its organizing principle would be from each according to his ability to each according to his needs improbable as it might seem today many nineteenthcentury marxists expected the rst socialist revolution to occur in the united states.
marx himself saw america as the country where capitalism had developed more shamelessly than elsewhere thus setting the stage for the nal conict that would yield the socialist utopia.
violent labor upheavals like those at homestead see p 557 haymarket the prophet of the class struggle karl marx 1818 1883 see p 589 and pullman see p 658 seemed to conrm that analysis and a chorus of european marxists stepped up their prophecies.
marxs collaborator friedrich engels wrote in the aftermath of the haymarket eruption in may 1886 that in europe it had taken workers decades to evolve a common class consciousness but on the more favored soil of america where no medieval ruins bar the way.
the working class would do so within 10 months but it was not to be.
twenty years later the head of the german social democratic party lamented that we are waiting for you americans to do something the americans had done a little something but amid all the ferment of reform in the progressive era they remained a sore disappointment to european radicals.
eugene v debs organized the socialist party in 1901 and won 6 percent of the vote in the presidential election of 1912.
but the socialist party remained a tiny marginal group.
it never posed a serious challenge to the major american parties and never remotely approached the stature of old world working class parties such as the french socialists the italian communists the german social democrats and the british labour party.
at one time or another most of these european organizations became ruling parties that implemented socialist ideas such as national ownership of core industries robust support for labor unions and lavish welfare programs developments that to this day have had only feeble if any counterparts in the united states.
the failure of marxs predictions about america occasioned much soul searching about the plausibility of his entire theory of history.
in 1904 a young german scholar named werner sombart traveled to the united states much as alexis de tocqueville had nearly seventy ve years earlier to examine americas puzzling reality rsthand see thinking globally alexis de tocqueville on democracy in america and europe pages 278 279.
two years later he published the notable book why is there no socialism in the united states.
if socialism follows as a necessary reaction to capitalism he asked why was there no socialist movement worthy of the name in the country with the most advanced capitalist development namely the united states sombart gave several answers 1.
the strikingly egalitarian manners of all americans.
the bowing and scraping before the upper classes which produces such an unpleasant impression in europe is completely unknown he noted reecting the workers refusal or inability to consider themselves a class apart.
the iww seeks subscribers 1911 this poster aimed to attract subscribers to industrial worker the newspaper of the industrial workers of the world iww.
the iww was a small but vocal radical labor union that hoped to unify american workers in one big union irrespective of their particular jobs gender or race.
its motto was an injury to one is an injury to all at its peak in 1923 the union claimed 100 000 members commonly known as wobblies and could marshal the support of some 300 000 more mostly workers on the docks and in mines lumbering and textiles.
the safety valve of the western frontier which allowed workers to walk away from oppressive employers and strike out on their own.
sombart exaggerated the effects of the frontier see p 650 but he did call attention to the remarkable geographic mobility of american workers which together with their astonishing racial and ethnic diversity worked to inhibit their sense of class permanence and class solidarity.
the american workers remarkably high standard of living.
on roast beef and apple pie he concluded in a famous sentence all socialist utopias have gone to pot 4.
an accident of historical timing.
sombart shared with tocqueville a deep insight into the american experience.
unlike europe where the struggles for political and economic rights went forward in tandem in america workers had largely achieved full political equality before the onset of americas own industrial revolution.
they had a stake in the existing political order from the outset and little incentive to overturn it.
as another german socialist put it for the purposes of building class consciousness the struggle for freedom is very much superior to the effortless possession of a freedom that others have won before that observation echoed tocquevilles celebrated dictum that because the united states never had a feudal phase it was born free instead of becoming so and was reaping the fruits of the democratic revolution without having had the revolution itself more than a century after sombarts inquiry and especially since the collapse of soviet communism marxism stands largely discredited and some western european societies are edging away from socialist ideas such as national ownership of industries.
as one historian has suggested one might well ask not why is there no socialism in the united states but why has there been no socialist transformation in any advanced capitalist society chapter 28 progressivism and the republican roosevelt 1901 1912 political progressivism the question who were the progressives evokes contradictory answers.
progressive reformers included militarists such as theodore roosevelt who thrilled to the strenuous life as well as pacists such as jane addams whose loftiest goals included the abolition of war.
female settlement workers hoping to americanize recent immigrants mobilized alongside labor unionists and enlightened businessmen to strengthen the helping hand of government.
in diverse ways and sometimes with divergent aims the progressives sought to modernize american institutions to achieve two chief goals to use the state to curb monopoly power and to improve the common persons conditions of life and labor.
progressives emerged in both major parties in all regions and at all levels of government.
the truth is that progressivism was less a monolithic minority movement and more a broadly dispersed majority mood.
see varying viewpoints p.
one of the rst objectives of progressives was to regain the power that had slipped from the hands of the people into those of the interests these ardent reformers pushed for direct primary elections so as to undercut power hungry party bosses.
they favored the initiative so that voters could directly propose legislation themselves thus bypassing the boss bought state legislatures.
progressives also agitated for the referendum.
this device would place laws on the ballot for nal approval by the people especially laws that had been railroaded through a compliant legislature by free spending agents of big business.
the recall would enable the voters to remove faithless elected ofcials particularly those who had been bribed by bosses or lobbyists.
rooting out graft also became a prime goal of earnest progressives.
a number of the state legislatures passed corrupt practices acts which limited the amount of money that candidates could spend for their election.
such legislation also restricted huge gifts from corporations for which the donors would expect jane addams and fellow pacists 1915 addams cofounded the womens peace party in 1915.
its pacist platform was said to represent the views of the mother half of humanity although the party initially attracted twenty ve thousand members americas entry into the war two years later eroded popular support since pacist internationalism became suspect as anti american.
urban reformers special favors.
the secret australian ballot was likewise being introduced more widely in the states to counteract boss rule.
bribery was less feasible when bribers could not tell if they were getting their moneys worth from the bribed.
direct election of u s senators became a favorite goal of progressives especially after the muckrakers had exposed the scandalous intimacy between greedy corporations and congress.
by 1900 the senate had so many rich men that it was often sneered at as the millionaires club too many of these prosperous solons elected as they then were by trust dominated legislatures heeded the voice of their masters rather than the voice of the masses.
a constitutional amendment to bring about the popular election of senators had rough sledding in congress for the plutocratic members of the senate were happy with existing methods.
but a number of states established primary elections in which the voters expressed their preferences for the senate.
the local legislatures when choosing senators found it politically wise to heed the voice of the people.
partly as a result of such pressures the seventeenth amendment to the constitution approved in 1913 established the direct election of u s senators see the appendix.
but the expected improvement in caliber was slow in coming.
woman suffrage the goal of female reformers for many decades likewise received powerful new support from the progressives early in the 1900s.
the political reformers believed that womens votes would elevate the political tone and the foes of the saloon felt that they could count on the support of enfranchised females.
the suffragists with their cry of votes for women and equal suffrage for men and women protested bitterly against taxation without representation many of the states especially the more liberal ones in the west such as washington cal i fornia and the suffrage campaign of the early twentieth century beneted from a new generation of women who considered themselves feminists at a mass meeting in new york in 1914 marie jenny howe 1870 1934 a minister by training as well as a prominent early feminist proclaimed we intend simply to be ourselves not just our little female selves but our whole big human selves.
oregon gradually extended the vote to women.
but by 1910 nationwide female suffrage was still a decade away and a suffragist could still be sneeringly dened as one who has ceased to be a lady and has not yet become a gentleman progressivism in the cities and states progressives scored some of their most impressive gains in the cities.
frustrated by the inefciency and corruption of machine oiled city government many localities followed the pioneering example of galveston texas.
in 1901 it had appointed expert staffed commissions to manage urban affairs.
other communities adopted the city manager system also designed to take politics out of municipal administration.
some of these reforms obviously valued efciency more highly than democracy as control of civic affairs was further removed from the peoples hands.
urban reformers likewise attacked slumlords juvenile delinquency and wide open prostitution viceat a price which ourished in red light districts unchallenged by bribed police.
public spirited americans looked to eng lish and german cities for lessons on how to clean up their water supplies light their streets and run their trolley cars.
the vogue of public ownership of utilities swept the nation as local governments tried to halt the corrupt sale of franchises.
progressivism naturally bubbled up to the state level notably in wisconsin which became a yeasty laboratory of reform.
the governor of the state pompadoured robert m fighting bob la follette was an undersized but overbearing crusader who emerged as the most militant of the progressive republican leaders.
after a desperate ght with entrenched monopoly he reached the governors chair in 1901.
routing the lumber and railroad interests he wrested considerable control from the crooked corporations and returned it to the people.
he also perfected a scheme for regulating public utilities while laboring in close association with experts on the faculty of the state university at madison.
other states marched steadily toward the progressive camp as they undertook to regulate railroads and trusts chiey through public utility commissions.
oregon was not far behind wisconsin and cal i fornia made giant bootstrides under the stocky hiram w johnson.
elected republican governor in 1910 this dynamic prosecutor of grafters helped break the dominant grip of the southern pacic railroad on cal i fornia chapter 28 progressivism and the republican roosevelt 1901 1912 politics and then like la follette set up a political machine of his own.
heavily whiskered charles evans hughes the able and audacious reformist republican governor of new york had earlier gained national fame as an investigator of malpractices by gas and insurance companies and by the coal trust.
progressive women women proved themselves an indispensable part of the progressive army.
a crucial focus for womens activism was the settlement house movement see p 607.
at a time when women could neither vote nor hold political ofce settlement houses offered a side door to public life.
they exposed middle class women to the problems plaguing americas cities including poverty political corruption and intolerable working and living conditions.
they also gave them the skills and condence to attack those evils.
the womens club movement provided an even broader civic entryway for many middle class women.
literary clubs where educated women met to improve themselves with poetry and prose had existed for decades.
but in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries many of these clubs set aside shakespeare and henry james for social issues and current events.
dante has been dead for several centuries observed the president of the general federation of womens clubs in 1904.
i progressive women inspect factories this photograph by lewis hine for the national child labor committee depicts female factory inspectors from all over the country.
from left to right as they were identied at the time miss ella haas state factory inspector dayton ohio miss mary malone state inspector of the ten hour law delaware mrs florence kelley chief state factory inspector of illinois 1893 1897 miss jean gordon factories inspector parish of new orleans 1908 miss madge nave factory inspector louisville kentucky mrs martha d gould factories inspector parish of new orleans.
think it is time that we dropped the study of his inferno and turned our attention to our own nineteenth century notions of separate spheres dictated that a womans place was in the home so most female progressives defended their new activities as an extension not a rejection of the traditional roles of wife and mother.
thus they were often drawn to moral and maternal issues like keeping children out of smudgy mills and sweltering sweatshops attacking the scourge of tuberculosis bred in airless tenements winning pensions for mothers with dependent children and ensuring that only safe food products found their way to the family table.
female activists agitated through orga ni zations like the national consumers league 1899 and the womens trade union league 1903 as well as through two new federal agencies the childrens bureau 1912 and the womens bureau 1920 both in the department of labor.
these wedges into the federal bureaucracy however small gave female reformers a national stage for social investigation and advocacy.
campaigns for factory reform and temperance particularly attracted women foot soldiers.
unsafe and unsanitary sweatshops factories where workers toiled long hours for low wages were a public scandal in many cities.
florence kelley a former resident of jane addamss hull house became the state of illinoiss rst chief factory inspector and one of the nations leading advocates for improved factory con progressivism in the courts the wages of negligence ofcials review the charred remains of some of the survivors of the catastrophic triangle shirtwaist company re in 1911.
outrage over this calamity galvanized a generation of reformers to ght for better workplace safety rules.
in 1899 kelley took control of the newly founded national consumers league which mobilized female consumers to pressure for laws safeguarding women and children in the workplace.
in the landmark case muller v oregon 1908 crusading attorney louis d brandeis persuaded the supreme court to accept the constitutionality of laws protecting women workers by presenting evidence of the harmful effects of factory labor on womens weaker bodies.
although this argument calling for special protection for women seemed discriminatory by later standards and closed many male jobs to women progressives at the time hailed brandeiss achievement as a triumph over existing legal doctrine which afforded employers total control over the workplace.
the american welfare state that emerged from female activism focused more on protecting women and children than on granting benets to everyone as was the case in much of western europe with its stronger labor movements.
crusaders for these humane mea sures did not always have smooth sailing.
one dismaying setback came in 1905 when the supreme court in lochner v new york invalidated a new york law establishing a ten hour day for bakers.
yet the reformist progressive wave nally washed up into the judiciary and in 1917 the court upheld a ten hour law for factory workers.
laws regulating factories were worthless if not enforced a truth horribly demonstrated by a lethal re in 1911 at the triangle shirtwaist company in new york city.
locked doors and other agrant violations of the re code turned the factory into a death trap.
one hundred forty six workers most of them young immigrant women were incinerated or leapt from eighth and ninth story windows to their deaths.
lashed by the public outcry including a massive strike by women in the needle trades the new york legislature passed much stronger laws regulating the hours and conditions of sweatshop toil.
other legislatures chapter 28 progressivism and the republican roosevelt 1901 1912 frances e willard who would fall to her knees in prayer on saloon oors mobilized nearly 1 million women to make the world homelike and built the wctu into the largest orga ni zation of women in the world.
she found a vigorous ally in the anti saloon league which was aggressive well orga nized and well nanced.
caught up in the crusade some states and numerous counties passed dry laws which controlled restricted or abolished alcohol.
the big cities were generally wet for they had a large immigrant vote accustomed in the old country to the free ow of wine and beer.
when world war i erupted in 1914 nearly one half of the population lived in dry territory and nearly three fourths of the total area had outlawed saloons.
demon rum was groggy and about to be oored temporarily by the eighteenth amendment in 1919.
trs square deal for labor out of work and the reason why 1899 this temperance propaganda from an 1899 magazine illustrates the role of women in the temperance movement.
alcohol abuse threatened the stability of the family still predominantly considered the womans sphere in the late nineteenth century.
followed and by 1917 thirty states had put workers compensation laws on the books providing insurance to workers injured in industrial accidents.
gradually the concept of the employers responsibility to society was replacing the old dog eat dog philosophy of unregulated free enterprise.
corner saloons with their shutter doors naturally attracted the ire and re of progressives.
alcohol was intimately connected with prostitution in red light districts with the drunken voter with crooked city ofcials dominated by booze interests and with the blowsy boss who counted poker chips by night and miscounted ballots by day including the cemetery vote.
by 1900 cities like new york and san francisco had one saloon for about every two hundred people.
antiliquor campaigners received powerful support from several militant organizations notably the womans christian temperance union wctu.
founder theodore roosevelt although something of an imperialistic busybody abroad was touched by the progressive wave at home.
like other reformers he feared that the public interest was being submerged in the drifting seas of indifference.
everybodys interest was nobodys interest.
roosevelt decided to make it his.
his sportsmans instincts spurred him into demanding a square deal for capital labor and the public at large.
broadly speaking the presidents program embraced three cs control of the corporations consumer protection and conservation of natural resources.
the square deal for labor received its acid test in 1902 when a crippling strike broke out in the anthracite coal mines of pennsylvania.
some 140 000 besooted workers many of them illiterate immigrants had long been frightfully exploited and accidentplagued.
they demanded among other improvements a 20 percent increase in pay and a reduction of the working day from ten to nine hours.
unsympathetic mine owners condent that a chilled public would react against the miners refused to arbitrate or even negotiate.
one of their spokesmen multimillionaire george f baer reected the highand mighty attitude of certain ungenerous employers.
workers he wrote would be cared for not by the labor agitators but by the christian men to whom god in his in nite wisdom has given the control of the property interests of this country as coal supplies dwindled factories and schools were forced to shut down and even hospitals felt the muller v oregon 1908 ourt records provide notably fruitful sources for historians.
they not only tell often colorful stories about the lives of ordinary men and women caught up in the legal system they also by their very nature testify to the norms and values that lawyers employ to make their cases and that judges invoke to explain their decisions.
the case of muller v oregon see p 711 is especially instructive on both counts.
the ofcial supreme court records tell how on september 4 1905 joe haselbock a supervisor in curt mullers grand laundry in portland oregon asked an employee mrs e gotcher to remain after hours to do an extra load of laundry.
that c request violated oregons law prohibiting women from working more than ten hours per day.
mrs gotcher later complained to the authorities and muller was ned 10.
muller refused to pay and took his case all the way to the u s supreme court.
in its landmark decision below the court upheld the constitutionality of the oregon statute and muller at last had to cough up his ne.
on what grounds did the court justify its ruling.
what does justice david j brewers argument on behalf of the courts decision suggest about the cultural identity and social role of women in early twentieth century american society.
208 u s 412 curt muller plff.
in err v state of oregon.
that womans physical structure and the performance of material functions place her at a disadvantage in the struggle for subsistence is obvious.
this is especially true when the burdens of motherhood are upon her.
and as healthy mothers are essential to vigorous offspring the physical well being of woman becomes an object of public interest and care in order to preserve the strength and vigor of the race.
still again history discloses the fact that woman has always been dependent upon man.
he established his control at the outset by superior physical strength and this control in various forms with diminishing intensity has continued to the present.
it is still true that in the struggle for subsistence she is not an equal competitor with her brother.
differentiated by these matters from the other sex she is properly placed in a class by herself and legislation designed for her protection may be sustained even when like legislation is not necessary for men and could not be sustained.
it is impossible to close ones eyes to the fact that she still looks to her brother and depends upon him.
the two sexes differ in structure of body in the functions to be performed by each in the amount of physical strength in the capacity for long continued labor particularly when done standing the influence of vigorous health upon the future well being of the race the self reliance which enables one to assert full rights and in the capacity to maintain the struggle for subsistence.
this difference justifies a difference in legislation and upholds that which is designed to compensate for some of the burdens which rest upon her.
we have not referred in this discussion to the denial of the elective franchise in the state of oregon for while that may disclose a lack of political equality in all things with her brother that is not of itself decisive.
the reason runs deeper and rests in the inherent difference between the two sexes and in the different functions in life which they perform.
chapter 28 progressivism and the republican roosevelt 1901 1912 roosevelt was a charismatic gure who made a powerful impression on his contemporaries.
the journalist william allen white 1868 1944 later wrote of his rst meeting with tr in 1897 he sounded in my heart the rst trumpet call of the new time that was to be.
i had never known such a man as he and never shall again.
he overcame me.
and in the hour or two we spent that day at lunch and in a walk down f street he poured into my heart such visions such ideals such hopes such a new attitude toward life and patriotism and the meaning of things as i had never dreamed men had.
after that i was his man.
icy grip of winter.
desperately seeking a solution roosevelt summoned representatives of the striking miners and the mine owners to the white house.
he was profoundly annoyed by the extraordinary stupidity and bad temper of the wooden headed gentry who operated the mines.
as he later confessed if it had not been for the dignity of his high ofce he would have taken one of them by the seat of the breeches and chucked him out of the window roosevelt nally resorted to his trusty big stick when he threatened to seize the mines and operate them with federal troops.
faced with this rst timeever threat to use federal bayonets against capital rather than labor the owners grudgingly consented to arbitration.
a compromise decision ultimately gave the miners a 10 percent pay boost and a working day of nine hours.
but their union was not ofcially recognized as a bargaining agent.
keenly aware of the mounting antagonisms between capital and labor roosevelt urged congress to create the new department of commerce and labor.
this goal was achieved in 1903.
ten years later the agency was split in two.
an important arm of the newborn cabinet body was the bureau of corporations which was authorized to probe businesses engaged in interstate commerce.
the bureau was highly useful in helping to break the stranglehold of monopoly and in clearing the road for the era of trust busting tr corrals the corporations the sprawling railroad octopus sorely needed restraint.
the interstate commerce commission created in 1887 as a feeble sop to the public had proved woefully inadequate.
railroad barons could simply appeal the commissions decisions on rates to the federal courts a process that might take ten years.
spurred by the former cowboy president congress passed effective railroad legislation beginning with the elkins act of 1903.
this curb was aimed primarily at the rebate evil.
heavy nes could now be imposed both on the railroads that gave rebates and on the shippers that accepted them.
still more effective was the hepburn act of 1906.
free passes with their hint of bribery were severely restricted.
the once infantile interstate commerce commission was expanded and its reach was extended to include express companies sleeping car companies and pipelines.
for the rst time the commission was given real molars when it was authorized on complaint of shippers to nullify existing rates and stipulate maximum rates.
railroads also provided roosevelt with an opportunity to brandish his antitrust bludgeon.
trusts had come to be a ghting word in the progressive era.
roosevelt believed that these industrial behemoths with their efcient means of production had arrived to stay.
he concluded that there were good trusts with public consciences and bad trusts which lusted greedily for power.
he was determined to respond to the popular outcry against the trusts but was also determined not to throw out the baby with the bathwater by indiscriminately smashing all large businesses.
roosevelt as a trustbuster rst burst into the headlines in 1902 with an attack on the northern securities company a railroad holding company orga nized by nancial titan j p morgan and empire builder james j hill.
these napoleonic moguls of money sought to achieve a virtual monopoly of the railroads in the northwest.
roosevelt was therefore challenging the most regal potentates of the industrial aristocracy.
the railway promoters appealed to the supreme court which in 1904 upheld roosevelts antitrust suit and ordered the northern securities company to be dissolved.
the northern securities decision jolted wall street and angered big business but greatly enhanced roosevelts reputation as a trust smasher.
roosevelts big stick crashed down on other giant monopolies as he initiated over forty legal proceedings protecting consumers dustrial behemoths were healthier though perhaps more tame at the end of roosevelts reign than they had been before.
his successor william howard taft actually busted more trusts than tr did.
in one celebrated instance in 1907 roosevelt even gave his personal blessing to j p morgans plan to have u s steel absorb the tennessee coal and iron company without fear of antitrust reprisals.
when taft then launched a suit against u s steel in 1911 the political reaction from tr was explosive.
caring for the consumer roosevelt tames the trusts legend to the contrary roosevelt did not attack all trusts indiscriminately.
rather he pursued a few high prole cases against a handful of corporate giants in order to tame other businesses into accepting government regulation.
against them.
the supreme court in 1905 declared the beef trust illegal and the heavy st of justice fell upon monopolists controlling sugar fertilizer harvesters and other key products.
much mythology has inated roosevelts reputation as a trustbuster.
the rough rider understood the political popularity of monopoly smashing but he did not consider it sound economic policy.
combination and integration he felt were the hallmarks of the age and to try to stem the tide of economic progress by political means he considered the rankest folly.
bigness was not necessarily badness so why punish success.
roosevelts real purpose in assaulting the goliaths of industry was symbolic to prove conclusively that the government not private business ruled the country.
he believed in regulating not fragmenting the big business combines.
the threat of dissolution he felt might make the sultans of the smokestacks more amenable to federal regulation as it did.
in truth roosevelt never swung his trust crushing stick with maximum force.
in many ways the huge in roosevelt backed a noteworthy mea sure in 1906 that beneted both corporations and consumers.
big meatpackers were being shut out of certain european markets because some american meat from the small packinghouses claimed the giants had been found to be tainted.
foreign governments were even threatening to ban all american meat imports by throwing out the good beef with the bad botulism.
at the same time american consumers hungered for safer canned products.
their appetite for reform was whetted by upton sinclairs sensational novel the jungle published in 1906.
sinclair a dedicated socialist intended his revolting tract to focus attention on the plight of the workers in the big canning factories but instead he appalled the public with his description of disgustingly unsanitary food products.
as he put it he aimed for the nations heart but hit its stomach.
the book described in noxious detail the lth disease and putrefaction in chicagos damp illventilated slaughterhouses.
many readers including roosevelt were so sickened that for a time they found meat unpalatable.
the president was moved by the loathsome mess in chicago to appoint a special investigating commission whose cold blooded report almost outdid sinclairs novel.
it related how piles of poisoned rats rope ends splinters and other debris were scooped up and canned as potted ham.
a cynical jingle of the time ran mary had a little lamb and when she saw it sicken she shipped it off to packingtown and now its labeled chicken.
backed by a nauseated public roosevelt induced congress to pass the meat inspection act of 1906.
it decreed that the preparation of meat shipped over state lines would be subject to federal inspection from chapter 28 progressivism and the republican roosevelt 1901 1912 sausage making ca.
1906 white jacketed inspectors like those on the right made some progress in cleaning up the septic slaughterhouses after the passage of the meat inspection act in 1906 corral to can.
although the largest packers resisted certain features of the act they accepted it as an opportunity to drive their smaller y by night competitors out of business.
at the same time they could receive the governments seal of approval on their exports.
as a companion to the meat inspection act the pure food and drug act of 1906 was designed to prevent the adulteration and mislabeling of foods and pharmaceuticals.
earth control wasteful americans assuming that their natural resources were inexhaustible had looted and polluted their incomparable domain with unparalleled speed and greed.
western ranchers and timbermen were especially eager to accelerate the destructive process for they panted to build up the country and the environmental consequences be hanged.
but even before the end of the nineteenth century far visioned leaders saw that such a squandering of the nations birthright would have to be halted or america would sink from resource richness to despoiled dearth.
a rst feeble step toward conservation had been taken with the desert land act of 1877 under which the federal government sold arid land cheaply on the condition that the purchaser irrigate the thirsty soil within three years.
more successful was the forest re serve act of 1891 authorizing the president to set aside public forests as national parks and other reserves.
under this statute some 46 million acres of magnicent trees were rescued from the lumbermans saw in the 1890s and preserved for posterity.
the carey act of 1894 distributed federal land to the states on the condition that it be irrigated and settled.
a new day in the history of conservation dawned with roosevelt see makers of america the environmentalists pp.
huntsman naturalist rancher lover of the great outdoors he was appalled by the pillaging of timber and mineral resources.
other dedicated conservationists notably gifford pin in his annual message to congress in 1907 roosevelt declared prophetically we are prone to speak of the resources of this country as inexhaustible this is not so.
the mineral wealth of the country the coal iron oil gas and the like does not reproduce itself and therefore is certain to be exhausted ultimately and wastefulness in dealing with it to day means that our descendants will feel the exhaustion a generation or two before they otherwise would.
the conservation crusade high point for conservation roosevelt and famed naturalist john muir visit glacier point on the rim of yosemite valley california.
in the distance is yosemite falls a few feet behind roosevelt is a sheer drop of 3 254 feet.
chot head of the federal division of forestry had broken important ground before him.
but roosevelt seized the banner of leadership and charged into the fray with all the weight of his prestige his energy his rsthand knowledge and his slashing invective.
the thirst of the desert still unslaked congress responded to the whip of the rough rider by passing the landmark newlands act of 1902.
washington was authorized to collect money from the sale of public lands in the sun baked western states and then use these funds for the development of irrigation projects.
settlers repaid the cost of reclamation from their nowproductive soil and the money was put into a revolving fund to nance more such enterprises.
the giant roosevelt dam constructed on arizonas salt river was appropriately dedicated by roosevelt in 1911.
thanks to this epochal legislation dozens of dams were thrown across virtually every major western river in the ensuing decades.
roosevelt pined to preserve the nations shrinking forests.
by 1900 only about a quarter of the once vast virgin timberlands remained standing.
lumbermen had already logged off most of the rst growth timber from maine to michigan and the sharp thud of their axes was beginning to split the silence in the great r forests of the pacic slope.
roosevelt proceeded to set aside in federal reserves some 125 million acres or almost three times the acreage thus saved from the saw by his three predecessors.
he similarly earmarked millions of acres of coal deposits as well as water resources useful for irrigation and power.
to set a shining example in 1902 he banned christmas trees from the white house.
conservation including reclamation may have been roosevelts most enduring tangible achievement.
he was buoyed in this effort by an upwelling national mood of concern about the disappearance of the frontier believed to be the source of such national characteristics as individualism and democracy.
an increasingly citied people worried that too much civilization might not be good for the national soul.
city dwellers snapped up jack londons call of the wild 1903 and other books about nature and urban youngsters made the outdoor oriented boy scouts of america the countrys largest youth orga ni zation.
middle class clubwomen raised money for nature preserves and orga nized the massachusetts and later national audubon society to save wild native birds by banning the use of plumes to ornament fashionable ladies hats.
the sierra club founded in 1892 dedicated itself to preserving the wildness of the western landscape.
gifford pinchot 1865 1946 a leading conservationist in the roosevelt administration wrote the object of our forest policy is not to preserve the forests because they are refuges for the wild creatures of the wilderness but the making of prosperous homes.
every other consideration comes as secondary.
the test of utility.
implies that no lands will be permanently reserves which can serve the people better in any other way.
makers of america theafricanthe great environmentalists american migration h umans have long been awed by nature but they have also yearned to be its masters.
native american peoples did what they could to shape the natural environment to serve their purposes burning forests and grasslands for example to improve hunting habitats but they lacked the tools to make mother earth bow deeply to their will.
the earliest european colonists saw north america as a howling wilderness and toiled mightily with ax and plow to tame it.
by the mid nineteenth century americans commanded powerful new technologies like the railroad and steam powered dredges which promised unbridled dominion over the natural world.
only then did voices begin to be heard in defense of the wounded earth the faint rst stirrings of what would come to be called environmentalism in a pattern that would often be repeated natures earliest defenders tended to be well off townsfolk and city dwellers like henry david thoreau and ralph waldo emerson.
the americans most likely to appreciate the value of the pristine wilderness it seemed were those who had ceased to struggle against it.
cities not log cabins produce sierra clubbers one historian noted.
for the loggers miners and farmers who continued to sweat their living out of natures grudging embrace concern for environmental niceties often seemed like the sanctimonious piety of a privileged elite.
by the dawn of the twentieth century many genteel urban americans had come to romanticize their pioneer forebears.
they reinvented hunting and shing as sports for the well to do not simply as ways to put food on the table.
preservationists like john muir waxed lyrical about the mystic allure of unspoiled nature.
seizing the popular mood theodore roosevelt deliberately constructed a public image of himself as a manly outdoorsman raising cattle in the dakotas shooting lions in africa rafting down wild rivers in the amazon basin and as president he greatly expanded the system of national forests.
but roosevelt was also a pioneer of another sort as a prominent promoter of the progressive era conservation movement composed of a loose coalition of scientists bureaucrats and businesspeople dependent on stable access to americas rich endowment of natural resources.
progressive conservationists believed that nature must be neither uncritically reverenced nor wastefully exploited but must instead be efciently utilized.
thus the same tr who admired the wonders of yosemite valley in the company of john muir also supported the professional forester gifford pinchot who declared that the object of our forest policy is not to preserve the forests because they are refuges for the wild creatures of the wilderness but the making of prosperous homes.
use must be the test by which the forester tries himself pinchots rational use philosophy guided americas natural resource policy until the mid twentieth century.
it justied the systematic harvesting of millions of trees in the sprawling national forests whose boundaries roosevelt had expanded and the drowning of vast river valleys behind massive dams that roosevelts reclamation service helped to build.
this attitude toward nature triumphed in the new deal era of the 1930s when the federal government initiated colossal projects that undertook nothing less than reengineering the face of the continent including the tennessee valley authority the soil conservation service and the shelterbelt tree planting project on the great plains.
the huge reach of these new deal projects also introduced millions of americans to the con gifford pinchot going trout fishing the father of the modern forest service pinchot championed the concept of rational use as the guiding principle of the federal governments natural resource management policies.
lake powell utah named for the famed explorer john wesley powell and formed by one of the several dams on the colorado river lake powell has been a focus of intense controversy.
it drowned the spectacularly beautiful glen canyon but created recreational facilities for countless americans.
cept that nature had to be treated with respect helping to stimulate the post world war ii grassroots environmental movement.
the rise of ecological science in the post world war ii era fundamentally changed the debate about the relation of nature to civilization.
ecologists charged that the apparent rationality of the earlier conservationists dangerously neglected the fateful intricacies of earth day 1999 some fteen hundred schoolchildren gathered on the shoreline near los angeles to participate in a beach cleanup project.
the o here represents planet earth the children inside it represent the north and south american continents.
biological systems.
they called attention to the stunningly complex webs of interrelationships that linked together seemingly unrelated organisms and to the perils of tampering even slightly with the delicate biological fabrics that nature had taken millennia to weave.
rachel carson helped to popularize the new outlook in her sensational 1962 expos silent spring about the far reaching effects of pesticides on birds plants and animals including humans.
the advent of ecological studies coincided with a revival of preservationist sentiment especially in the suburbs where americans increasingly dwelled.
hordes of afuent baby boomers took to americas trails slopes and waterways often on public lands like arizonas wondrous grand canyon national park or public waters like utahs shimmering and manmade lake powell.
membership in environmental orga ni zations such as the sierra club and the audubon society soared as a generation infatuated with nature demanded a clean and green world.
the rst celebration of earth day on april 22 1970 marked the political maturation of modern day environmentalism which wedded scientic analysis with respect for natures majesty.
that same year saw the creation of the federal environmental protection agency epa soon followed by the endangered species act and other legislation designed to regulate the relationship between humans and nature.
at the outset of the twenty rst century developments like global warming served dramatic notice that planet earth was the biggest ecological system of them all one that did not recognize national boundaries.
yet while americans took pride in the efforts they had made to clean up their own turf who were they having long since consumed much of their own timberlands to tell the brazilians that they should not cut down the amazon rain forest.
who were they having tamed virtually all their own free owing waters to tell the chinese not to dam their rivers.
for the peoples of the developing world struggling to match americas standard of living environmentalists often seemed like spoiled spoilers preaching the same privileged pieties that had infuriated generations of working americans.
chapter 28 progressivism and the republican roosevelt 1901 1912 loggers in the state of washington 1912 it took the sweat and skill of many men to conquer a giant douglas r like this one.
an axwielding sniper had rounded the edges of this log so that a team of oxen driven by a bullwhacker could more easily drag it out of the woods along a skid road skid road sometimes corrupted as skid row was also a name for the often sleazy sections of logging towns where loggers spent their time in the off season.
the preservationists lost a major battle in 1913 when the federal government allowed the city of san francisco to build a dam for its municipal water supply in the spectacular high walled hetch hetchy valley in yosemite national park.
the hetch hetchy controversy laid bare a deep division between conservationists that persists to the present day.
to the preservationists of the sierra club including famed flooding the hetch hetchy valley to quench san franciscos thirst preservationists led by john muir battled for seven years unsuccessfully to prevent the building of a dam that would turn this spectacular glacial valley in yosemite national park into the hetch hetchy reservoir which would provide san francisco with water.
muir observed dam hetch hetchy.
as well dam for water tanks the peoples cathedrals and churches for no holier temple has ever been consecrated by the heart of man today environmentalists are campaigning to restore the hetch hetchy valley by removing the dam.
naturalist john muir hetch hetchy was a temple of nature that should be held inviolable by the civilizing hand of humanity.
but other conservationists among them president roosevelts chief forester gifford pinchot believed that wilderness was waste pinchot and roosevelt wanted to use the nations natural endowment intelligently.
in their eyes they had to battle on two fronts against greedy commercial interests the panic of 1907 that abused nature as well as against romantic preservationists in thrall to simple woodman spare thattree sentimentality.
under roosevelt professional foresters and engineers developed a policy of multiple use resource management they sought to combine recreation sustained yield logging watershed protection and summer stock grazing on the same expanse of federal land.
at rst many westerners resisted the federal management of natural resources but they soon learned how to take advantage of new agencies like the forest service and especially the bureau of reclamation.
the largest ranches and timber companies in particular gured out how to work hand in glove with federal conservation programs devoted to the rational largescale and long term use of natural resources.
the one man and a mule logger or the one man and adog sheepherder had little clout in the new resources bureaucracy.
single person enterprises were shouldered aside in the interest of efciency by the combined bulk of big business and big government.
the roosevelt panic of 1907 the machine and nature these hardy sightseers at the grand canyon in 1911 ironically and probably unwittingly foreshadowed the mass tourism that arrived with the dawning automobile age.
soon millions of motorized americans would regularly ee from the cities and suburbs to get away from it all in wilderness sites increasingly overrun by their fellow refugees from civilization roosevelt was handily elected president in his own right in 1904 and entered his new term buoyed by his enormous personal popularity the cuddly teddy bear honored one of his bear hunting exploits when he saved the life of a cub and children piped vigorously on whistles modeled on his famous teeth.
yet the conser vative republican bosses considered him as dangerous and unpredictable as a rattlesnake.
they grew increasingly restive as roosevelt in his second term called ever more loudly for regulating corporations taxing incomes and protecting workers.
roosevelt meanwhile had partly defanged himself after his election in 1904 by announcing that under no circumstances would he be a candidate for a third term.
this was a tactical blunder for the power of the king wanes when the people know he will be dead in four years.
roosevelt suffered a sharp setback in 1907 when a short but punishing panic descended on wall street.
the nancial urry featured frightened runs on banks suicides and criminal indictments against speculators.
the nancial world hastened to blame roosevelt for the storm.
it cried that this quack had unsettled industry with his boat rocking tactics.
conservatives damned him as theodore the meddler and branded the current distress the roosevelt panic the hottempered president angrily lashed back at his critics when he accused certain malefactors of great wealth of having deliberately engineered the monetary crisis to force the government to relax its assaults on trusts.
fortunately the panic of 1907 paved the way for long overdue scal reforms.
precipitating a currency shortage the urry laid bare the need for a more elastic medium of exchange.
in a crisis of this sort the hardpressed banks were unable to increase the volume of chapter 28 progressivism and the republican roosevelt 1901 1912 money in circulation and those with ample reserves were reluctant to lend to their less fortunate competitors.
congress in 1908 responded by passing the aldrich vreeland act which authorized national banks to issue emergency currency backed by various kinds of collateral.
the path was thus smoothed for the momentous federal reserve act of 1913 see p 733.
the rough rider thunders out still warmly popular in 1908 roosevelt could easily have won a second presidential nomination and almost certainly the election.
but he felt bound by his impulsive postelection promise after his victory in 1904.
the departing president thus naturally sought a successor who would carry out my policies the man of his choice was amiable ample girthed and hugeframed william howard taft secretary of war and a mild progressive.
as an heir apparent he had often been called upon in roosevelts absence to sit on the lid all 350 pounds of him.
at the republican convention of 1908 in chicago roosevelt used his control of the party machinery the steamroller to push through tafts nomination on the rst ballot.
three weeks later in mile high denver in the heart of silver country the democrats nominated twice beaten william jennings bryan.
the dull campaign of 1908 featured the rotund taft and the now balding boy orator both trying to don the progressive roosevelt mantle.
the solid judge taft read cut and dried speeches while bryan griped that roosevelt had stolen his policies from the bryanite camp.
a majority of voters chose stability with roosevelt endorsed taft who polled 321 electoral votes to 162 for bryan.
the victors popular count was 7 675 320 to 6 412 294.
the elections only surprise came from the socialists who amassed 420 793 votes for eugene v debs the hero of the pullman strike of 1894 see pp.
roosevelt ever in the limelight left soon after the election for a lion hunt in africa.
his numerous enemies clinked glasses while toasting health to the lions and a few irreverently prayed that some big cat would do its duty but tr survived still bursting with energy at the age of fty one in 1909.
roosevelt was branded by his adversaries as a wild eyed radical but his reputation as an eater of errant industrialists now seems inated.
he fought many a sham battle and the number of laws he inspired was baby kiss papa good bye theodore roosevelt leaves his baby my policies in the hands of his chosen successor william howard taft.
friction between taft and roosevelt would soon erupt however prompting roosevelt to return to politics and challenge taft for the presidency.
certainly not in proportion to the amount of noise he emitted.
he was often under attack from the reigning business lords but the more enlightened of them knew that they had a friend in the white house.
roosevelt should be remembered rst and foremost as the cowboy who started to tame the bucking bronco of adolescent capitalism thus ensuring it a long adult life.
trs enthusiasm and perpetual youthfulness like an overgrown boy scouts appealed to the young of all ages.
you must always remember a british diplomat cautioned his colleagues that the president is about six he served as a political lightning rod to protect capitalists against popular indignation and against socialism which roosevelt regarded as ominous he strenuously sought the middle road between taft as president unbridled individualism and paternalistic collectivism.
his conservation crusade which tried to mediate between the romantic wilderness preservationists and the rapacious resource predators was probably his most typical and his most lasting achievement.
several other contributions of roosevelt lasted beyond his presidency.
first he greatly enlarged the power and prestige of the presidential ofce and masterfully developed the technique of using the big stick of publicity as a political bludgeon.
second he helped shape the progressive movement and beyond it the liberal reform campaigns later in the century.
his square deal in a sense was the grandfather of the new deal later launched by his fth cousin franklin d roosevelt.
finally to a greater degree than any of his predecessors tr opened the eyes of americans to the fact that they shared the world with other nations.
as a great power they had fallen heir to responsibilities and had been seized by ambitions from which there was no escaping.
taft a round peg in a square hole william howard taft with his ruddy complexion and upturned mustache at rst inspired widespread condence.
everybody loves a fat man the saying goes and the jovial taft with mirthquakes of laughter bubbling up from his abundant abdomen was personally popular.
he had graduated second in his class at yale and had established an enviable reputation as a lawyer and judge though he was widely regarded as hostile to labor unions.
he had been a trusted administrator under roosevelt in the philippines at home and in cuba where he had served capably as a troubleshooter.
but good old will suffered from lethal political handicaps.
roosevelt had led the con icting elements of the republican party by the sheer force of his personality.
taft in contrast had none of the arts of a dashing political leader and none of roosevelts zest for the fray.
recoiling from the clamor of controversy he generally adopted an attitude of passivity toward congress.
he was a poor judge of public opinion and his candor made him a chronic victim of foot inmouth disease.
peaceful bill was no doubt a mild progressive but at heart he was more wedded to the status quo than to change.
signicantly his cabinet did not contain a single representative of the partys insurgent wing which was on re for reform of current abuses especially the tariff.
the dollar goes abroad as a diplomat though ordinarily lethargic taft bestirred himself to use the lever of american investments to boost american political interests abroad an approach to foreign policy that his critics denounced as dollar diplomacy.
washington warmly encouraged wall street bankers to sluice their surplus dollars into foreign areas of strategic concern to the united states especially in the far east and in the regions critical to the security of the panama canal.
by preempting investors from rival powers such as germany new york bankers would thus strengthen american defenses and foreign policies while bringing further prosperity to their homeland and to themselves.
the almighty dollar thereby supplanted the big stick.
chinas manchuria was the object of tafts most spectacular effort to inject the reluctant dollar into the far eastern theater.
newly ambitious japan and imperialistic russia recent foes controlled the railroads of this strategic province.
president taft saw in the manchurian railway monopoly a possible strangulation of chinese economic interests and a consequent slamming of the open door in the faces of u s merchants.
in 1909 secretary of state philander c knox blunderingly proposed that a group of american and foreign bankers buy the manchurian railroads and then turn them over to china under a self liquidating arrangement.
both japan and russia unwilling to be jockeyed out of their dominant position bluntly rejected knoxs overtures.
taft was showered with ridicule.
another dangerous new trouble spot was the revolution riddled caribbean now virtually a yankee lake.
hoping to head off trouble washington urged wall street bankers to pump dollars into the nancial vacuums in honduras and haiti to keep out foreign funds.
the united states under the monroe doctrine would not permit foreign nations to intervene and consequently felt obligated to put its money where its mouth was to prevent economic and political instability.
again necessity was the mother of armed caribbean intervention.
sporadic disorders in palm fronded cuba honduras and the dominican republic brought american forces to these countries to restore order and protect american investment.
a revolutionary chapter 28 progressivism and the republican roosevelt 1901 1912 ex president theodore roosevelt watches president taft struggle with the demands of government 1910 upheaval in nicaragua partly fomented by american interests resulted in the landing of twenty ve hundred marines in 1912.
the marines remained in nicaragua for thirteen years see map 29 2 on p 735.
taft the trustbuster taft managed to gain some fame as a smasher of monopolies.
the ironic truth is that the colorless taft brought 90 suits against the trusts during his 4 years in ofce as compared with some 44 for roosevelt in 7 years.
by fateful happenstance the most sensational judicial actions during the taft regime came in 1911.
in that year the supreme court ordered the dissolution of the mighty standard oil company which was judged to be a combination in restraint of trade in violation of the sherman anti trust act of 1890.
at the same time the court handed down its famous rule of reason this doctrine held that only those combinations that unreasonably restrained trade were illegal.
this neprint proviso ripped a huge hole in the governments antitrust net.
even more explosively in 1911 taft decided to press an antitrust suit against the u s steel corporation.
this initiative infuriated roosevelt who had personally been involved in one of the mergers that prompted the suit.
once roosevelts protg president taft was increasingly taking on the role of his antagonist.
the stage was being set for a bruising confrontation.
taft splits the republican party lowering the barriers of the formidable protective tariff the mother of trusts was high on the agenda of the progressive members of the republican party and they at rst thought they had a friend and ally in taft.
true to his campaign promises to reduce tariffs taft called congress into special session in march 1909.
the house proceeded to pass a moderately reductive bill but senatorial reactionaries tacked on hundreds of upward tariff revisions.
only items such as hides sea moss and canary seed were left on the duty free list.
much to the dismay of his supporters taft signed the payne aldrich bill rubbing salt in their wounds by taft and the progressives proclaiming it the best bill that the republican party ever passed taft revealed a further knack for shooting himself in the foot in his handling of conservation.
the portly president was a dedicated conservationist and his contributions like the establishment of the bureau of mines to control mineral resources actually equaled or surpassed those of roosevelt.
but his praiseworthy accomplishments were largely erased in the public mind by the noisy ballinger pinchot quarrel that erupted in 1910.
when secretary of the interior richard ballinger opened public lands in wyoming montana and alaska to corporate development he was sharply criticized by gifford pinchot chief of the agriculture departments division of forestry and a stalwart rooseveltian.
when taft dismissed pinchot on the narrow grounds of insubordination a storm of protest arose from conservationists and from roosevelts friends who were legion.
the whole unsavory episode further widened the growing rift between the president and the former president onetime bosom political partners.
the reformist wing of the republican party was now up in arms while taft was being pushed increasingly into the embrace of the stand pat old guard.
by the spring of 1910 the grand old party was split wideopen owing largely to the clumsiness of taft.
a suspicious roosevelt returned triumphantly to new york in june 1910 and shortly thereafter stirred up a tempest.
unable to keep silent he took to the stump at osawatomie kansas and shocked the old guard with a aming speech.
the doctrine that he proclaimed popularly known as the new nationalism urged the national government to increase its power to remedy economic and social abuses.
weakened by these internal divisions the republicans lost badly in the congressional elections of 1910.
in a victory of landslide proportions the democrats emerged with 228 seats leaving the once dominant republicans with only 161.
in a further symptom of the reforming temper of the times a socialist representative austrian born victor l berger was elected from milwaukee.
the republicans by virtue of holdovers retained the senate 51 to 41 but the insurgents in their midst were numerous enough to make that hold precarious.
he was eventually denied his seat in 1919 during a wave of antired hysteria.
the taft roosevelt rupture the sputtering uprising in republican ranks had now blossomed into a full edged revolt.
early in 1911 the national progressive republican league was formed with the ery white maned senator la follette of wisconsin its leading candidate for the republican presidential nomination.
the assumption was that roosevelt an anti third termer would not permit himself to be drafted but the restless rough rider began to change his views about third terms as he saw taft hand in glove with the hated old guard discard my policies in february 1912 roosevelt formally wrote to seven state governors that he was willing to accept the republican nomination.
his reasoning was that the third term tradition applied to three consecutive elective terms.
exuberantly he cried my hat is in the ring and the ght is on and i am stripped to the buff roosevelt forthwith seized the progressive banner while la follette who had served as a convenient pathbreaker was protestingly elbowed aside.
girded for battle the rough rider came clattering into the presidential primaries then being held in many states.
he shouted through half clenched teeth that the president had fallen under the thumb of the reactionary bosses and that although taft means well he means well feebly the once genial taft now in a ghting mood retorted by branding roosevelt supporters emotionalists and neurotics a taft roosevelt explosion was near in june 1912 when the republican convention met in chicago.
the rooseveltites who were about 100 delegates short of winning the nomination challenged the right of some 250 taft delegates to be seated.
most of these contests were arbitrarily settled in favor of taft whose supporters held the throttle of the convention steamroller.
the roosevelt adherents crying fraud and naked theft in the end refused to vote and taft triumphed.
roosevelt the supposedly good sportsman refused to quit the game.
having tasted for the rst time the bitter cup of defeat he was now on re to lead a thirdparty crusade.
chapter 28 progressivism and the republican roosevelt 1901 1912 chronology sierra club founded national consumers league founded commission system established in galveston texas progressive robert la follette elected governor of wisconsin american socialist party formed lincoln steffens and ida tarbell publish muckraking exposs anthracite coal strike newlands act department of commerce and labor established elkins act womens trade union league founded northern securities case roosevelt defeats alton b parker for presidency lochner v new york hepburn act upton sinclair publishes the jungle meat inspection act pure food and drug act muller v oregon taft defeats bryan for presidency aldrich vreeland act payne aldrich tariff ballinger pinchot affair washington state grants woman suffrage triangle shirtwaist company re standard oil antitrust case u s steel corporation antitrust suit cal i fornia grants woman suffrage taft wins republican nomination over roosevelt arizona kansas and oregon grant woman suffrage childrens bureau established in department of labor seventeenth amendment passed direct election of u s senators federal reserve act san francisco decides to build hetch hetchy reservoir womens bureau established in department of labor roosevelt panic key terms social gospel 703 muckrakers 704 initiative 708 referendum 708 recall 708 australian ballot 709 muller v oregon 711 lochner v new york 711 womans christian temperance union wctu 712 people to know elkins act 714 meat inspection act 715 pure food and drug act 716 hetch hetchy valley 720 dollar diplomacy 723 payne aldrich bill 724 henry demarest lloyd thorstein veblen jacob a riis robert m fighting bob la follette hiram w johnson florence kelley frances e willard gifford pinchot john muir to learn more to learn more nancy cott the grounding of modern feminism 1987 alan dawley struggles for justice social responsibility and the liberal state 1991 glenda gilmore gender and jim crow women and the politics of white supremacy in north carolina 1896 1920 1996 samuel p hays conservation and the gospel of efciency 1959 richard hofstadter the age of reform 1955 t j jackson lears no place of grace antimodernism and the transformation of american culture 1981 robyn muncy creating a female dominion in american reform 1991 daniel t rodgers atlantic crossings social politics in a progressive age 1998 nick salvatore eugene v debs citizen and socialist 1982 kathryn kish sklar florence kelley and the nations work 1995 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at wilsonian progressivism at home and abroad 1912 1916 american enterprise is not free the man with only a little capital is nding it harder and harder to get into the eld more and more impossible to compete with the big fellow.
because the laws of this country do not prevent the strong from crushing the weak.
o fce hungry democrats the outs since 1897 were jubilant over the disruptive republican brawl at the convention in chicago.
if they could come up with an outstanding reformist leader they had an excellent chance to win the white house.
such a leader appeared in dr woodrow wilson once a mild conservative but now a militant progressive.
beginning professional life as a brilliant academic lecturer on government he had risen in 1902 to the presidency of princeton university where he had achieved some sweeping educational reforms.
wilson entered politics in 1910 when new jersey bosses needing a respectable front candidate for the governorship offered him the nomination.
they expected to lead the academic novice by the nose but to their surprise wilson waged a passionate reform campaign in which he assailed the predatory trusts and promised to return state government to the people.
riding the crest of the progressive wave the schoolmaster in politics was swept into ofce.
once in the governors chair wilson drove through the legislature a sheaf of forward looking mea sures that made reactionary new jersey one of the more liberal states.
filled with righteous indignation wilson revealed irresistible reforming zeal burning eloquence superb powers of leadership and a refreshing habit of appealing over the heads of the scheming bosses to the sovereign people.
now a gure of national eminence wilson was being widely mentioned for the presidency.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website roosevelt versus wilson gop divided by bull moose equals democratic victory 1912 the bull moose campaign of 1912 when the democrats met at baltimore in 1912 wilson was nominated on the forty sixth ballot aided by william jennings bryans switch to his side.
the democrats gave wilson a strong progressive platform to run on dubbed the new freedom program it included calls for stronger antitrust legislation banking reform and tariff reductions.
surging events had meanwhile been thrusting roosevelt to the fore as a candidate for the presidency on a third party progressive republican ticket.
the ghting ex cowboy angered by his recent rebuff was eager to lead the charge.
a pro roosevelt progressive convention with about two thousand delegates from forty states assembled in chicago during august 1912.
dramatically symbolizing the rising political status of women as well as progressive support for the cause of social justice settlement house pioneer jane addams placed roosevelts name in nomination for the presidency.
roosevelt was applauded tumultuously as he cried in a vehement speech we stand at armageddon and we battle for the lord the hosanna spirit of a religious revival meeting suffused the convention as the hoarse delegates sang onward christian soldiers and battle hymn of the republic william allen white the caustic kansas journalist later wrote roosevelt bit me and i went mad fired up progressives entered the campaign with righteousness and enthusiasm.
roosevelt boasted that he felt as strong as a bull moose and the bull moose took its place with the donkey and the elephant in the american political zoo.
as one poet whimsically put it i want to be a bull moose and with the bull moose stand with antlers on my forehead and a big stick in my hand.
roosevelt and taft were bound to slit each others political throats by dividing the republican vote they virtually guaranteed a democratic victory.
the two antagonists tore into each other as only former friends can.
death alone can take me out now cried the once jovial taft as he branded roosevelt a dangerous egotist and a demagogue roosevelt ghting mad assailed taft as a fathead with the brain of a guinea pig beyond the clashing personalities the overshadowing question of the 1912 campaign was which of two varieties of progressivism would prevail roosevelts new nationalism or wilsons new freedom.
both men favored a more active government role in economic and social affairs but they disagreed sharply over specic strategies.
roosevelt preached the theories spun out by the progressive thinker herbert croly in his book the promise of american life 1910.
croly and tr both favored continued consolidation of trusts and labor unions paralleled by the growth of powerful regulatory agencies in washington.
roosevelt and his bull moosers also campaigned for woman suffrage and a broad program of social welfare including minimum wage laws and socialistic social insurance.
clearly the bull moose progressives looked forward to the kind of activist welfare state that franklin roosevelts new deal would one day make a reality.
chapter 31 american life in the roaring twenties 1919 1929 class struggle while many american liberals hung their heads.
the evidence against the accused though damaging betrayed serious weaknesses.
if the trial had been held in an at mosphere less charged with antiredism the outcome might well have been only a prison term.
hooded hoodlums of the kkk a new ku klux klan spawned by the postwar reaction mushroomed fearsomely in the early 1920s.
despite the familiar sheets and hoods it more closely resembled the antiforeign nativist movements of the 1850s than the antiblack nightriders of the 1860s.
it was antiforeign anti catholic antiblack anti jewish antipacist anti communist anti internationalist antievolutionist antibootlegger antigambling antiadultery and anti birth control.
it was also pro anglo saxon pro native american and pro protestant.
in short the besheeted klan betokened an extremist ultraconser vative uprising against many of the forces of diversity and modernity that were transforming american culture.
as reconstituted the klan spread with astonishing rapidity especially in the midwest and the bible belt south where protestant fundamentalism thrived.
at its peak in the mid 1920s it claimed about 5 million dues paying members and wielded potent political inuence.
it capitalized on the typically american love of on the edge adventure and in group camaraderie to say nothing of the adolescent ardor for secret ritual.
the knights of the invisible empire included among their ofcials imperial wizards grand goblins king kleagles and other horrendous kreatures the most impressive displays were konclaves and huge ag waving parades.
the chief warning was the blazing cross.
the principal weapon was the bloodied lash supplemented by tar and feathers.
rallying songs were klanswomen on parade 1928 founded in the reconstruction era the ku klux klan enjoyed a remarkable resurgence in the 1920s.
here women members unmasked and unapologetic march down pennsylvania avenue under the shadow of the capitol dome.
immigration restriction hiram wesley evans 1881 1966 imperial wizard of the ku klux klan in 1926 poignantly described the cultural grievances that fueled the klan and lay behind much of the fundamentalist revolt against modernism nordic americans for the last generation have found themselves increasingly uncomfortable and nally deeply distressed.
one by one all our traditional moral standards went by the boards or were so disregarded that they ceased to be binding.
the sacredness of our sabbath of our homes of chastity and nally even of our right to teach our own children in our own schools fundamental facts and truths were torn away from us.
those who maintained the old standards did so only in the face of constant ridicule.
we found our great cities and the control of much of our industry and commerce taken over by strangers.
we are a movement of the plain people very weak in the matter of culture intellectual support and trained leadership.
this is undoubtedly a weakness.
it lays us open to the charge of being hicks and rubes and drivers of second hand fords the fiery cross on high one hundred percent american and the ku klux klan and the pope against kissing the popes toe.
one brutal slogan was kill the kikes koons and katholics this reign of hooded horror so repulsive to the best american ideals collapsed rather suddenly in the late 1920s.
decent people at last recoiled from the orgy of ribboned esh and terrorism while scandalous embezzling by klan ofcials launched a congressional investigation.
the bubble was punctured when the movement was exposed as a vicious racket based on a 10 initiation fee 4 of which was kicked back to lcal organizers as an incentive to recruit.
the kkk was an alarming manifestation of the intolerance and prejudice plaguing people anxious about the dizzying pace of social change in the 1920s.
despite the klans decline civil rights activists fought in vain for legislation making lynching a federal crime as lawmakers feared alienating southern white voters.
stemming the foreign flood isolationist america of the 1920s ingrown and provincial had little use for the immigrants who began to ood into the country again as peace settled soothingly on the war torn world.
some 800 000 stepped ashore in 1920 1921 about two thirds of them from southern and eastern europe.
the one hundred percent americans recoiling at the sight of this resumed new immigration once again cried that the famed poem at the base of the statue of liberty was all too literally true they claimed that a sickly europe was indeed vomiting on america the wretched refuse of its teeming shore congress temporarily plugged the breach with the emergency quota act of 1921.
newcomers from europe were restricted in any given year to a de nite quota which was set at 3 percent of the people of their nationality who had been living in the united states in 1910.
the only way to handle it isolationists and nativists succeeded in damming up the ow of immigrants to the united states in the early 1920s.
the immigration act of 1924 placed strict quotas on european immigrants and completely shut out the japanese.
chapter 31 american life in the roaring twenties 1919 1929 176 983 average annual inflow 1907 1914 685 531 198 082 quotas under act of 1921 quotas under act of 1924 quotas under nationalorigins provision of 1929 quotas under mccarranwalter act of 1952 158 367 140 999 21 847 132 323 20 251 125 165 29 492 immigrants from northern and western europe immigrants from other countries principally southern and eastern europe figure 31 1 annual immigration and the quota laws the national origins quota system was abolished in 1965.
legislation in that year capped the level of immigration at 170 000 per year but made exceptions for children spouses and parents of persons already arrived.
it also restricted immigration from any single country to 20 000 people per year.
the immigration laws were again signicantly revised in 1986 and changed twice more in 1990 and 1996.
in the twenty rst century immigration laws remain highly controversial.
987 and 1094.
this national origins system was relatively favorable to the immigrants from southern and eastern europe for by 1910 immense numbers of them had already arrived.
this stopgap legislation of 1921 was replaced by the immigration act of 1924.
quotas for foreigners were cut from 3 percent to 2 percent.
the national origins base was shifted from the census of 1910 to that of 1890 by which time comparatively few southern europeans had arrived.
great britain and northern ireland for example could send 65 721 a year as against 5 802 for italy.
southern europeans bitterly denounced the device as unfair and discriminatory a triumph for the nativist belief that blue eyed and fair haired northern europeans were of better blood.
the purpose was clearly to freeze americas existing racial composition which was largely northern european.
a agrantly discriminatory section of the immigration act of 1924 slammed the door absolutely against japa nese immigrants.
mass hate america rallies erupted in japan and one japa nese superpatriot expressed his outrage by committing suicide near the american embassy in five years later the immigration act of 1929 using 1920 as the quota base virtually cut immigration in half by limiting the total to 152 574 a year.
in 1965 congress abolished the national origins quota system.
exempt from the quota system were canadians and latin americans whose proximity made them easy to attract for jobs when times were good and just as easy to send back home when they were not.
the quota system effected a pivotal departure in american policy.
it claimed that the nation was lling up and that a no vacancy sign was needed.
immigration henceforth dwindled to a mere trickle.
by 1931 probably for the rst time in the american experience more foreigners left than arrived.
quotas thus caused america to sacrice something of its tradition of freedom and opportunity as well as its future ethnic diversity see figure 31 1.
the immigration act of 1924 marked the end of an era a period of virtually unrestricted immigration that in the preceding century had brought some 35 million newcomers to the united states mostly from europe.
the immigrant tide was now cut off but it left on american shores by the 1920s a patchwork of ethnic communities separated from each other and from the larger society by language religion and customs.
many of the most recent arrivals including the italians jews and poles lived in isolated enclaves with their own houses of worship newspapers and theaters see makers of america the poles pp.
efforts to organize labor unions repeatedly foundered on the rocks of ethnic differences.
immigrant workers on the same shop oor might share a common prohibition interest in wages and working conditions but they often had no common language with which to forge common cause.
indeed cynical employers often played upon ethnic rivalries to keep their workers divided and powerless.
ethnic variety thus undermined class and political solidarity.
it was an old american story but one that some reformers hoped would not go on forever.
immigration restriction did not appeal to all reformers.
particularly opposed was the chorus of cultural pluralists who had long criticized the idea that an american melting pot would eliminate ethnic differences.
two intellectuals the philosopher horace kallen and the critic randolph bourne championed alternative conceptions of the immigrant role in american society.
at a time when war hysteria demanded the one hundred percent americanization of german and austrian immigrants kallen defended the newcomers right to practice their ancestral customs.
in kallens vision the united states should provide a protective canopy for ethnic and racial groups to preserve their cultural uniqueness.
like instruments in a symphony orchestra each immigrant community would harmonize with the others while retaining its own singular identity.
if kallen stressed the preservation of identity bourne advocated greater cross fertilization among immigrants.
cosmopolitan interchange bourne believed was destined to make america not a nationality but a trans nationality a weaving back and forth with the other lands of many threads of all sizes and colors in this view the united states should serve as the vanguard of a more international and multicultural age.
kallens pluralism and bournes cosmopolitanism attracted a handful of other intellectuals to the defense of ethnic diversity including progressives like john dewey jane addams and louis brandeis.
vastly outnumbered in the debate over immigration restriction in the 1920s these early proponents of cultural pluralism planted the seeds for the blooming of multiculturalism in the last quarter of the twentieth century.
the volstead act passed by congress later that year.
together these laws made the world safe for hypocrisy the legal abolition of alcohol was especially popular in the south and west.
southern whites were eager to keep stimulants out of the hands of blacks lest they burst out of their place in the west prohibition represented an attack on all the vices associated with the ubiquitous western saloon public drunkenness prostitution corruption and crime.
but despite the overwhelming ratication of the dry amendment strong opposition persisted in the larger eastern cities.
for many wet foreign born people old world styles of sociability were built around drinking in beer gardens and corner taverns.
yet most americans now assumed that prohibition had come to stay.
everywhere carousers indulged in last wild ings as the nation prepared to enter upon a permanent alcoholiday but prohibitionists were naive in the extreme.
they overlooked the tenacious american tradition of strong drink and of weak control by the central government the prohibition experiment one of the last peculiar spasms of the progressive reform movement was prohibition loudly supported by crusading churches and by many women.
the arid new order was authorized in 1919 by the eighteenth amendment see the appendix as implemented by texas guinan queen of the nightclubs guinan is shown here in one of the speakeasies she operated in new york city during prohibition.
makers of america theafricanthe great poles american migration t he poles were among the largest immigrant groups to respond to industrializing americas call for badly needed labor after the civil war.
between 1870 and world war i some 2 million polish speaking peasants boarded steamships bound for the united states.
by the 1920s when antiforeign feeling led to restrictive legislation that choked the immigrant stream to a trickle polish immigrants and their american born children began to develop new identities as polish americans.
the rst poles to arrive in the new world had landed in jamestown in 1608 and helped to develop that colonys timber industry.
over the ensuing two and a half centuries scattered religious dissenters and revolutionary nationalists also made their way from poland to america.
during the revolution about one hundred poles including two ofcers recruited by benjamin franklin served in the continental army.
but the polish hopefuls who poured into the united states in the late nineteenth century came primarily to stave off starvation and to earn money to buy land.
known in their homeland as za chlebem for bread emigrants they belonged to the mass of central and eastern european peasants who had been forced off their farms by growing competition from the large scale mechanized agriculture of western europe and the united states.
an exceptionally high birthrate among the catholic poles compounded this economic pressure creating an army of the land poor and landless who left their homes seasonally or permanently in search of work.
in 1891 farmworkers and unskilled laborers in the united states earned about 1 a day more than eight times as much as agricultural workers in the polish province of galicia.
such a magnet was irresistible.
these polish speaking newcomers emigrated not from a unied nation but from a weakened country that had been partitioned in the eighteenth century by three great european powers prussia later germany austria hungary and russia.
the prussian poles driven from their homeland in part by the anticatholic policies that the german imperial government pursued in the 1870s arrived in america rst.
fleeing religious persecution as well as economic turmoil many of these early immigrants came to the united states intending to stay.
by contrast most of those who came later from austrian and russian poland simply hoped to earn enough american dollars to return home and buy land.
some of the polish peasants learned of america from propaganda spread throughout europe by agents for u s railroad and steamship lines.
but many more were lured by glowing letters from friends and relatives already living in the united states.
the rst wave of polish immigrants had established a thriving network of self help and fraternal associations orga nized around polish catholic parishes.
often polish american entrepreneurs helped their european compatriots polish coal miners ca.
1905 it was common practice in american mines to segregate mining crews by ethnicity and race.
solidarity still 1981 many polish americans continue to take a keen interest in the fate of their ancestral land.
in the 1980s many of them supported a challenge to the communist government led by a renegade trade union federation called solidarity.
thousands rallied in chicago the home of the largest polish community in the united states to protest against polish prime minister general wojciech jaruzelski mocked here leashed to soviet leader leonid brezhnev who had imposed martial law and ordered the mass arrest of solidarity activists.
make travel arrangements or nd jobs in the united states.
one of the most successful of these the energetic chicago grocer anton schermann is credited with bringing over 100 000 poles and causing the windy city to earn the nickname the american warsaw most of the poles arriving in the united states in the late nineteenth century headed for booming industrial cities such as buffalo pittsburgh detroit milwaukee and chicago.
in 1907 four fths of the men toiled as unskilled laborers in coal mines meatpacking factories textile and steel mills oil re neries and garment making shops.
although married women usually stayed home and contributed to the familys earnings by taking in laundry and boarders children and single girls often joined their fathers and brothers on the job.
by putting the whole family to work americas polish immigrants saved tidy sums.
by 1901 about onethird of all poles in the united states owned real estate and they sent so much money to relatives in austria and russia that american and european authorities fretted about the consequences in 1907 a nativist u s immigration commission groused that the huge outow of funds to eastern europe was weakening the u s economy.
when an independent poland was created after world war i few poles chose to return to their old world homeland.
instead like other immigrant groups in the 1920s they redoubled their efforts to integrate into american society.
polish institutions like churches and fraternal orga ni zations which had served to perpetuate a distinctive polish culture in the new world now facilitated the transformation of poles into polish americans.
when poland was absorbed into the communist bloc after world war ii polish americans clung still more tightly to their american identity pushing for landmarks like chicagos pulaski road to memorialize their culture in the new world.
chapter 31 american life in the roaring twenties 1919 1929 no more moonshine federal agents gloat over a captured still in dayton ohio in 1930.
moonshiners or makers of illegal liquor enjoyed a boom during prohibition though zealous g men government agents put the owner of this makeshift distillery out of business at least temporarily.
especially over private lives.
they forgot that the federal authorities had never satisfactorily enforced a law where the majority of the people or a strong minority were hostile to it.
they ignored the fact that one cannot make a crime overnight out of something that millions of people have never regarded as a crime.
lawmakers could not legislate away a thirst.
peculiar conditions hampered the enforcement of prohibition.
profound disillusionment over the aftermath of the war raised serious questions as to the wisdom of further self denial.
slaking thirst became a cherished personal liberty and many ardent wets believed that the way to bring about repeal was to violate the law on a large enough scale.
hypocritical hipasked legislators spoke or voted dry while privately drinking wet.
let us strike a blow for liberty was an ironic toast.
frustrated soldiers returning from france complained that prohibition had been put over on them while they were over there grimy workers bemoaned the loss of their cheap beer while pointing out that the idle rich could buy all the illicit alcohol they wanted.
flaming youth of the jazz age thought it smart to swill bootleg liquor liquid ton sillectomies millions of older citizens likewise found forbidden fruit fascinating as they engaged in bar hunts prohibition might have started off on a better foot if there had been a larger army of enforcement ofcials.
automaker henry ford 1863 1947 an ardent prohibitionist posted this notice in his detroit factory in 1922 from now on it will cost a man his job.
to have the odor of beer wine or liquor on his breath or to have any of these intoxicants on his person or in his home.
the eighteenth amendment is a part of the fundamental laws of this country.
it was meant to be enforced.
politics has interfered with the enforcement of this law but so far as our organization is concerned it is going to be enforced to the letter.
organized crime but the state and federal agencies were understaffed and their snoopers susceptible to bribery were underpaid.
the public was increasingly distressed as scores of people including innocent bystanders were killed by quick triggered dry agents.
prohibition simply did not prohibit.
the old time men only corner saloons were replaced by thousands of speakeasies each with its tiny grilled window through which the thirsty spoke softly before the barred door was opened.
hard liquor especially the cocktail was drunk in staggering volume by both men and women.
largely because of the difculties of transporting and concealing bottles beverages of high alcoholic content were popular.
foreign rumrunners often from the west indies had their inning and countless cases of liquor leaked down from canada.
the zeal of american prohibition agents on occasion strained diplomatic relations with uncle sams northern neighbor.
home brew and bathtub gin became popular as law evading adults engaged in alky cooking with toy stills.
the worst of the homemade rotgut produced blindness even death.
the affable bootlegger worked in silent partnership with the friendly undertaker.
yet the noble experiment was not entirely a failure.
bank savings increased and absenteeism in industry decreased presumably because of the newly sober ways of formerly soused bar ies.
on the whole probably less alcohol was consumed than in the days before prohibition though strong drink continued to be available.
as the legendary tippler remarked prohibition was a darn sight better than no liquor at all the golden age of gangsterism prohibition spawned shocking crimes.
the lush profits of illegal alcohol led to bribery of the police many of whom were induced to see and smell no evil.
violent wars broke out in the big cities between rival gangs often rooted in immigrant neighborhoods who sought to corner the rich market in booze.
rival triggermen used their sawed off shotguns and chattering typewriters machine guns to erase bootlegging competitors who were trying to muscle in on their racket in the gang wars of the 1920s in chicago about ve hundred mobsters were murdered.
arrests were few and convictions were even fewer as the button lipped gangsters covered for one another with the underworlds code of silence.
chicago was by far the most spectacular example gangster al capone fishing in florida capone may have looked like any chicago businessman on vacation but his business was bigger and nastier than most as he often eliminated his competition by murder.
he was reported as saying everybody calls me a racketeer.
i call myself a businessman.
when i sell liquor its bootlegging.
when my patrons serve it on a silver tray on lake shore drive its hospitality he was nally jailed in 1932 for falsifying his incometax returns.
of lawlessness.
in 1925 scarface al capone a grasping and murderous booze distributor began six years of gang warfare that netted him millions of bloodspattered dollars.
he zoomed through the streets in an armor plated car with bulletproof windows.
a brooklyn newspaper quipped and the pistols red glare bombs bursting in air give proof through the night that chicagos still there.
capone though branded public enemy number one could not be convicted of the cold blooded massacre on st valentines day in 1929 of seven disarmed members of a rival gang.
but after serving most of an eleven year sentence in a federal penitentiary for income tax evasion he was released as a syphilitic wreck.
chapter 31 american life in the roaring twenties 1919 1929 gangsters rapidly moved into other protable and illicit activities prostitution gambling and narcotics.
honest merchants were forced to pay protection money to the orga nized thugs otherwise their windows would be smashed their trucks overturned or their employees or themselves beaten up.
racketeers even invaded the ranks of local labor unions as organizers and promoters.
organized crime had come to be one of the nations most gigantic businesses.
by 1930 the annual take of the underworld was estimated to be from 12 billion to 18 billion several times the income of the washington government.
criminal callousness sank to new depths in 1932 with the kidnapping for ransom and eventual murder of the infant son of aviator hero charles a lindbergh.
the entire nation was inexpressibly shocked and saddened causing congress in 1932 to pass the so called lindbergh law making interstate abduction in certain circumstances a death penalty offense.
monkey business in tennessee education in the 1920s continued to make giant bootstrides.
more and more states were requiring young people to remain in school until age sixteen or eigh the battle over evolution opponents of darwins theories set up shop at the opening of the famed monkey trial in dayton tennessee in 1925.
the trial was an early battle in an american culture war that is still being waged more than seventy ve years later.
the bombastic fundamentalist evangelist w a.
billy sunday 1862 1935 declared in 1925 if a minister believes and teaches evolution he is a stinking skunk a hypocrite and a liar.
teen or until graduation from high school.
the proportion of seventeen year olds who nished high school almost doubled in the 1920s to more than one in four.
the most revolutionary contribution to educational theory during these yeasty years was made by mild mannered professor john dewey who served on the faculty of columbia university from 1904 to 1930.
by common consent one of americas few front rank philosophers he set forth the principles of learning by doing that formed the foundation of so called progressive education with its greater permissiveness he believed that the workbench was as essential as the blackboard and that education for life should be a primary goal of the teacher.
for more on dewey see makers of america pioneering pragmatists pp.
science and fundamentalism science also scored wondrous advances in these years.
a massive public health program launched by the rockefeller foundation in the south in 1909 had virtually wiped out the ancient af iction of hookworm by the 1920s.
better nutrition and health care helped to increase the life expectancy of a newborn infant from fty years in 1901 to fty nine years in 1929.
yet both science and progressive education in the 1920s were subjected to unfriendly re from the newly orga nized fundamentalists.
these devoted religionists charged that the teaching of darwinian evolution was destroying faith in god and the bible while contributing to the moral breakdown of youth in the jazz age.
numerous attempts were made to secure laws prohibiting the teaching of evolution the bestial hypothesis in the public schools and three southern states adopted such shackling mea sures.
the trio of states included tennessee in the heart of the so called bible belt south where the spirit of evangelical religion was still robust.
the stage was set for the memorable monkey trial at the hamlet of dayton in eastern tennessee in 1925.
a likable high school biology teacher john t scopes was indicted for teaching evolution.
batteries of newspaper reporters armed with notebooks and cameras descended upon the quiet town to witness the spectacle.
scopes was defended by nationally known attorneys while former presidential candidate william jennings bryan an ardent presbyterian fundamentalist joined the prosecution.
taking the stand as an expert on the bible bryan was made to appear foolish by the famed criminal lawyer clarence darrow.
five days after the trial was over bryan died of a stroke no doubt brought on by the wilting heat and witnessstand strain.
this historic clash between theology and biology proved inconclusive.
scopes the forgotten man of the drama was found guilty and ned 100.
but the supreme court of tennessee while upholding the law set aside the ne on a technicality.
the fundamentalists at best won only a hollow victory for the absurdities of the trial cast ridicule on their cause.
yet even though increasing numbers of christians were coming to reconcile the revelations of religion with the ndings of modern science fundamentalism with its emphasis on a literal reading of the bible remained a vibrant force in american spiritual life.
it was espe the tennessee law was not formally repealed until 1967 cially strong in the baptist church and in the rapidly growing churches of christ orga nized in 1906.
the mass consumption economy prosperity real sustained and widely shared put much of the roar into the twenties.
the economy kicked off its war harness in 1919 faltered a few steps in the recession of 1920 1921 and then sprinted forward for nearly seven years.
both the recent war and treasury secretary andrew mellons tax policies favored the rapid expansion of capital investment.
ingenious machines powered by relatively cheap energy from newly tapped oil elds dramatically increased the productivity of the laborer.
assembly line production reached such perfection in henry fords famed rouge river plant near detroit that a nished automobile emerged every ten seconds.
great new industries suddenly sprouted forth.
supplying electrical power for the humming new machines became a giant business in the 1920s.
above all the automobile once the horseless chariot of the rich now became the carriage of the common citizen.
by 1930 americans owned almost 30 million cars.
the nations deepening love affair with the automobile headlined a momentous shift in the character of the economy.
american manufacturers seemed to have mastered the problems of production their worries now focused on consumption.
could they nd the mass markets for the goods they had contrived to spew forth in such profusion.
responding to this need a new arm of american commerce came into being advertising.
by persuasion and ploy seduction and sexual suggestion advertisers sought to make americans chronically discontented with their paltry possessions and want more more more.
a founder of this new profession was bruce barton prominent new york partner in a madison avenue rm.
in 1925 barton published a best seller the man nobody knows setting forth the provocative thesis that jesus christ was the greatest adman of all time.
every advertising man ought to study the parables of jesus barton preached.
they are marvelously condensed as all good advertising should be barton even had a good word to say for christs executive ability he picked up twelve men from the bottom ranks of business and forged them into an orga ni zation that conquered the world chapter 31 american life in the roaring twenties 1919 1929 debt and the economy became increasingly vulnerable to disruptions of the credit structure.
putting america on rubber tires babe ruth the sultan of swat sports became big business in the consumer economy of the 1920s.
ballyhooed by the image makers home run heroes like george h babe ruth were far better known than most statesmen.
the fans bought tickets in such numbers that babes hometown park yankee stadium became known as the house that ruth built in 1921 the slugging heavyweight champion jack dempsey knocked out the dapper french light heavyweight georges carpentier.
the jersey city crowd in attendance had paid more than a million dollars the rst in a series of million dollar gates in the golden 1920s.
buying on credit was another innovative feature of the postwar economy.
possess today and pay tomorrow was the message directed at buyers.
once frugal descendants of puritans went ever deeper into debt to own all kinds of newfangled marvels refrigerators vacuum cleaners and especially cars and radios now.
prosperity thus accumulated an overhanging cloud of a new industrial revolution slipped into high gear in america in the 1920s.
thrusting out steel tentacles it changed the daily life of the people in unprecedented ways.
machinery was the new messiah and the automobile was its principal prophet.
of all the inventions of the era the automobile cut the deepest track.
it heralded an amazing new industrial system based on assembly line methods and massproduction techniques.
americans adapted rather than invented the gasoline engine europeans can claim the original honor.
by the 1890s a few daring american inventors and promoters including henry ford and ransom e olds oldsmobile were developing the infant automotive industry.
by 1910 sixty nine car companies rolled out a total annual production of 181 000 units.
the early contraptions were neither speedy nor reliable.
many a stalled motorist profanely cranking a balky automobile had to endure the jeer get a horse from the occupants of a passing dobbin drawn carriage.
an enormous industry sprang into being as detroit became the motorcar capital of america.
the mechanized colossus owed much to the stopwatch efciency techniques of frederick w taylor a prominent inventor engineer and tennis player who sought to elim inate wasted motion.
his epitaph reads father of scientic management best known of the new crop of industrial wizards was henry ford who more than any other individual put america on rubber tires.
his high and hideous model t tin lizzie was cheap rugged and reasonably reliable though rough and clattering.
the parts of fords ivver were highly standardized but the behavior of this rattling good car was so eccentric that it became the butt of numberless jokes.
lean and silent henry ford who was said to have wheels in his head erected an immense personal empire on the cornerstone of his mechanical genius though his associates provided much of the orga ni zational talent.
ill educated this multimillionaire mechanic was socially and culturally narrow.
history is bunk he once testied.
but he dedicated himself with one track devotion to the gospel of standardization.
after two early failures he grasped and applied fully the technique of the moving assembly line the automobile age fordism.
he is supposed to have remarked that the purchaser could have his automobile in any color he desired just as long as it was black.
so economical were his methods that in the mid 1920s he was selling the ford roadster for 260 well within the purse of a thrifty worker see figure 31 2.
before long fordism caught re outside the united states.
german engineers were particularly enamored though their workers resented those american methods the ood of fords was phenomenal.
in 1914 the automobile wizard turned out his 500 000th model t by 1930 his total had risen to 20 million or on a bumper to bumper basis more than enough to encircle the globe.
a national newspaper and magazine poll conducted in 1923 revealed ford to be the peoples choice for the presidential nomination in 1924.
by 1929 when the great bull market collapsed 26 million motor vehicles were registered in the united states.
this gure averaging 1 for every 4 9 americans represented far more automobiles than existed in all the rest of the world see figure 31 3.
months model t introduced figure 31 2 the cost of a model t ford 1908 1924 henry fords mass production techniques cut the costs of production dramatically and put the automobile within reach of the workingpersons purse.
cost is shown in months of labor for an employee at the average national wage.
total number of cars in millions united states france germany japan britain year henry ford in his first car built in 1896 ford has been called the father of the trafc jam figure 31 3 international comparison of number of automobiles chapter 31 american life in the roaring twenties 1919 1929 the advent of the gasoline age the impact of the self propelled carriage on various aspects of american life was tremendous.
a gigantic new industry emerged dependent on steel but displacing steel from its kingpin role.
employing directly or indirectly about 6 million people by 1930 it was a major wellspring of the nations prosperity.
thousands of new jobs moreover were created by supporting industries.
the lengthening list would include rubber glass and fabrics to say nothing of highway construction and thousands of ser vice stations and garages.
americas standard of living responding to this infectious vitality rose to an enviable level.
new industries boomed lustily older ones grew sickly.
the petroleum business experienced an explosive development.
hundreds of oil derricks shot up in cal i fornia texas and oklahoma as these states expanded wondrously and the wilderness frontier became an industrial frontier.
the once feared railroad octopus on the other hand was hard hit by the competition of passenger cars buses and trucks.
an ageold story was repeated one industrys gains were another industrys pains.
other effects were widely felt.
speedy marketing of perishable foodstuffs such as fresh fruits was accel gas station 1923 gas stations like this one began to appear about 1913.
before that the nations handful of automobile owners bought fuel from their local oil companies and stored it in tanks in their own yards.
a new prosperity enriched outlying farms as city dwellers were provided with produce at attractive prices.
countless new roads ribboned out to meet the demand of the american motorist for smoother and faster highways often paid for by taxes on gasoline.
the era of mud ended as the nation made haste to construct the nest network of hard surfaced roadways in the world.
lured by sophisticated advertising and encouraged by tempting installment plan buying countless americans with shallow purses acquired the habit of riding as they paid.
zooming motorcars were agents of social change.
at rst a luxury they rapidly became a necessity.
essentially devices for needed transportation they soon developed into a badge of freedom and equality a necessary prop for self respect.
to some ostentation seemed more important than transportation.
leisure hours could now be spent more pleasurably as tens of thousands of cooped up souls responded to the call of the open road on joyriding vacations.
women were further freed from clinging vine dependence on men.
isolation among the sections was broken down and the less attractive states lost population at an alarming rate.
by the late 1920s americans owned more automobiles than bathtubs.
i cant go to town in a bathtub one homemaker explained.
other social by products of the automobile were visible.
autobuses made possible the consolidation of the impact of the automobile schools and to some extent of churches.
the sprawling suburbs spread out still farther from the urban core as america became a nation of commuters.
the demon machine on the other hand exacted a terrible toll by catering to the american mania for speed.
citizens were becoming statistics.
not counting the hundreds of thousands of injured and crippled the one millionth american had died in a motor vehicle accident by 1951 more than all those killed on all the battleelds of all the nations wars to that date.
the public be rammed seemed to be the motto of the new age.
virtuous home life partially broke down as joyriders of all ages forsook the parlor for the highway.
the morals of aming youth sagged correspondingly at least in the judgment of their elders.
what might a lifelong resident of muncie indiana disguised as middletown in robert and helen lynds exhaustive investigation of american life in a typical medium size community during the 1920s pooh poohed their scientic sociological methods why on earth do you need to study whats changing this country.
i can tell you whats happening in just four letters a u t o.
young people get up to in the privacy of a closed top model t.
an indiana juvenile court judge voiced parents worst fears when he condemned the automobile as a house of prostitution on wheels even the celebrated crime waves of the 1920s and 1930s were aided and abetted by the motorcar for gangsters could now make quick getaways.
yet no sane american would plead for a return of the old horse and buggy complete with y breeding manure.
the automobile contributed notably to improved air and environmental quality despite its later notoriety as a polluter.
life might be cut short on the highways and smog might poison the air but the automobile brought more convenience plea sure and excitement into more peoples lives than almost any other single invention.
humans develop wings the modern woman in the drivers seat as part of its effort to sell to a mass market the ford motor company used advertising to convey that driving an automobile was respectable for women.
a woman who drove was not only modern but she also better fullled her traditional duties as a household manager.
gasoline engines also provided the power that enabled humans to ful ll the age old dream of sprouting wings.
after near successful experiments by others with heavier than air craft the wright brothers orville and wilbur performed the miracle at kitty hawk north carolina.
on a historic day december 17 1903 orville wright took aloft a feebly engined plane that stayed airborne for 12 seconds and 120 feet.
thus the air age was launched by two obscure bicycle repairmen.
as aviation gradually got off the ground the world slowly shrank.
the public was made increasingly airminded by unsung heroes often martyrs who appeared as stunt iers at fairs and other public gatherings.
airplanes ying cof ns were used with marked success for various purposes during the great war of 1914 1918.
shortly thereafter private companies began to operate passenger lines with airmail chapter 31 american life in the roaring twenties 1919 1929 lucky lindy charles a lindbergh 1902 1974 stands in front of the aircraft that made him famous.
the rst person to y solo across the atlantic lindbergh became an acclaimed celebrity perhaps the rst mediamade hero of the twentieth century.
his shining reputation later lost some of its luster when he voiced antisemitic sentiments and opposed american entry into world war ii though he went on to y several combat missions in the war against japan.
contracts which were in effect a subsidy from washington.
the rst transcontinental airmail route was established from new york to san francisco in 1920.
in 1927 modest and skillful charles a lindbergh the so called flyin fool electried the world with the rst solo west to east conquest of the atlantic.
seeking a prize of 25 000 the lanky stunt ier courageously piloted his single engine plane the spirit of st louis from new york to paris in a grueling thirtythree hours and thirty nine minutes.
lindberghs exploit swept americans off their feet.
fed up with the cynicism and debunking of the jazz age they found in this wholesome and handsome youth a genuine hero.
they clasped the soaring lone eagle to their hearts much more warmly than the bashful young man desired.
lucky lindy received an uproarious welcome in the hero canyon of lower broadway as eighteen hundred tons of ticker tape and other improvised confetti showered upon him.
lindberghs achievement it was more than a stunt did much to dramatize and popularize ying while giving a strong boost to the infant aviation industry.
the impact of the airship was tremendous.
it provided the restless american spirit with yet another dimension.
at the same time it gave birth to a giant new industry.
unfortunately the accident rate in the pioneer stages of aviation was high though hardly more so than on the early railroads.
but by the 1930s and 1940s travel by air on regularly scheduled airlines was signicantly safer than on many overcrowded highways.
humanitys new wings also increased the tempo of an already breathless civilization.
the oundering railroad received another setback through the loss of passengers and mail.
a lethal new weapon was given to the gods of war and with the coming of city busting aerial bombs people could well debate whether the conquest of the air was a blessing or a curse.
the atlantic ocean was shriveling to about the size of the aegean sea in the days of socrates while isolation behind ocean moats was becoming a bygone dream.
the radio revolution the speed of the airplane was far eclipsed by the speed of radio waves.
guglielmo marconi an italian invented wireless telegraphy in the 1890s and his brainchild was used for long range communication during world war i.
next came the voice carrying radio a triumph of many minds.
a red letter day was posted in november 1920 when the pittsburgh radio station kdka broadcast the news of the harding landslide.
later miracles airplanes and radio family listening in to the radio 1922 the lacambanne family of san francisco gathered in their parlor to listen to a concert broadcast over the radio.
in the early years when only a handful of households could afford a radio listening brought family and neighbors together to share a common experience.
were achieved in transatlantic wireless phonographs radiotelephones and television.
the earliest radio programs reached only local audiences.
but by the late 1920s technological improvements made long distance broadcasting possible and national commercial networks drowned out much local programming.
meanwhile advertising commercials made radio another vehicle for american free enterprise as contrasted with the government owned systems of europe.
while other marvels of the era like the automobile were luring americans away from home the radio was drawing them back.
for much of the decade radio came in with a bang in the winter of 1921 1922.
a san francisco newspaper reported a discovery that countless citizens were making there is radio music in the air every night everywhere.
anybody can hear it at home on a receiving set which any boy can put up in an hour.
family and neighbors gathered around a households sole radio as they once had around the toasty hearth.
radio knitted the nation together.
various regions heard voices with standardized accents and countless millions tuned in to perennial comedy favorites like amos n andy programs sponsored by manufacturers and distributors of brand name products like the a p gypsies and the eveready hour helped to make radio touted labels household words and purchases.
educationally and culturally the radio made a signicant contribution.
sports were further stimulated.
politicians had to adjust their speaking techniques to the new medium and millions rather than thousands of voters heard their promises and pleas.
a host of listeners swallowed the gospel of their favorite newscaster or were even ringside participants in world shaking events.
finally the music of famous artists and symphony orchestras was beamed into countless homes.
hollywoods filmland fantasies the ickering movie was the fruit of numerous geniuses including thomas a edison.
as early as the 1890s this novel contraption though still in crude form had attained some popularity in the naughty peep show penny arcades.
the real birth of the movie came in 1903 when the rst story sequence reached the screen.
this breathless melodrama the great train robbery was featured in the ve cent theaters popularly called nickelodeons spectacular among the rst full length classics was d w grifths birth of a nation 1915 which gloried the ku klux klan of reconstruction days and defamed both blacks and northern carpetbaggers.
white southerners reputedly red guns at the screen during the attempted rape scene.
african americans were outraged at the lm and angrily orga nized protest marches petition campaigns and public hearings.
a fascinating industry was thus launched.
hollywood in southern cal i fornia quickly became the movie capital of the world for it enjoyed a maximum of sunshine and other advantages.
early producers featured nudity and heavy lidded female vampires vamps and an offended public forced the screen magnates to set up their own rigorous code of censorship.
the motion picture really arrived during world war i when it was used as an engine of anti german propaganda.
specially prepared hang the kaiser lms chapter 31 american life in the roaring twenties 1919 1929 in the face of protests against sex in the movies the industry appointed a movie czar will h hays 1879 1954 who issued the famous hays code in 1934.
as he stated in a speech this industry must have toward that sacred thing the mind of a child toward that clean virgin thing that unmarked slate the same responsibility the same care about the impressions made upon it that the best clergyman or the most inspired teacher of youth would have.
aided powerfully in selling war bonds and in boosting morale.
a new era began in 1927 with the success of the rst talkie the jazz singer starring the white performer al jolson in blackface.
the age of the silents was ushered out as theaters every where were wired for sound at about the same time reasonably satisfactory color lms were being produced.
movies eclipsed all other new forms of amusement in the phenomenal growth of their popularity.
movie stars of the rst pulchritude commanded much larger salaries than the president of the united states in some cases as much as 100 000 for a single picture.
many actors and actresses were far more widely known than the nations political leaders.
critics bemoaned the vulgarization of popular tastes wrought by the new technologies of radio and motion pictures.
but the effects of the new mass media were not all negative.
the insularity of ethnic communities eroded as the immigrants children especially forsook the neighborhood vaudeville theater for the downtown movie palace or turned away from grandmas yiddish storytelling to tune in amos n andy if some of the rich diversity of the immigrants old country cultures was lost the standardization of tastes and of language hastened entry into the american mainstream and set the stage for the emergence of a working class political coalition that for a time would overcome the divisive ethnic differences of the past.
the dynamic decade far reaching changes in lifestyles and values paralleled the dramatic upsurge of the economy.
the census of 1920 revealed that for the rst time most americans no margaret sanger 1879 1966 in boston 1929 forbidden to speak on the inammatory topic of birth control a deant sanger covered her mouth and lectured in boston by writing on a blackboard.
since 1912 sanger had devoted herself to promoting birth control and establishing contraceptive clinics throughout the united states.
longer lived in the countryside but in urban areas.
women continued to nd opportunities for employment in the cities though they tended to cluster in a few low paying jobs such as retail clerking and ofce typing that became classied as womens work an orga nized birth control movement led by the ery feminist margaret sanger openly championed the use of contraceptives.
alice pauls national womans party began in 1923 to campaign for an equal rights amendment to the constitution.
the campaign was still stalled short of success seven decades later.
to some defenders of traditional ways it seemed that the world had suddenly gone mad.
even the churches were affected.
the fundamentalist champions of the old time religion lost ground to the modernists who liked to think that god was a good guy and the universe a pretty chummy place.
some churches tried to ght the devil with worldly weapons.
competing with joyriding automobiles and golf links they turned to quality entertainment of their own including wholesome moving pictures for young the jazz singer 1927 he jazz singer was the rst feature length talkie a motion picture in which the characters actually spoke and its arrival spelled the end for silent lms where the audience read subtitles with live or recorded music as background.
although moviegoers ocked to the jazz singer to hear recorded sound when they got there they found a movie concerned with themes of great interest to the urban rst or second generation immigrant audiences who were hollywoods major patrons.
the jazz singer told the story of a poor assimilating jewish immigrant torn between following his fathers wish that he train as an orthodox cantor and his own ambition to make a success of himself as a jazz singer performing in the popular blackface style.
the movies star al jolson was himself an immigrant jew who had made his name as a blackface performer.
t white actors had gradually taken over the southern black minstrel show during the nineteenth century.
by the early twentieth century jewish entertainers had entirely monopolized these roles.
jolson like other jewish blackface performers used his ability to impersonate a black person to force his acceptance into mainstream white american society.
this use of blackface seems ironic since black americans in the 1920s were struggling with their own real life battles against jim crow era segregation a blatant form of exclusion from american society.
besides the novelty of being a talkie what may have made the jazz singer a box ofce hit in 1927.
how might different types of viewers in the audience have responded to the story.
what does the popularity of blackface reveal about racial attitudes at the time.
chapter 31 american life in the roaring twenties 1919 1929 the flapper new dance styles like the charleston amboyantly displayed the new social freedom of the apper whose dress and antics frequently ummoxed the guardians of respectability.
one uptown house of the lord in new york advertised on a billboard come to church christian worship increases your efciency even before the war one observer thought the chimes had struck sex oclock in america and the 1920s witnessed what many old timers regarded as a veritable erotic eruption.
advertisers exploited sexual allure to sell every thing from soap to car tires.
oncemodest maidens now proclaimed their new freedom as appers in bobbed tresses and dresses.
young women appeared with hemlines elevated stockings rolled breasts taped at cheeks rouged and lips a crimson gash that held a dangling cigarette.
thus did the apper symbolize a yearned for and devilmay care independence some said wild abandon in some american women.
still more adventuresome females shocked their elders when they sported the new one piece bathing suits.
justication for this new sexual frankness could be found in the recently translated writings of dr sigmund freud.
this viennese physician appeared to argue that sexual repression was responsible for a variety of nervous and emotional ills.
thus not pleasure alone but also health demanded sexual gratication and liberation.
many taboos ew out the window as sex conscious americans let themselves go.
as unknowing freudians teenagers pioneered the sexual frontiers.
glued together in rhythmic embrace they danced to jazz music squeaking from phonographs.
in an earlier day a kiss had been the equivalent of a proposal of marriage.
but in the new era exploratory young folk sat in darkened movie houses or took to the highways and byways in automobiles.
there the youthful neckers and petters poached upon the forbidden territory of each others bodies.
if the apper was the goddess of the era of wonderful nonsense jazz was its sacred music.
with its virtuoso wanderings and tricky syncopation jazz moved up from new orleans along with the migrating the guardian of morality womens new one piece bathing suits were a sensation in the 1920s.
here a check is carefully made to ensure that not too much leg is showing.
dynamic harlem richard mller freienfels 1882 1949 a german psychologist who was highly critical of the american obsession with mass production extended his condemnation to the american people in 1929 even the people impress one as having been standardized.
all these clean shaven men all these girls.
seem to have been produced somewhere in a ford factory not by the dozen but by the thousand.
in no other country are the individuals reduced to such a dead level as in the united states.
blacks during world war i.
tunes like w c handys st.
louis blues became instant classics as the wailing saxophone became the trumpet of the new era.
blacks such as handy jelly roll morton and joseph joe king oliver gave birth to jazz but the entertainment industry soon spawned all white bands notably paul whitemans.
caucasian impresarios cornered the profits though not the creative soul of americas most native music.
a new racial pride also blossomed in the northern black communities that burgeoned during and after the war.
harlem in new york city counting some 100 000 african american residents in the 1920s was one of the largest black communities in the world.
harlem sustained a vibrant creative culture that nourished poets like langston hughes whose rst volume marcus garvey 1887 1940 in 1920 garvey the jamaican born founder of the united negro improvement association advocated a constitution to protect the rights of black americans.
by that year his nationalist self help organization boasted eleven hundred branches in forty countries in the americas and africa.
most of those branches were located in the united states his base of operations until 1927.
king olivers creole jazz band early 1920s joseph joe king oliver arrived in chicago from new orleans in 1918.
his band became the rst important black jazz ensemble and made chicagos royal garden caf a magnet for jazz lovers.
left to right honor dutrey trombone baby dodds drums king oliver cornet lil hardin piano bill johnson banjo and johnny dodds clarinet.
kneeling in the foreground is the young louis armstrong.
chapter 31 american life in the roaring twenties 1919 1929 of verses the weary blues appeared in 1926.
harlem in the 1920s also spawned a charismatic political leader marcus garvey.
the jamaican born garvey founded the united negro improvement association unia to promote the resettlement of american blacks in their own african homeland within the united states the unia sponsored stores and other businesses like the black star line steamship company to keep blacks dollars in black pockets.
most of garveys enterprises failed nancially and garvey himself was convicted in 1927 for alleged mail fraud and deported by a nervous u s government.
but the race pride that garvey inspired among the 4 million blacks who counted themselves unia followers at the movements height helped these newcomers to northern cities gain selfcondence and self reliance.
and his example proved important to the later founding of the nation of islam black muslim movement.
cultural liberation likewise in literature an older era seemed to have ground to a halt with the recent war.
by the dawn of the 1920s most of the custodians of an aging genteel culture had died henry james in 1916 henry adams in 1918 and william dean howells the dean of american literature in 1920.
a few novelists who had been popular in the previous decades continued to thrive notably the well to do cosmopolitan new yorker edith wharton and the virginia born willa cather esteemed for her stark but sympathetic portrayals of pioneering on the prairies.
but in the decade after the war a new generation of writers burst upon the scene.
many of them hailed from ethnic and regional backgrounds different from that of the protestant new eng landers who traditionally had dominated american cultural life.
the newcomers exhibited the energy of youth the ambition of excluded outsiders and in many cases the smoldering resentment of ideals betrayed.
they bestowed on american literature a new vitality imaginativeness and artistic quality.
a patron saint of many young authors was h l mencken the bad boy of baltimore little escaped his acidic wit.
in the pages of his green covered monthly american mercury he wielded a slashing rapier as much as a pen.
he assailed marriage patriotism democracy prohibition rotarians and the middle class american booboisie the south he contemptuously dismissed as the sahara of the bozart f scott fitzgerald and his wife zelda the fitzgeralds are shown here in the happy early days of their stormy marriage.
a bastardization of beaux arts french for the ne arts and he scathingly attacked do gooders as puritans puritanism he jibed was the haunting fear that someone somewhere might be happy the war had jolted many young writers out of their complacency about traditional values and literary standards.
with their pens they probed for new codes of morals and understanding as well as fresh forms of expression.
f scott fitzgerald a handsome minnesota born princetonian then only twenty four years old became an overnight celebrity when he published this side of paradise in 1920.
the book became a kind of bible for the young.
it was eagerly devoured by aspiring appers and their ardent wooers many of whom affected an air of bewildered abandon toward life.
catching the spirit of the hour often about 4 a m fitzgerald found all gods dead all wars the flowering of literature fought all faiths in man shaken he followed this melancholy success with the great gatsby 1925 a brilliant commentary on the illusory american ideal of the self made man.
midwesterner james gatz reinvented himself as tycoon jay gatsby only to be destroyed by the power of those with established wealth and social standing.
theodore dreisers masterpiece of 1925 an american tragedy similarly explored the pitfalls of social striving as it dealt with the murder of a pregnant working girl by her socially ambitious young lover.
ernest hemingway who had seen action on the italian front in 1917 was among the writers most affected by the war.
he responded to pernicious propaganda and the overblown appeal to patriotism by devising his own lean word sparing but word perfect style.
in the sun also rises 1926 he told of disillusioned spiritually numb american expatriates in europe.
in a farewell to arms 1929 he crafted one of the nest novels in any language about the war experience.
a troubled soul he nally blew out his brains with a shotgun blast in 1961.
other writers turned to a caustic probing of american small town life.
sherwood anderson dissected various ctional personalities in winesburg ohio 1919 nding them all in some way warped by their cramped psychological surroundings.
sinclair lewis a hotheaded heavy drinking journalist from sauk centre minnesota sprang into prominence in 1920 with main street the story of one womans unsuccessful war against provincialism.
in babbitt 1922 he affectionately pilloried george f babbitt a prosperous vulgar middle class real estate broker who slavishly conforms to the respectable materialism of his group.
the word babbittry was quickly coined to describe his all too familiar lifestyle.
hemingway anderson and many other writers and painters found shelter and inspiration in the paris salon of gertrude stein an expatriate american.
a literary innovator in her own right stein wrote experimental poetry and prose including three lives 1909 tender buttons 1914 and most famously the autobiography of alice b toklas 1933 named for her lifelong partner.
william faulkner a dark eyed pensive mississippian turned his attention to a ctional chronicle of an imaginary history rich deep south county he named yoknapatawpha in powerful books like the sound and the fury 1929 and as i lay dying 1930 faulkner peeled back layers of time and consciousness from the constricted souls of his ingrown southern characters.
his extended meditation on the rag tag and bob ends of old tales and talkings culminated in what some readers consider his greatest work absalom absalom.
nowhere was innovation in the 1920s more obvious than in poetry.
ezra pound a brilliantly erratic idahoan who deserted america for europe rejected what he called an old bitch civilization gone in the teeth and proclaimed his doctrine make it new pound strongly inuenced the missouri born and harvard educated t s eliot who took up residence in eng land.
in the waste land 1922 eliot produced one of the most impenetrable but inuential poems of the century.
robert frost a san francisco born poet wrote hauntingly about his adopted new eng land.
the most daringly innovative of all was e e.
cummings who relied on unorthodox diction and peculiar typesetting to produce startling poetical effects.
langston hughes 1902 1967 raised in the midwest hughes arrived in new york city in 1921 to attend columbia university.
he spent most of his life in harlem making it so much the center of his prolic and versatile literary career that he was often introduced as the poet laureate of harlem chapter 31 american life in the roaring twenties 1919 1929 langston hughes 1902 1967 celebrated harlems role in energizing a generation of artists and writers in his poem esthete in harlem 1930 strange that in this nigger place i should meet life face to face when for years i had been seeking life in places gentler speaking until i came to this vile street and found life stepping on my feet.
on the stage eugene oneill a new york dramatist and princeton dropout of globe trotting background laid bare freudian notions of sex in plays like strange interlude 1928.
a prodigious playwright he authored more than a dozen productions in the 1920s and won the nobel prize in 1936.
oneill arose from new yorks greenwich village which before and after the war was a seething cauldron of writers painters musicians actors and other would be artists.
after the war a black cultural renaissance also took root uptown in harlem led by such gifted writers as claude mckay langston hughes and zora neale hurston and by jazz artists like louis armstrong and eubie blake.
in an outpouring of creative expression called the harlem renaissance they proudly exulted in their black culture and argued for a new negro who was a full citizen and a social equal to whites.
architecture also reinvented itself as modern in diverse ways.
at one extreme frank lloyd wright advanced the theory that buildings should grow from their sites incorporate indigenous materials and not slavishly imitate greek and roman importations.
in a very different kind of paean to modern america the machine age outdid itself in new york city when it thrust upward the cloud brushing empire state building 102 stories high.
dedicated in 1931 the empty state building towered partially vacant during the depressed 1930s.
esthete in harlem from the collected poems of langston hughes by langston hughes edited by arnold rampersad with david roessel associate editor.
copyright 1994 by the estate of langston hughes.
used by permission of alfred a knopf a division of random house inc wall streets big bull market signals abounded that the economic joyride might end in a crash even in the best years of the 1920s several hundred banks failed annually.
this something fornothing craze was well illustrated by real estate speculation especially the fantastic florida boom that culminated in 1925.
numerous underwater lots were sold to eager purchasers for preposterous sums.
the whole wildcat scheme collapsed when the peninsula was devastated by a west indian hurricane which belied advertisements of a soothing tropical wind the stock exchange provided even greater sensations.
speculation ran wild and an orgy of boomor bust trading pushed the market up to dizzy peaks.
never sell america short and be a bull on america were favorite catchwords as wall street bulls gored one another and eeced greedy lambs.
the stock market became a veritable gambling den.
as the 1920s lurched forward everybody seemed to be buying stocks on margin that is with a small down payment.
barbers stenographers and elevator operators cashed in on hot tips picked up while on duty.
one valet was reported to have parlayed his wages into a quarter of a million dollars.
the cash register crashed the social register as rags to riches americans reverently worshiped at the altar of the ticker tape machine.
so powerful was the intoxicant of quick prots that few heeded the voices raised in certain quarters to warn that this kind of tinsel prosperity could not last forever.
little was done by washington to curb moneymad speculators.
in the wartime days of wilson the national debt had rocketed from the 1914 gure of 1 188 235 400 to the 1921 peak of 23 976 250 608.
conservative principles of money management pointed to a diversion of surplus funds to reduce this nancial burden.
a businesslike move toward economic sanity was made in 1921 when a republican congress created the bureau of the budget.
the bureaus director was to assist the president in preparing careful estimates of receipts and expenditures for submission to congress as the annual budget.
this new reform long overdue was designed in part to prevent haphazardly extravagant appropriations.
the burdensome taxes inherited from the war were especially distasteful to secretary of the treasury mellon as well as to his fellow millionaires.
their theory wall street s big bull market calvin coolidge presides over the jazz age coolidges hands off policies were sweet music to big business.
was that such high levies forced the rich to invest in tax exempt securities rather than in the factories that provided prosperous payrolls.
the mellonites also argued with considerable persuasiveness that high taxes not only discouraged business but in so doing also brought a smaller net return to the treasury than moderate taxes.
seeking to succor the poor rich people mellon helped engineer a series of tax reductions from 1921 to 1926.
congress followed his lead by repealing the excess prots tax abolishing the gift tax and reducing excise taxes the surtax the income tax and estate taxes.
in 1921 a wealthy person with an income of 1 million had paid 663 000 in income taxes in 1926 the same person paid about 200 000.
secretary mellons spare the rich policies thus shifted much of the tax burden from the wealthy to the middle income groups.
mellon lionized by conser vatives as the greatest secretary of the treasury since hamilton remains a controversial gure.
true he reduced the national debt by 10 billion from about 26 billion to 16 billion.
but foes of the emaciated multimillionaire charged that he should have bitten an even larger chunk out of the debt especially while the country was pulsating with prosperity.
he was also accused of indirectly encouraging the bull market.
if he had absorbed more of the national income in taxes there would have been less money left for frenzied speculation.
his refusal to do so typied the single mindedly probusiness regime that dominated the political scene throughout the postwar decade.
chapter 31 american life in the roaring twenties 1919 1929 chronology wright brothers y rst airplane first story sequence motion picture henry ford introduces model t bolshevik revolution in russia eighteenth amendment prohibition volstead act seattle general strike anderson publishes winesburg ohio equal rights amendment era proposed immigration act of 1924 scopes trial florida real estate boom fitzgerald publishes the great gatsby dreiser publishes an american tragedy hughes publishes the weary blues hemingway publishes the sun also rises 1919 red scare lindbergh ies solo across atlantic first talking motion picture the jazz singer sacco and vanzetti executed radio broadcasting begins fitzgerald publishes this side of paradise lewis publishes main street faulkner publishes the sound and the fury hemingway publishes a farewell to arms al capone imprisoned sacco vanzetti trial emergency quota act bureau of the budget created lewis publishes babbitt eliot publishes the waste land key terms bolshevik revolution 770 red scare 771 criminal syndicalism laws 771 american plan 771 ku klux klan 772 bible belt 772 immigration act of 1924 774 eighteenth amendment 775 people to know volstead act 775 racketeers 780 fundamentalism 781 scientic management 782 fordism 783 united negro improvement association unia 792 a mitchell palmer nicola sacco bartolomeo vanzetti horace kallen randolph bourne al capone john t scopes frederick w taylor henry ford charles a lindbergh sigmund freud to learn more to learn more casey nelson blake beloved community the cultural criticism of randolph bourne van wyck brooks waldo frank and lewis mumford 1990 nancy cott the grounding of modern feminism 1987 lynn dumenil the modern temper america in the twenties 1995 john higham strangers in the land patterns of american nativism 1860 1925 1955 edward j larsen summer for the gods the scopes trial and americas continuing debate over science and religion 1997 william leuchtenburg the perils of prosperity 1914 1932 1958 david levering lewis when harlem was in vogue 1981 nancy maclean behind the mask of chivalry the making of the second kkk 1993 roland marchand advertising the american dream making way for modernity 1920 1940 1985 mae m ngai impossible subjects illegal aliens and the making of modern america 2004 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the politics of boom and bust 1920 1932 we in america today are nearer to the nal triumph over poverty than ever before in the history of any land.
we have not yet reached the goal but.
we shall soon with the help of god be in sight of the day when poverty will be banished from this nation.
herbert hoover 1928 t hree republican presidents warren g harding calvin coolidge and herbert hoover steered the nation on the roller coaster ride of the 1920s a thrilling ascent from the depths of post world war i recession to breathtaking heights of prosperity followed by a terrifying crash into the great depression.
in a retreat from progressive reform republicans sought to serve the public good less by direct government action and more through cooperation with big business.
some corrupt ofcials served themselves as well exploiting public resources for personal prot.
meanwhile the united states retreated from its brief internationalist ing during world war i and resumed with a vengeance its traditional foreign policy of military unpreparedness and political isolationism.
the republican old guard returns warren g harding inaugurated in 1921 looked presidential.
with erect gure broad shoulders high forehead bushy eyebrows and graying hair he was one of the best liked men of his generation.
an easygoing warm handed backslapper he exuded graciousness and love of people.
so kindly was his nature that he would brush off ants rather than crush them.
yet the charming smiling exterior concealed a weak inept interior.
with a mediocre mind harding quickly found himself beyond his depth in the presidency.
what a job was his anguished cry on one occasion.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the harding administration harding like grant was unable to detect moral halitosis in his evil associates and he was soon surrounded by his poker playing shirt sleeved cronies of the ohio gang a good guy harding was one of the boys he hated to hurt peoples feelings especially those of his friends by saying no and designing political leeches capitalized on this weakness.
the difference between george washington and warren harding ran a current quip was that while washington could not tell a lie harding could not tell a liar.
he was not a bad man said one washington observer.
he was just a slob candidate harding who admitted his scanty mental furnishings had promised to gather about him the best minds of the party.
charles evans hughes masterful imperious incisive brilliant brought to the position of secretary of state a dominating if somewhat conser vative leadership.
the new secretary of the treasury was a lean and elderly pittsburgh aluminum king andrew w mellon multimillionaire collector of the paintings that are now displayed in washington as his gift to the nation.
chubby faced herbert hoover famed feeder of the belgians and wartime food administrator became secretary of commerce.
an energetic businessman and engineer he raised his second rate cabinet post to rst rate importance especially in drumming up foreign trade for u s manufacturers.
but the best minds of the cabinet were largely offset by two of the worst.
senator albert b.
fall of new mexico a scheming anticonservationist was appointed secretary of the interior.
as guardian of the nations natural resources he resembled the wolf hired to protect the sheep.
harry m daugherty a smalltown lawyer but a big time crook in the ohio gang was supposed to prosecute wrongdoers as attorney general.
gop reaction at the throttle well intentioned but weak willed harding was a perfect front for enterprising industrialists.
a mckinleystyle old order settled back into place with a heavy thud at wars end crushing the reform seedlings that had sprouted in the progressive era.
a nest feathering crowd moved into washington and proceeded to hoodwink harding whom many regarded as an amiable boob this new old guard hoped to improve on the old business doctrine of laissez faire.
their plea was not simply for government to keep its hands off business but for government to help guide business along the path to prots.
they subtly and effectively achieved their ends by putting the courts and the administrative bureaus into the safekeeping of fellow stand patters for the duration of the decade.
the supreme court was a striking example of this trend.
harding lived less than three years as president but he appointed four of the nine justices.
several of his choices were or became deep dyed reactionaries and they buttressed the dike against popular currents for nearly two decades.
hardings fortunate choice for chief justice was ex president taft who not only performed his duties ably but surprisingly was more liberal than some of his cautious associates.
in the rst years of the 1920s the supreme court axed progressive legislation.
it killed a federal childlabor law stripped away many of labors hard won gains and rigidly restricted government intervention in the economy.
in the landmark case of adkins v childrens hospital 1923 the court reversed its own reasoning in muller v oregon see p 711 which had declared women to be deserving of special protection in the workplace and invalidated a minimum wage law for women.
its strained ruling was that because women now had the vote nineteenth amendment they were the legal equals of men and could no longer be protected by special legislation.
the contradictory premises of the muller and adkins cases framed a debate over gender differences that would continue for the rest of the century were women sufciently different from men that they merited special legal and social treatment or were they effectively equal in the eyes of the law and therefore undeserving of special protections and preferences.
an analogous debate over racial differences haunted af rmative action policies later in the century.
corporations under harding could once more relax and expand.
antitrust laws were often ignored circumvented or feebly enforced by friendly prosecutors in the attorney generals ofce.
the interstate justice oliver wendell holmes 1841 1935 wryly dissenting in the adkins case said it would need more than the nineteenth amendment to convince me that there are no differences between men and women or that legislation cannot take those differences into account.
chapter 30 the war to end war 1917 1918 to galvanize the country wilson would have to proclaim more gloried aims.
radiating the spiritual fervor of his presbyterian ancestors he declared the supremely ambitious goal of a crusade to make the world safe for democracy brandishing the sword of righteousness wilson virtually hypnotized the nation with his lofty ideals.
he contrasted the selsh war aims of the other belligerents allied and enemy alike with americas shining altruism.
america he preached did not ght for the sake of riches or territorial conquest.
the republic sought only to shape an international order in which democracy could ourish without fear of power crazed autocrats and militarists.
in wilsonian idealism the personality of the president and the necessities of history were perfectly matched.
the high minded wilson genuinely believed in the principles he so eloquently intoned especially that the modern world could not afford the kind of hyper destructive war that advanced industrial states were now capable of waging.
in this wilsons vision was prophetic.
in any case probably no other appeal could have successfully converted the american people from their historic hostility to involvement in european squabbles.
americans it seemed could be either isolationists or crusaders but nothing in between.
wilsons appeal worked perhaps too well.
holding aloft the torch of idealism the president red up the public mind to a fever pitch.
force force to the utmost force without stint or limit he cried while the country responded less elegantly with hang the kaiser lost on the gale was wilsons earlier plea for peace without victory wilsons fourteen potent points wilson quickly came to be recognized as the moral leader of the allied cause.
he scaled a summit of inspiring oratory on january 8 1918 when he delivered his famed fourteen points address to an enthusiastic congress.
although one of his primary purposes was to keep reeling russia in the war wilsons vision inspired all the drooping allies to make mightier efforts and demoralized the enemy governments by holding out alluring promises to their dissatised minorities.
the rst ve of the fourteen points were broad in scope.
1 a proposal to abolish secret treaties pleased liberals of all countries.
2 freedom of the seas appealed to the germans as well as to americans who distrusted british sea power.
3 a removal of economic barriers among nations had long been the goal of liberal internationalists every where.
4 a reduction of armament burdens was gratifying to taxpayers in all countries.
5 an adjustment of colonial claims in the interests of both native peoples and the colonizers was reassuring to the anti imperialists.
indeed wilsons pronouncement about colonies was potentially revolutionary.
it helped to delegitimize the old empires and opened the road to eventual national independence for millions of subject peoples other points among the fourteen proved to be no less seductive.
they held out the hope of independence self determination to oppressed minority groups such as the poles millions of whom lay under the heel of germany and austria hungary.
the capstone point number fourteen foreshadowed the league of nations an international orga ni zation that wilson dreamed would provide a system of collective security.
wilson earnestly prayed that this new scheme would effectively guarantee the political independence and territorial integrity of all countries whether large or small.
yet wilsons appealing points though raising hopes the world over were not every where applauded.
certain leaders of the allied nations with an eye to territorial booty were less than enthusiastic.
hard nosed republicans at home grumbled and some of them openly mocked the fourteen commandments of god almighty wilson creel manipulates minds mobilizing peoples minds for war both in america and abroad was an urgent task facing the washington authorities.
for this purpose the committee on public information was created.
it was headed by a youngish journalist george creel who though outspoken and tactless was gifted with zeal and imagination.
his job was to sell america on the war and sell the world on wilsonian war aims.
the creel orga ni zation employing some 150 000 workers at home and overseas proved that words were indeed weapons.
it sent out an army of 75 000 fourminute men often longer winded than that who delivered countless speeches containing much patriotic pep creels propaganda took varied forms.
posters were splashed on billboards in the battle of the fences as artists rallied to the colors millions of leaets and pamphlets which contained the most pungent wilson the war for the american mind anti german propaganda the government relied extensively on emotional appeals and hate propaganda to rally support for the first world war which most americans regarded as a distant european affair.
this poster used gendered imagery to evoke the brutal german violation of belgian neutrality in august 1914.
patriotic persuasion worried about the publics enthusiasm for the war the government employed all the arts of psychology and propaganda to sustain the martial spirit.
the prewar song i didnt raise my boy to be a soldier was changed to i didnt raise my boy to be a slacker which in turn inspired the cruel parody i didnt raise my boy to be a sausage isms were showered like confetti upon the world.
propaganda booklets with red white and blue covers were printed by the millions.
hang the kaiser movies carrying such titles as the kaiser the beast of berlin and to hell with the kaiser revealed the helmeted hun at his bloodiest.
armwaving conductors by the thousands led huge audiences in songs that poured scorn on the enemy and gloried the boys in uniform.
the entire nation catching the frenzied spirit of a religious revival burst into song.
this was undoubtedly americas singingest war.
most memorable was george m cohans spine tingling over there over there over there send the word send the word over there that the yanks are coming the yanks are coming the drums rum tumming evrywhere.
creel typied american war mobilization which relied more on aroused passion and voluntary compliance than on formal laws.
but he oversold the ideals of wilson and led the world to expect too much.
when chapter 30 the war to end war 1917 1918 the president proved to be a mortal and not a god the resulting disillusionment both at home and abroad was disastrous.
enforcing loyalty and stiing dissent german americans numbered over 8 million counting those with at least one parent foreign born out of a total population of 100 million.
on the whole they proved to be dependably loyal to the united states.
yet rumormongers were quick to spread tales of spying and sabotage even tri ing epidemics of diarrhea were blamed on german agents.
a few german americans were tarred feathered and beaten in one extreme case a german socialist in illinois was lynched by a drunken mob.
as emotion mounted hysterical hatred of germans and things germanic swept the nation.
orchestras found it unsafe to present german composed music like that of wagner or beethoven.
german books were removed from library shelves and german classes were canceled in high schools and colleges.
sauerkraut became liberty cabbage hamburger liberty steak even beer became suspect as patriotic americans fretted over the loyalty of breweries with names like schlitz and pabst.
both the espionage act of 1917 and the sedition act of 1918 reected current fears about germans and antiwar americans.
especially visible among the nineteen socialist leader eugene v debs addresses an antiwar rally in 1918 for his denunciation of world war i debs was convicted under the espionage act of 1917 and sent to federal prison.
in his courtroom speech defending himself against charges of disloyalty he passionately declared while there is a lower class i am in it while there is a criminal element i am of it while there is a soul in prison i am not free he ran as a presidential candidate in 1920 while still incarcerated in his cell and received nearly a million votes.
hundred prosecutions pursued under these laws were antiwar socialists and members of the radical industrial workers of the world iww.
kingpin socialist eugene v debs was convicted under the espionage act in 1918 and sentenced to ten years in a federal penitentiary.
iww leader william d big bill haywood and ninety nine associates were similarly convicted.
virtually any criticism of the government could be censored and punished.
some critics claimed the new laws were bending if not breaking the first amendment.
but in schenck v united states 1919 the supreme court af rmed their legality arguing that freedom of speech could be revoked when such speech posed a clear and present danger to the nation.
these prosecutions form an ugly chapter in the history of american civil liberty.
with the dawn of peace presidential pardons were rather freely granted including president hardings to eugene debs in 1921.
yet a few victims lingered behind bars into the 1930s.
the nations factories go to war victory was no foregone conclusion especially since the republic despite ample warning was caught atfootedly unready for its leap into global war.
the pacistic wilson had only belatedly backed some mild preparedness mea sures beginning in 1915 including the creation of a civilian council of national defense to study problems of economic mobilization.
he had wartime workers also launched a shipbuilding program as much to capture the belligerents war disrupted foreign trade as to anticipate americas possible entry into the war and endorsed a modest bee ng up of the army which with 100 000 regulars then ranked about fteenth among the armies of the world in the same category with persias.
it would take a herculean effort to marshal americas daunting but disorga nized resources and throw them into the eld quickly enough to bolster the allied war effort.
towering obstacles confronted economic mobilizers.
sheer ignorance was among the biggest roadblocks.
no one knew precisely how much steel or explosive powder the country was capable of producing.
old ideas also proved to be liabilities as traditional fears of big government hamstrung efforts to orchestrate the economy from washington.
states rights democrats and businesspeople alike balked at federal economic controls even though the embattled nation could ill afford the freewheeling hit or miss chaos of the peacetime economy.
late in the war and after some bruising political battles wilson succeeded in imposing some order on this economic confusion.
in march 1918 he appointed lone eagle stock speculator bernard baruch to head the war industries board.
although the war industries board had only feeble formal powers it set a precedent for the federal government to take a central role in economic planning in moments of crisis.
it was disbanded just days after the armistice and americans returned to their preference for laissez faire and a weak central government.
but in the midst of the great depression of the 1930s policymakers would look back to world war i agencies like this one as models.
workers in wartime spurred by the slogan labor will win the war american workers sweated their way to victory.
in part they were driven by the war departments work or ght rule of 1918 which threatened any unemployed male with being immediately drafted a powerful discouragement to go on strike.
but for the most part government tried to treat labor fairly.
the national war labor board chaired by former president taft exerted itself to head off labor disputes that might hamper the war effort.
while pressing employers to grant concessions to labor including high wages and the eight hour day the board stopped short of supporting labors most im suppressing the steel strike pittsburgh 1919 the big steel producers ferociously resisted the unionization of their industry.
in pittsburgh compliant local ofcials bent to the steel makers will and issued an order banning all outdoor meetings of strikers.
this mounted policeman enforced the order with a ailing billy club.
the steelworkers strike eventually failed leaving the steel industry un unionized until the new deal championed labors cause in the depression decade of the 1930s.
portant demand a government guarantee of the right to organize into unions.
fortunately for the allied cause samuel gompers and his american federation of labor af of l loyally supported the war though some smaller and more radical labor orga ni zations including the industrial workers of the world did not.
the iww known as the wobblies and sometimes derided as the i wont works engineered some of the most damaging industrial sabotage and not without reason.
as transient laborers in such industries as fruit and lumber the wobblies were victims of some of the shabbiest working conditions in the country.
when they protested many were viciously beaten arrested or run out of town.
mainstream labors loyalty was rewarded.
at wars end the af of l had more than doubled its membership to over 3 million and in the most heavily unionized sectors coal mining manufacturing and chapter 30 the war to end war 1917 1918 american strikebreakers to keep the mills running.
after bitter confrontations that left more than a dozen workers dead the steel strike collapsed a grievous setback that crippled the union movement for more than a decade.
the black workers who entered the steel mills in 1919 were but a fraction of the tens of thousands of southern blacks drawn to the north in wartime by the magnet of war industry employment.
these migrants made up the small scale beginnings of a great northward african american trek that would eventually grow to massive proportions.
their sudden appearance in previously all white areas sometimes sparked interracial violence.
an explosive riot in east st louis missouri in july 1917 left nine whites and at least forty blacks dead.
an equally gruesome race riot ripped through chicago.
the wartime windy city was taut with racial tension as a growing black population expanded into white working class neighborhoods and as african americans found jobs as strikebreakers in meatpacking plants.
triggered by an incident at a bathing beach in july 1919 a reign of terror descended on the city for nearly two weeks.
black and white gangs roamed chicagos streets eventually kill ing fteen whites and twenty three blacks.
chicago race riot 1919 the policeman apparently arrived too late to spare this victim from being pelted by stones from an angry mob.
transportation real wages after adjusting for ination had risen more than 20 percent over prewar levels.
a new day seemed to be dawning for the longstruggling union movement.
yet labor harbored grievances.
recognition of the right to organize still eluded labors grasp.
wartime ination prices more than doubled between 1914 and 1920 threatened to eclipse wage gains.
not even the call of patriotism and wilsonian idealism could defuse all labor disputes.
some six thousand strikes several stained by blood broke out in the war years.
in 1919 the greatest strike in american history rocked the steel industry.
more than a quarter of a million steelworkers walked off their jobs in a bid to force their employers to recognize their right to organize and bargain collectively.
the steel companies resisted mercilessly.
they refused to negotiate with union representatives and brought in thirty thousand african suffering until suffrage women also heeded the call of patriotism and opportunity.
thousands of female workers ooded into factories and elds taking up jobs vacated by men who left the assembly line for the frontline.
but the war split the womens movement deeply.
many progressive era feminists were pacists inclined to oppose the participation both of america in the war and women in the war effort.
this group found a voice in the national womans party led by quaker activist alice paul which demonstrated against kaiser wilson with marches and hunger strikes.
but the larger part of the suffrage movement represented by the national american woman suffrage association supported wilsons war.
leaders echoed wilsons justication for ghting by arguing that women must take part in the war effort to earn a role in shaping the peace.
the ght for democracy abroad was womens best hope for winning true democracy at home.
war mobilization gave new momentum to the suffrage ght.
impressed by womens war work president suffrage for women wilson endorsed woman suffrage as a vitally necessary war mea sure in 1917 new york voted for suffrage at the state level michigan oklahoma and south dakota followed.
the next year governments in great britain austria hungary and germany extended the suffrage to women.
not long after the united states followed suit.
in 1920 more than seventy years after the rst calls for suffrage at seneca falls the nineteenth amendment was ratied giving all american women the right to vote.
see the appendix and table 30 1.
despite political victory womens wartime economic gains proved eeting.
although a permanent womens bureau did emerge after the war in the department of labor to protect women in the workplace most women workers soon gave up their war jobs.
meanwhile congress af rmed its support for women in their traditional role as mothers when it passed the sheppard towner maternity act of 1921 providing federally nanced instruction in maternal and infant in an open address to congress in 1917 suffragist carrie chapman catt 1859 1947 capitalized on the idealism of the day and invoked the founding principles of american democracy in arguing the case for womens right to vote how can our nation escape the logic it has never failed to follow when its last unenfranchised class calls for the vote.
behold our uncle sam oating the banner with one hand taxation without representation is tyranny and with the other seizing the billions of dollars paid in taxes by women to whom he refuses representation.
is there a single man who can justify such inequality of treatment such outrageous discrimination.
in the trenches u s army nurses worked on the frontlines in france in 1918.
the war also opened many opportunities for womens work on the home front but the conict ended too soon for many women to secure a permanent foothold in occupations traditionally dominated by men.
chapter 30 the war to end war 1917 1918 suffragists picket the white house 1917 militant feminists sometimes handcuffed themselves to the white house fence to dramatize their appeal for the vote to the president.
table 30 1 a chronology of womens right to vote in national elections in selected nations new zealand australia white women only until aborigines included in 1962 finland denmark iceland austria canada women of british and french extraction only until 1950 germany hungary poland russian federation united kingdom only women who were married householders or university graduates age 30 or over until 1928 netherlands sweden united states czechoslovakia mongolia south africa whites only until 1994 turkey spain but women lost the vote under the dictator francisco franco 1936 1976 brazil cuba france italy japan yugoslavia argentina mexico pakistan israel south korea china syrian arab republic haiti india greece lebanon egypt iran afghanistan revoked under taliban rule 1996 2001 switzerland jordan kuwait sources caroline daley and melanie nolan eds suffrage and beyond international feminist perspectives 1994 issues wmndocs suffrage htm womens history international woman suffrage timeline.
health care.
in doing so it also expanded the responsibility of the federal government for family welfare.
feminists continued to ex their political muscle in the postwar decade pressing for more laws to protect women in the workplace and prohibit child labor.
complete success often eluded them in those crusades but the developments of the world war i era nevertheless foreshadowed a future when womens wage labor and political power would reshape the american way of life.
forging a war economy mobilization relied as much on the heated emotions of patriotism as on the cool majesty of the laws.
the largely voluntary character of economic war orga ni zation testied to ocean insulated americas safe distance from the ghting as well as to the still modest scale of government powers in the progressive era republic.
but as the war wore on government took greater command of the nations resources to secure an allied victory.
as the larder of democracy america had to feed itself and its allies.
by a happy inspiration the man chosen to head the food administration was the quaker humanitarian herbert c hoover.
he was already considered a hero because he had successfully led a massive charitable drive to feed the starving people of war racked belgium.
in common with other american war administrators hoover preferred to rely on voluntary compliance rather than on compulsory edicts.
he deliberately rejected issuing ration cards a practice used in europe.
instead he waged a whirlwind propaganda campaign through posters billboards newspapers pulpits and doughboys in france movies.
to save food for export hoover proclaimed wheatless wednesdays and meatless tuesdays all on a voluntary basis.
even children when eating apples were urged to be patriotic to the core the country soon broke out in a rash of vegetable victory gardens as perspiring patriots hoed their way to victory in backyards and vacant lots.
congress severely restricted the use of foodstuffs for manufacturing alcoholic beverages and the war spawned spirit of self denial helped accelerate the wave of prohibition that was sweeping the country.
many leading brewers were german descended and this taint made the drive against alcohol all the more popular.
the reformers dream of a saloonless nation was nally achieved temporarily in 1919 with the passage of the eighteenth amendment prohibiting all alcoholic drinks.
thanks to the fervent patriotic wartime spirit hoovers voluntary approach worked.
farm production increased by one fourth and food exports to the allies tripled in volume.
hoovers methods were widely imitated in other war agencies.
the fuel administration exhorted americans to save fuel with heat less mondays lightless nights and gasless sundays the treasury department sponsored huge parades and invoked slogans like halt the hun to promote four great liberty loan drives followed by a victory loan campaign in 1919.
together these efforts netted the then fantastic sum of about 21 billion or twothirds of the current cost of the war to the united states.
the remainder was raised by increased taxes which unlike the loan subscriptions were obligatory.
the ultimate bill including interest and veterans benets mounted to some 112 billion.
pressures of various kinds patriotic and otherwise were used to sell bonds.
the unfortunate german american who could not display a liberty bond button might nd his or her house bedaubed with yellow paint.
a number of reluctant investors in war bonds were roughly handled.
in at least one instance a man signed for a bond with a rope around his neck.
despite the wilson administrations preference for voluntary means of mobilizing the economy over the course of the war it expanded the federal government in size and power.
the war industries board issued production quotas allocated raw materials and set prices for government purchases.
following indescribable trafc snarls in late 1917 washington took over the railroads.
time itself came under uncle sams control when the entire country was ordered to observe daylight saving time to extend the workday and save on fuel.
making plowboys into doughboys food for thought wartime agencies ooded the country with posters like this in 1917 1918 exhorting women on the home front to grow their own and thus ease the pressure on food supplies.
most citizens at the outset did not dream of sending a mighty force to france.
as far as ghting went america would use its navy to uphold freedom of the seas.
it would continue to ship war materials to the allies and supply them with loans which nally totaled nearly 10 billion.
but in april and may of 1917 the european associates laid their cards on the table.
they confessed that they were scraping the bottom not only of their money chests but more ominously of chapter 30 the war to end war 1917 1918 their manpower barrels.
a huge american army would have to be raised trained and transported or the whole western front would collapse.
conscription was the only answer to the need for raising an immense army with all possible speed.
wilson disliked a draft as did many other americans with civil war memories but he eventually accepted and eloquently supported conscription as a disagreeable and temporary necessity.
the proposed draft bill immediately ran into a barrage of criticism in congress.
a congressman from missouri deploring compulsion cried out in protest that there was precious little difference between a conscript and a convict prophets of doom predicted that on draft registration day the streets would run red with blood.
at length congress six weeks after declaring war grudgingly got around to passing conscription.
the draft act required the registration of all males between the ages of eighteen and forty ve.
no draft dodger could purchase his exemption or hire a substitute as in the days of the civil war though the law exempted men in key industries such as shipbuilding.
ignoring grisly tales of the agonies of trench warfare many young american men saw an opportunity for adventure and seized it.
author john dos passos 1896 1970 recollected how he felt going off to war in 1917 we had spent our boyhood in the afterglow of the peaceful nineteenth century.
what was war like.
we wanted to see with our own eyes.
we ocked into the volunteer services.
i respected the conscientious objectors and occasionally felt i should take that course myself but hell i wanted to see the show.
the draft machinery on the whole worked effectively.
registration day proved to be a day of patriotic pilgrimages to ag draped registration centers and the sign up saw no shedding of blood as some had gloomily predicted.
despite precautions some 337 000 slackers escaped the draft and about 4 000 conscientious objectors were excused.
within a few frantic months the army grew to over 4 million men.
for the rst time women were admitted to the armed forces some 11 000 to the navy and 269 to the marines.
african americans also served in the armed forces though in strictly segregated units and usually under white ofcers.
reecting racial attitudes of the time military authorities hesitated to train black men for combat and the majority of black soldiers were assigned to construction battalions or put to work unloading ships.
recruits were supposed to receive six months of training in america and two more months overseas.
but so great was the urgency that many doughboys were swept swiftly into battle scarcely knowing how to handle a rie much less a bayonet.
fighting in france belatedly miracles in shipbuilding russias collapse underscored the need for haste.
the communistic bolsheviks after seizing power late in 1917 ultimately withdrew their beaten country from the capitalistic war early in 1918.
this sudden defection released hundreds of thousands of battle tested germans from the eastern front facing russia for the western front in france where for the rst time in the stopping the german juggernaut war they were developing a dangerous superiority in manpower.
berlins calculations as to american tardiness were surprisingly accurate.
germany had counted on knocking out britain six months after the declaration of unlimited submarine warfare long before america could get into the struggle.
no really effective american ghting force reached france until about a year after congress declared war.
berlin had also reckoned on the inability of the americans to transport their army assuming that they were able to raise one.
here again the german predictions were not far from the mark as shipping shortages plagued the allies.
nevertheless france gradually began to bustle with american doughboys see map 30 1.
the rst trainees to reach the front were used as replacements in the allied armies and were generally deployed in quiet sectors with the british and french.
the newcomers soon made friends with the french girls or tried to and one of the most sung about women in history was the fabled mademoiselle from armentires one of the printable stanzas ran she was true to me she was true to you she was true to the whole damn army too.
battling venereal disease the american military waged a half hearted war on rampant venereal disease.
0 interactive map ver fla nd e s ly ypres ra n eth.
tr eld brussels sch.
do it of rs r.
dover st b elgi u m.
se r m eu so m m er.
somme offensive amiens cantigny may 28 1918 in e central powers neutral nations german spring offensive 1918 aisne marne offensive ge r m a n y ne r ais verdun feb 21 dec.
18 1916 belleau wood r june 6 25 1918 versailles allied powers se mo lux.
sedan paris m e r ar n chteau thierry may 31 june 4 1918 lo meuse argonne sept 26 nov 11 1918 second battle of the marne july 18 aug 6 1918 f r ance rr ai n e st mihiel sept 12 16 1918 a l s ac e 50n lle eng lis h cha n n el r lys offensive se map 30 1 major u s operations in france 1918 one doughboy recorded in his diary his baptism of re at st mihiel hiked through dark woods.
no lights allowed guided by holding on the pack of the man ahead.
stumbled through underbrush for about half mile into an open eld where we waited in soaking rain until about 10 00 p m we then started on our hike to the st mihiel front arriving on the crest of a hill at 1 00 a m.
i saw a sight which i shall never forget.
it was the zero hour and in one instant the entire front as far as the eye could reach in either direction was a sheet of ame while the heavy artillery made the earth quake 5e gr eat b r i ta i n n american offensive stabilized front 1914 1917 armistice line nov 11 1918 farthest german advance july 18 1918 deadlocked battle allied victory 100 km.
chapter 30 the war to end war 1917 1918 not surprisingly american soldiers suffered from high rates of venereal disease which the army only contributed to by avoiding the subject.
american operations were not con ned solely to france small detachments fought in belgium italy and notably russia.
the united states hoping to keep stores of munitions from falling into german hands when bolshevik russia quit ghting contributed some 5 000 troops to an allied invasion of northern russia at archangel.
wilson likewise sent nearly 10 000 troops to siberia as part of an allied expedition which included more than 70 000 japa nese.
major american purposes were to prevent japan from getting a stranglehold on siberia to rescue some 45 000 marooned czechoslovak troops and to snatch military supplies from bolshevik control.
sharp ghting at archangel and in siberia involved casualties on both sides including several hundred americans.
the bolsheviks long resented these capitalistic interventions which they regarded as high handed efforts to suffocate their infant communist revolution in its cradle.
america helps hammer the hun the dreaded german drive on the western front exploded in the spring of 1918.
spearheaded by about half a million troops the enemy rolled forward with terrifying momentum.
so dire was the peril that the allied nations for the rst time united under a supreme commander the quiet french marshal foch whose axiom was to make war is to attack until then the allies had been ghting imperfectly coordinated actions.
at last the ill trained yanks were coming and not a moment too soon.
late in may 1918 the german juggernaut smashing to within forty miles of paris threatened to knock out france.
newly arrived american troops numbering fewer than thirty thousand were thrown into the breach at chteau thierry right in the teeth of the german advance.
this was a historic moment the rst signicant engagement of american troops in a european war.
battle fatigued french soldiers watched incredulously as the roads lled with endless truckloads of american doughboys singing new world songs at the top of their voices a seemingly inexhaustible ood of fresh and gleaming youth.
with their arrival it was clear that a new american giant had arisen in the west to replace the dying russian titan in the east.
american weight in the scales was now being felt on both sides of the con ict see figure 30 1.
by july 1918 the awesome german drive had spent its force and keyed up american men participated in a foch counteroffensive in the second battle of the marne.
this engagement marked the beginning of a german withdrawal that was never effectively reversed.
in september 1918 nine american divisions about 243 000 men joined four french divisions to push the germans gassed by john singer sargent the noted artist captures the horror of trench warfare in world war i.
the enemy was often distant and unseen and death came impersonally from gas or artillery re.
american troops entering the line only in the wars nal days were only briey exposed to this kind of brutal ghting.
mademoiselle from armentires ome familiar songs such as julia ward howes stirring civil war era melody battle hymn of the republic were penned by known composers and have well established scores and lyrics.
but many ballads have no specic author.
songwriters may t new verses to known tunes but the songs essentially grow out of the soil of popular culture and take on a life of their own.
yankee doodle dandy for example originated during the seventeenthcentury eng lish civil war was adapted by the american revolutionaries more than a century later and was parodied by southerners during the american civil war s yankee doodle had a mind to whip the southern traitors because they didnt choose to live on codsh and potaters.
stagger lee or stagolee a blues ballad supposedly based on a murder in memphis in the 1930s has been played in countless renditions with its homicidal subject variously portrayed as a ruthless badman or a civil rights hero.
this process of accretion and adaptation can furnish valuable clues to historians about changing sentiments and sensibilities just as the ballads themselves give expression to feelings not always evident in the of cial record.
folklorist alan lomax spent a lifetime tracking down american ballads documenting layers of life and experience not usually excavated by traditional scholars.
in the case of the first world wars most notorious song mademoiselle from armentires or hinky dinky parley voo he compiled from various sources more than six hundred soldier authored stanzas some of which are reproduced here others he delicately described as not mailable.
what fresh and irreverent perspectives do they reveal about the soldierseye view of military life.
mademoiselle from armentires she hadnt been kissed in forty years.
she might have been young for all we knew when napoleon opped at waterloo.
youll never get your croix de guerre if you never wash your underwear.
the french they are a funny race they ght with their feet and save their face.
the cootie louse is the national bug of france.
the cooties found all over france no matter where you hang your pants.
oh the seventy seventh went over the top a sous lieutenant a jew and a wop.
the ofcers get all the steak and all we get is the belly ache.
the general got a croix de guerre the son of a gun was never there.
theres many and many a married man wants to go back to france again.
twas a hell of a war as we recall but still twas better than none at all.
source excerpt from john a lomax and alan lomax american ballads and folk songs pp.
courtesy of the alan lomax archive chapter 30 the war to end war 1917 1918 upon their crumbling lines from balloons shells and rockets.
men killed in battle russia 1 700 000 germany 1 600 000 france 1 385 000 british empire 900 000 austria 800 000 462 000 53 000 italy united states figure 30 1 approximate comparative losses in world war i from the st mihiel salient a german dagger in frances ank.
the americans dissatised with merely bolstering the british and french had meanwhile been demanding a separate army.
general john j.
black jack pershing was nally assigned a front of eighty ve miles stretching northwestward from the swiss border to meet the french lines.
as part of the last mighty allied assault involving several million men pershings army undertook the meuse argonne offensive from september 26 to november 11 1918.
one objective was to cut the german railroad lines feeding the western front.
this battle the most gargantuan thus far in american history lasted forty seven days and engaged 1 2 million american troops.
with especially heavy ghting in the rugged argonne forest the killed and wounded mounted to 120 000 or 10 percent of the americans involved.
the slow progress and severe losses from machine guns resulted in part from inadequate training in part from dashing open eld tactics with the bayonet liberally employed.
tennessee bred alvin c york a member of an antiwar religious sect became a hero when he single handedly killed 20 germans and captured 132 more.
victory was in sight and fortunately so.
the slowly advancing american armies in france were eating up their supplies so rapidly that they were in grave danger of running short.
but the battered germans were ready to stagger out of the trenches and cry kamerad comrade.
their allies were deserting them the british blockade was causing critical food shortages and the sledgehammer blows of the allies pummeled them relentlessly.
propaganda leaets containing seductive wilsonian promises rained down the fourteen points disarm germany berlin was now ready to hoist the white ag.
warned of imminent defeat by the generals it turned to the presumably softhearted wilson in october 1918 seeking a peace based on the fourteen points.
in stern responses the president made it clear that the kaiser must be thrown overboard before an armistice could be negotiated.
war weary germans whom wilson had been trying to turn against their military masters took the hint.
the kaiser was forced to ee to holland where he lived out his remaining twenty three years unwept unhonored and unhung the exhausted germans were through.
they laid down their arms at eleven oclock on the eleventh day of the eleventh month of 1918 and an eerie numbing silence fell over the western front.
war taut america burst into a delirium of around the clock rejoicing as the war to end wars had ended.
but the costs exceeded comprehension nearly 9 million soldiers had died and german repentance 1918 a prophetic reection of the view that the failure to smash germany completely would lead to another world war.
wilson the peacemaker theodore roosevelt 1858 1919 favored the germans unconditional surrender.
referring to wilsons practice of drafting diplomatic notes on his own typewriter roosevelt telegraphed several senators october 24 1918 let us dictate peace by the hammering guns and not chat about peace to the accompaniment of clicking typewriters.
the language of the fourteen points and the subsequent statements explaining or qualifying them are thoroughly mischievous.
more than 20 million had suffered grievous wounds.
to make matters worse some 30 million people perished in a worldwide inuenza pandemic in 1918 1919.
over 550 000 americans more than ten times the number of u s combat casualties died from the u.
the united states main contributions to the ultimate victory had been foodstuffs munitions credits oil for this rst mechanized war and manpower but not battleeld victories.
the yanks fought only two ma jor battles at st mihiel and the meuse argonne both in the last two months of the four year war and they were still grinding away in the meuse argonne well short of their objectives when the war ended.
it was the prospect of endless u s troop reserves rather than americas actual military per for mance that eventually demoralized the germans.
ironically enough general pershing in some ways depended more on the allies than they depended on him.
his army purchased more of its supplies in europe than it shipped from the united states.
fewer than ve hundred of pershings artillery pieces were of american manufacture.
virtually all of his aircraft were provided by the british and french.
britain and france transported a majority of the doughboys to europe.
the united states in short was no arsenal of democracy in this war that role awaited it in the next global con ict two decades later.
wilson steps down from olympus woodrow wilson had helped to win the war.
what part would he now play in shaping the peace.
expectations ran extravagantly high.
as the ghting in europe crashed to a close the american president towered at the peak of his popularity and power.
in lonely huts in the mountains of italy candles burned before posterportraits of the revered american prophet.
in poland starry eyed university students would meet in the streets clasp hands and utter only one word wilson no other man had ever occupied so dizzy a pinnacle as moral leader of the world.
wilson also had behind him the prestige of victory and the economic resources of the mightiest nation on earth.
but at this home from the war 1919 most black troops in world war i were denied combat duty and served as laborers and stevedores but this wounded veteran had seen some tough ghting though in a segregated unit the 369th colored infantry regiment also known as the hellghters of harlem segregation followed black servicemen even into death.
when congress appropriated money in 1930 to send gold star mothers to visit the graves of their slain soldier sons in france it provided for separate ships hotels and trains for african american women.
several black mothers preferring to remain at home and retain our honor and self respect reluctantly refused to make the trip.
chapter 30 the war to end war 1917 1918 fateful moment his sureness of touch deserted him and he began to make a series of tragic fumbles.
under the slogan politics is adjourned partisan political strife had been kept below the surface during the war crisis.
hoping to strengthen his hand at the paris peace table wilson broke the truce by personally appealing for a democratic victory in the congressional elections of november 1918.
but the maneuver back red when voters instead returned a narrow republican majority to congress.
having staked his reputation on the outcome wilson went to paris as a diminished leader.
unlike all the parliamentary statesmen at the table he did not command a legislative majority at home.
wilsons decision to go in person to paris to help make the peace infuriated republicans.
at that time no president had traveled to europe and wilsons journey looked to his critics like amboyant grandstanding.
he further rufed republican feathers when he snubbed the senate in assembling his peace delegation and neglected to include a single republican senator in his ofcial party.
the logical choice was the new chairman of the senate committee on foreign relations slender and aristocratically bewhiskered henry cabot lodge of massachusetts a harvard ph d.
but including lodge would have been problematic for the president.
the senators mind quipped one critic was like the soil of his native new eng land naturally barren but highly cultivated wilson loathed him and the feeling was hotly reciprocated.
an accomplished author lodge had been known as the scholar in poli wilson in dover england 1919 hailed by many europeans in early 1919 as the savior of the western world wilson was a fallen idol only a few months later when americans repudiated the peace treaty he had helped to craft.
tics until wilson came on the scene.
the two men were at daggers drawn personally and politically.
an idealist amid the imperialists woodrow wilson the great prophet arisen in the west received tumultuous welcomes from the masses of france eng land and italy late in 1918 and early in 1919.
they saw in his idealism the promise of a better world.
but the statesmen of france and italy were careful to keep the new messiah at arms length from worshipful crowds.
he might so arouse the people as to prompt them to overthrow their leaders and upset nespun imperialistic plans.
the paris conference of great and small nations fell into the hands of an inner clique known as the big four.
wilson representing the richest and freshest great power more or less occupied the drivers seat.
he was joined by genial premier vittorio orlando of italy and brilliant prime minister david lloyd george of britain.
perhaps the most realistic of the quartet was cynical hard bitten premier georges clemenceau of france the seventy eight year old organizer of victory known as the tiger speed was urgent when the conference opened on january 18 1919.
europe seemed to be slipping into anarchy the red tide of communism was licking westward from bolshevist russia.
the treaty of versailles the english science ction writer h g wells 1866 1946 soon a strong proponent of the league of nations spoke for many europeans when he praised woodrow wilson in 1917 in all the world there is no outstanding gure to which the world will listen there is no man audible in all the world in japan as well as germany and rome as well as boston except the president of the united states.
wilsons ultimate goal was a world parliament to be known as the league of nations but he rst bent his energies to preventing any vengeful parceling out of the former colonies and protectorates of the vanquished powers.
he was less attentive to the fate of colonies belonging to the victorious french and english.
wilson tried to force through a compromise between naked imperialism and wilsonian idealism.
the victors would not take possession of the conquered territory outright but would receive it as trustees of the league of nations.
strategic syria for example was awarded to france and oil rich iraq went to britain.
in practice this half loaf solution was little more than the old prewar colonialism thinly disguised although in the decades to come anticolonial independence movements would wield the wilsonian ideal of selfdetermination against their imperial occupiers.
meanwhile wilson had been serving as midwife for the league of nations which he envisioned as containing an assembly with seats for all nations and a council to be controlled by the great powers.
he gained a signal victory over the skeptical old world diplomats in february 1919 when they agreed to make the league covenant wilsons brainchild an integral part of the nal peace treaty.
at one point he spoke with such ardor for his plan that even the hard boiled newspaper reporters forgot to take notes.
hammering out the treaty domestic duties now required wilson to make a quick trip to america where ugly storms were brewing in the senate.
certain republican senators lodge in the lead were sharpening their knives for wilson.
to them the league was either a useless sewing circle or pilgrim landing in america 1919 an overpotent super state their hard core was composed of a dozen or so militant isolationists led by senators william borah of idaho and hiram johnson of cal i fornia who were known as irreconcilables or the battalion of death thirty nine republican senators or senatorselect enough to defeat the treaty proclaimed that the senate would not approve the league of nations in its existing imperfect form.
these difculties delighted wilsons allied adversaries in paris.
they were now in a stronger bargaining position because wilson would have to beg them for changes in the covenant that would safeguard the monroe doctrine and other american interests dear to the senators.
as soon as wilson was back in paris the hardheaded clemenceau pressed french demands for the german inhabited rhineland and the saar valley a rich coal area.
faced with erce wilsonian opposition to this violation of self determination france settled for a compromise whereby the saar basin would remain under the league of nations for fteen years and chapter 30 the war to end war 1917 1918 then a popular vote would determine its fate.
in exchange for dropping its demands for the rhineland france got the security treaty in which both britain and america pledged to come to its aid in the event of another german invasion.
the french later felt betrayed when this pact was quickly pigeonholed by the u s senate which shied away from all entangling alliances.
wilsons next battle was with italy over fiume a valuable seaport inhabited by both italians and yugoslavs.
when italy demanded fiume wilson insisted that the seaport go to yugoslavia and appealed over the heads of italys leaders to the countrys masses.
the maneuver fell at.
the italian delegates went home in a huff while the italian masses turned savagely against wilson.
another crucial struggle was with japan over chinas shandong shantung peninsula and the german islands in the pacic which the japa nese had seized during the war.
japan was conceded the strategic pacic islands under a league of nations mandate but wilson staunchly opposed japa nese control of shandong as a violation of self determination for its 30 million chinese residents.
but when the japa nese threatened to walk out wilson reluctantly accepted a compromise whereby japan kept germanys economic holdings in shandong and pledged to return the peninsula to china at a later date.
the chinese were outraged by this imperialistic solution while clemenceau jeered that wilson talked like jesus christ and acted like lloyd george the peace treaty that bred a new war a completed treaty of versailles after more weeks of wrangling was handed to the germans in june 1919 almost literally on the point of a bayonet.
excluded from the settlement negotiations at paris germany had capitulated in the hope that it would be granted a peace based on the fourteen points.
a careful analysis of the treaty shows that only about four of the twenty three original wilsonian points and subse the saar population voted overwhelmingly to rejoin germany in 1935.
in due time the japa nese illegally fortied these islands the marshalls marianas and carolines and used them as bases against the united states in world war ii.
quent principles were fully honored.
vengeance not reconciliation was the treatys dominant tone.
loud and bitter cries of betrayal burst from german throats charges that adolf hitler would soon reiterate during his meteoric rise to power.
wilson of course was guilty of no conscious betrayal.
but the allied powers were torn by con icting aims many of them sanctioned by secret treaties.
there had to be compromise at paris or there would be no agreement.
faced with hard realities wilson was forced to compromise away some of his less cherished fourteen points in order to salvage the more precious league of nations.
he was much like the mother who had to throw her sickly younger children to the pursuing wolves to save her sturdy rstborn.
a troubled wilson was not happy with the results.
greeted a few months earlier with frenzied acclaim in europe he was now a fallen idol condemned alike by disillusioned liberals and frustrated imperialists.
he was keenly aware of some of the injustices that had been forced into the treaty.
but he was hoping that the league of nations a potent league with america as a leader would iron out the inequities.
yet the loudly condemned treaty had much to commend it.
not least among its merits was its liberation of millions of minority peoples such as the poles from the yoke of imperial dynasties.
wilsons disappointments and his critics to the contrary the settlement was almost certainly a fairer one because he had gone to paris.
the domestic parade of prejudice returning for the second and nal time to america wilson sailed straight into a political typhoon.
isolationists raised a whirlwind of protest against the treaty especially against wilsons commitment to usher the united states into his newfangled league of nations.
invoking the revered advice of washington and jefferson they wanted no part of any entangling alliance nor were the isolationists wilsons only problem.
critics showered the treaty of versailles with abuse from all sides.
rabid hun haters regarding the pact as not harsh enough voiced their discontent.
principled liberals like the editors of the new york nation thought it too harsh and a gross betrayal to boot.
german americans italian americans and others whom wilson termed hyphenated americans were aroused be the defeat of wilson s treaty contentious nuptials woodrow wilsons visionary effort to end more than a century of american aloofness from world affairs met vigorous opposition from traditional isolationists especially in the u s senate.
senators eventually refused to ratify the versailles treaty shattering wilsons dream of making the united states a more engaged international actor.
cause the peace settlement was not sufciently favorable to their native lands.
irish americans traditional twisters of the british lions tail also denounced the league.
they felt that with the additional votes of the ve overseas british dominions it gave britain undue inuence and they feared that it could be used to force the united states to crush any rising for irish independence.
crowds of irish american zealots hissed and booed wilsons name.
wilsons tour and collapse 1919 despite mounting discontent the president had reason to feel optimistic.
when he brought home the treaty with the wilson league rmly riveted in as part i a strong majority of the people still seemed favorable.
at this time early july 1919 senator lodge had no real hope of defeating the treaty of versailles.
his strategy was merely to amend it in such a way as to americanize republicanize or senatorialize it.
the republicans could then claim political credit for the changes.
lodge effectively used delay to muddle and divide public opinion.
he read the entire 264 page treaty aloud in the senate foreign relations committee and held protracted hearings in which people of various nationalities aired their grievances.
wilson fretted increasingly as the hot summer of 1919 wore on.
the bulky pact was bogged down in the senate while the nation was drifting into confusion and apathy.
he therefore decided to take his case to the country in a spectacular speechmaking tour.
he would appeal over the heads of the senate to the sovereign people as he often had in the past.
the strenuous barnstorming campaign was undertaken in the face of protests by physicians and friends.
wilson had never been robust he had entered the white house nearly seven years before with a stomach pump and with headache pills for his neuritis.
his frail body had begun to sag under the strain of partisan strife a global war and a stressful peace conference.
but he declared that he was willing to die like the soldiers he had sent into battle for the sake of the new world order.
the presidential tour begun in september 1919 got off to a rather lame start.
the midwest received wilson lukewarmly partly because of strong german american inuence.
trailing after him like bloodhounds came two irreconcilable senators borah and johnson who spoke in the same cities a few days later.
hat tossing crowds answered their attacks on wilson crying impeach him impeach him but the reception was different in the rocky mountain region and on the pacic coast.
these areas which had elected wilson in 1916 welcomed him with heartwarming outbursts.
the high point and the breaking point of the return trip was at pueblo colorado september 25 1919.
wilson with tears coursing down his cheeks pleaded for the league of nations as the only real hope of preventing future wars.
that night he collapsed from physical and ner vous exhaustion.
wilson was whisked back in the funeral train to washington where several days later a stroke paralyzed one side of his body.
during the next few weeks he lay in a darkened room in the white house as much a victim of the war as the unknown soldier chapter 30 the war to end war 1917 1918 buried at arlington.
for more than seven months he did not meet with his cabinet.
defeat through deadlock senator lodge coldly calculating was now at the helm.
after failing to amend the treaty outright he nally came up with fourteen formal reservations to it a sardonic slap at wilsons fourteen points.
these safeguards reserved the rights of the united states under the monroe doctrine and the constitution and otherwise sought to protect american sovereignty.
senator lodge and other critics were especially alarmed by article x of the league because it morally bound the united states to aid any member victimized by external aggression.
a jealous congress wanted to reserve for itself the constitutional war declaring power.
wilson hating lodge saw red at the mere suggestion of the lodge reservations.
he was quite willing to accept somewhat similar reservations sponsored by his faithful democratic followers but he insisted that the lodge reservations emasculated the entire pact.
although too feeble to lead wilson was still strong enough to obstruct.
when the day nally came for the voting in the senate he sent word to all true democrats to vote against the treaty with the odious lodge reservations attached.
wilson hoped that when these were cleared away the path would be open for ratication without reservations or with only some mild democratic ones.
loyal democrats in the senate on november 19 1919 blindly did wilsons bidding.
combining with the irreconcilables mostly republicans they rejected the treaty with the lodge reservations appended 55 to 39.
the nation was too deeply shocked to accept the verdict as nal.
about four fths of the senators professed to favor the treaty with or without reservations yet a simple majority could not agree on a single proposition.
so strong was public indignation that the senate was forced to act a second time.
in march 1920 the treaty was brought up again with the lodge reservations tacked on.
there was only one possible path to success.
unless the senate approved the pact with the reservations the entire document would be rejected.
but the sickly wilson still sheltered behind drawn curtains and blind to disagreeable realities again sent word to all loyal democrats to vote down the treaty with the obnoxious reservations.
he thus signed the death warrant of the treaty as far as america was concerned.
on march 19 1920 the treaty netted a simple majority but failed to get the necessary two thirds majority by a count of 49 yeas to 35 nays.
who defeated the treaty.
the lodge wilson personal feud traditionalism isolationism disillusionment and partisanship all contributed to the confused picture.
but wilson himself must bear a substantial share of the responsibility.
he asked for all or nothing and got nothing.
one democratic senator angrily charged that the president had strangled his own brainchild with his own palsied hands rather than let the senate straighten its crooked limbs.
the solemn referendum of 1920 wilson had his own pet solution for the deadlock and this partly explains why he refused to compromise on lodges terms.
he proposed to settle the treaty issue in the forthcoming presidential campaign of 1920 by appealing to the people for a solemn referendum this was sheer folly for a true mandate on the league in the noisy arena of politics was clearly an impossibility.
jubilant republicans gathered in chicago in june 1920 with wayward bull moosers back in the corral after theodore roosevelts death in 1919 and the senatorial old guard back in the saddle.
the convention devised a masterfully ambiguous platform that could appeal to both pro league and anti league sentiment in the party.
the nominee would run on a teeter totter rather than a platform.
as the leading presidential contestants jousted with one another the political weathervane began to veer toward genial senator warren g harding of ohio.
a group of senate bosses meeting rather casually in the historic smoke lled room 404 of the hotel blackstone informally decided on the affable and malleable ohioan.
their fair haired boy was a prosperous backslapping small town newspaper editor of the folksy type quite the opposite of wilson who had earlier noted the senators disturbingly dull mind.
for vice president the party nominated frugal grimfaced governor calvin silent cal coolidge of massachusetts who had attracted conser vative support by breaking a police strike in boston.
meeting in san francisco democrats nominated earnest governor james m cox of ohio who strongly a crippled league of nations supported the league.
his running mate was assistant navy secretary franklin d roosevelt a young handsome vibrant new yorker.
democratic attempts to make the campaign a referendum on the league were thwarted by senator harding who issued muddled and contradictory statements on the issue from his front porch.
pro league and anti league republicans both claimed that hardings election would advance their cause while the candidate suggested that if elected he would work for a vague association of nations a league but not the league.
with newly enfranchised women swelling the vote totals harding was swept into power with a prodigious plurality of over 7 million votes 16 143 407 to 9 130 328 for cox the largest victory margin to that date in a presidential election.
the electoral count was 404 to 127.
eugene v debs federal prisoner number 9653 at the atlanta penitentiary rolled up the largest vote ever for the left wing socialist party 919 799.
public desire for a change found vent in a resounding repudiation of high and mighty wilsonism.
people were tired of professional highbrowism star reaching idealism bothersome do goodism moral overstrain and constant self sacrice.
eager to lapse back into normalcy they were willing to accept a second rate president and they got a third rate one.
although the election could not be considered a true referendum republican isolationists successfully turned hardings victory into a death sentence for the league.
politicians increasingly shunned the league as they would a leper.
when the legendary wilson died in 1924 admirers knelt in the snow outside his washington home.
his great vision of a league for peace had perished long before.
the betrayal of great expectations americas spurning of the league was tragically shortsighted.
the republic had helped to win a costly war but it foolishly kicked the fruits of victory under the table.
whether a strong international orga ni zation would have averted world war ii in 1939 will always be a matter of dispute.
but there can be no doubt that the orphaned league of nations was undercut at the start by the refusal of the mightiest power on the globe to join it.
the allies themselves were largely to blame for the new world conagration that ared up in 1939 but they found a convenient justication for their own shortcomings by pointing an accusing nger at uncle sam.
the ultimate collapse of the treaty of versailles must be laid at least in some degree at americas doorstep.
this complicated pact tied in with the four other peace treaties through the league covenant was a top heavy structure designed to rest on a four legged table.
the fourth leg the united states was never put into place.
this rickety structure teetered for over a decade and then crashed in ruins a debacle that played into the hands of the german demagogue adolf hitler.
no less ominous events were set in motion when the senate spurned the security treaty with france.
the french fearing that a new generation of germans would follow in their fathers goose steps undertook to build up a powerful military force.
predictably resenting the presence of strong french armies germany began to rearm illegally.
the seething cauldron of uncertainty and suspicion brewed an intoxicant that helped iname the fanatical following of hitler.
the united states as the tragic sequel proved hurt its own cause when it buried its head in the sand.
granted that the conduct of its allies had been disillusioning it had its own ends to serve by carrying through the wilsonian program.
it would have been well advised if it had forthrightly assumed its warborn responsibilities and had resolutely embraced the role of global leader proffered by the hand of destiny.
in the interests of its own security if for no other reason the united states should have used its enormous strength to shape world shaking events.
instead it permitted itself blithely to drift toward the abyss of a second and even more bloody international disaster.
chapter 30 the war to end war 1917 1918 chronology council of national defense established germany resumes unrestricted submarine warfare zimmermann note railroads placed under federal control united states enters world war i espionage act of 1917 wilson calls for peace without victory bolshevik revolution wilson proposes fourteen points sedition act of 1918 battle of chteau thierry second battle of the marne meuse argonne offensive key terms zimmermann note 747 fourteen points 748 committee on public information 748 espionage act 750 schenck v united states 750 war industries board 751 national war labor board 751 industrial workers of the world 751 1918 armistice ends world war i worldwide inuenza pandemic paris peace conference and treaty of versailles wilsons pro league tour and collapse eighteenth amendment prohibition of alcohol passed first senate defeat of versailles treaty final senate defeat of versailles treaty after reconsideration nineteenth amendment woman suffrage passed harding defeats cox for presidency people to know nineteenth amendment 753 sheppard towner maternity act 753 chteau thierry battle of 758 meuse argonne offensive 760 league of nations 763 irreconcilables 763 versailles treaty of 764 arthur zimmermann george creel eugene v debs william d big bill haywood bernard baruch herbert c hoover henry cabot lodge david lloyd george woodrow wilson realist or idealist.
a s the rst president to take the united states into a foreign war woodrow wilson was obliged to make a systematic case to the american people to justify his unprecedented european intervention.
his ideas have largely de ned the character of american foreign policy ever since for better or worse.
wilsonianism comprised three closely related principles 1 the era of american isolation from world affairs had irretrievably ended 2 the united states must infuse its own founding political and economic ideas including democracy the rule of law free trade and national self determination or anticolonialism into the international order and 3 american inuence could eventually steer the world to learn more away from rivalry and warfare and toward a cooperative and peaceful international system maintained by the league of nations or later the united nations.
whether that wilsonian vision constituted hardnosed realism or starry eyed idealism has excited scholarly debate for nearly a century.
realists such as george f kennan and henry kissinger insist that wilson was anything but a realist.
they criticize the president as a naive impractical dreamer who failed to understand that the international order was and always will be an anarchic unruly arena outside the rule of law where only military force can effectively protect the nations security.
in a sharp critique in his 1950 study american diplomacy kennan condemned wilsons vision as moralism legalism in this view wilson dangerously threatened to sacrice american self interests on the altar of his admirable but ultimately unworkable ideas.
wilsons defenders including his biographers arthur s link and thomas j.
knock argue that wilsons idealism was in fact a kind of higher realism recognizing as it did that armed con ict on the scale of world war i could never again be tolerated and that some framework of peaceful international relations simply had to be found.
the development of nuclear weapons in a later generation gave this argument more force.
this liberal defense of wilsonianism derives from the centuries old liberal faith that given sufcient intelligence and willpower the world can be made a better place.
realists reject this notion of moral and political progress as hopelessly innocent especially as applied to international affairs.
some leftist scholars such as william appleman williams have argued that wilson was in fact a realist of another kind a subtle and wily imperialist whose stirring rhetoric cloaked a grasping ambition to make the united states the worlds dominant economic power.
sometimes called the imperialism of free trade this strategy allegedly sought not to decolonialize the world and open up international commerce for the good of peoples elsewhere but to create a system in which american economic might would irresistibly prevail.
wilsons defenders however would claim that in a wilsonian world all parties would be better off because of free trade and international competition.
still other scholars especially john milton cooper jr have emphasized the absence of economic factors in shaping wilsons diplomacy.
isolationism so this argument goes held such sway over american thinking precisely because the united states had such a puny nancial stake abroad no hard american economic interests were mortally threatened in 1917 nor for a long time thereafter.
in these circumstances wilson and the wilsonians who came after him such as franklin d roosevelt had no choice but to appeal to abstract ideals and high principles.
the idealistic wilsonian strain in american diplomacy in this view may have been an unavoidable heritage of americas historically isolated situation.
if so it was wilsons genius to make practical use of those ideas in his bid for popular support of his diplomacy.
finally a new generation of scholars has begun to explore the inuence of wilsonian ideals on social movements outside the united states and europe.
erez manela has argued that emerging anticolonial and nationalist movements appropriated wilsonian ideals and adapted them to their own political ends challenging forms of colonialism that wilson himself failed to criticize.
in this view the legacy of wilsonian foreign policy may have been felt most strongly outside the united states.
to learn more john w chambers to raise an army the draft comes to modern america 1987 alan dawley changing the world american progressives in war and revolution 2003 paul fussell the great war and modern memory 1975 maurine w greenwald women war and work 1980 ellis hawley the great war and the search for modern order rev.
ed 1997 jennifer keene doughboys the great war and the remaking of america 2001 david m kennedy over here the first world war and american society rev.
ed 2005 thomas j.
knock to end all wars woodrow wilson and the quest for a new world order 1992 erez manela the wilsonian moment self determination and the international origins of anticolonial nationalism 2007 paul l murphy world war i and the origin of civil liberties in the united states 1979 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at american life in the roaring twenties 1919 1929 americas present need is not heroics but healing not nostrums but normalcy not revolution but restoration.
not surgery but serenity.
b loodied by the war and disillusioned by the peace americans turned inward in the 1920s.
shunning diplomatic commitments to foreign countries they also denounced radical foreign ideas condemned unamerican lifestyles and clanged shut the immigration gates against foreign peoples.
they partly sealed off the domestic economy from the rest of the world and plunged headlong into a dizzying decade of homegrown prosperity.
the boom of the golden twenties showered genuine benets on americans as incomes and living standards rose for many.
but there seemed to be something incredible about it all even as people sang my sister she works in the laundry my father sells bootlegger gin my mother she takes in the washing my god.
how the money rolls in.
new technologies new consumer products and new forms of leisure and entertainment made the twen ties roar.
yet just beneath the surface lurked widespread anxieties about the future and fears that america was losing sight of its traditional ways.
seeing red hysterical fears of red russia continued to color american thinking for several years after the communists came to power in the bolshevik revolution of 1917 which spawned a tiny communist party in america.
tensions were heightened by an epidemic of strikes that convulsed the republic at wars end many of them the result of high prices and frustrated unionorganizing drives.
upstanding americans jumped to the conclusion that labor troubles were fomented by bomb and whisker bolsheviks.
a general strike in seattle in 1919 though modest in its demands and orderly in its methods prompted a call from the mayor for federal troops to head off the anarchy of russia fire this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the red scare and brimstone evangelist billy sunday struck a responsive chord when he described a bolshevik as a guy with a face like a porcupine and a breath that would scare a pole cat.
if i had my way id ll the jails so full of them that their feet would stick out the window the big red scare of 1919 1920 resulted in a nationwide crusade against left wingers whose americanism was suspect.
attorney general a mitchell palmer who saw red too easily earned the title of the fighting quaker by his excess of zeal in rounding up suspects.
they ultimately totaled about six thousand.
this drive to root out radicals was redoubled in june 1919 when a bomb shattered both the nerves and the washington home of palmer.
the fighting quaker was thereupon dubbed the quaking fighter other events highlighted the red scare.
late in december 1919 a shipload of 249 alleged alien radicals was deported on the buford the soviet ark to the radicals on the run 1919 in the aftermath of the war the american legion superpatriotic voice of veterans joined the anti bolshevik chorus zealously attacking political leftists in the united states as enemy reds an author soldier arthur guy empey 1883 1963 applauded the deportation delirium when he wrote i believe we should place them the reds all on a ship of stone with sails of lead and that their rst stopping place should be hell.
workers paradise of russia.
one zealot cried my motto for the reds is s o s ship or shoot hysteria was temporarily revived in september 1920 when a stillunexplained bomb blast on wall street killed thirtyeight people and wounded several hundred others.
various states joined the pack in the outcry against radicals.
in 1919 1920 a number of legislatures reecting the anxiety of solid citizens passed criminal syndicalism laws.
these anti red statutes some of which were born of the war made unlawful the mere advocacy of violence to secure social change.
critics protested that mere words were not criminal deeds that there was a great gulf between throwing ts and throwing bombs and that free screech was for the nasty as well as the nice.
violence was done to traditional american concepts of free speech as iww members and other radicals were vigorously prosecuted.
the hysteria went so far that in 1920 ve members of the new york legislature all lawfully elected were denied their seats simply because they were socialists.
the red scare was a godsend to conser vative businesspeople who used it to break the backs of the edgling unions.
labors call for the closed or all union shop was denounced as sovietism in disguise employers in turn hailed their own antiunion campaign for the open shop as the american plan.
anti redism and antiforeignism were reected in a notorious case regarded by liberals as a judicial lynching nicola sacco a shoe factory worker and bartolomeo vanzetti a sh peddler were convicted in 1921 of the murder of a massachusetts paymaster and his guard.
the jury and judge were prejudiced in some degree against the defendants because they were italians atheists anarchists and draft dodgers.
liberals and radicals the world over rallied to the defense of the two aliens doomed to die.
the case dragged on for six years until 1927 when the condemned men were electrocuted.
communists and other radicals were thus presented with two martyrs in the.
chapter 32 the politics of boom and bust 1920 1932 government for sale this 1924 cartoon satirizing the corruption of the harding administration shows the sale of the capitol the white house and even the washington monument.
commerce commission to single out one agency came to be dominated by men who were personally sympathetic to the managers of the railroads.
harding reactionaries might well have boasted we care not what laws the democrats pass as long as we are permitted to administer them big industrialists striving to reduce the rigors of competition now had a free hand to set up trade associations.
cement manufacturers for example would use these agencies to agree upon standardization of products publicity campaigns and a united front in dealing with the railroads and labor.
although many of these associations ran counter to the spirit of existing antitrust legislation their formation was encouraged by secretary hoover.
his sense of engineering efciency led him to condemn the waste resulting from cutthroat competition and his commitment to voluntary cooperation led him to urge businesses to regulate themselves rather than be regulated by big government.
the aftermath of war wartime government controls on the economy were swiftly dismantled.
the war industries board disappeared with almost indecent haste.
with its passing progressive hopes for more government regulation of big business evaporated.
washington likewise returned the railroads to private management in 1920.
reformers had hoped that wartime government operation of the lines might lead to their permanent nationalization.
instead congress passed the esch cummins transportation act of 1920 which encouraged private consolidation of the railroads and pledged the interstate commerce commission to guarantee their protability.
the new philosophy was not to save the country from the railroads as in the days of the populists but to save the railroads for the country.
the federal government also tried to pull up anchor and get out of the shipping business.
the merchant marine act of 1920 authorized the shipping board which controlled about fteen hundred vessels to dispose of much of the hastily built wartime eet at bargain basement prices.
the board operated the remaining vessels without conspicuous success.
under the la follette seamans act of 1915 american shipping could not thrive in competition with foreigners who all too often provided their crews with wretched food and starvation wages.
labor suddenly deprived of its wartime crutch of friendly government support limped along badly in the postwar decade.
a bloody strike in the steel industry was ruthlessly broken in 1919 partly by exploiting ethnic and racial divisions among the steelworkers and partly by branding the strikers as dangerous reds the railway labor board a successor body to the wartime labor boards ordered a wage cut of 12 percent in 1922 provoking a two month strike.
it ended when attorney general daugherty who fully shared hardings big business bias clamped on the strikers one of the most sweeping injunctions in american history.
unions wilted in this hostile political environ the transition to peace ment and membership shriveled by nearly 30 percent between 1920 and 1930.
needy veterans were among the few nonbusiness groups to reap lasting gains from the war.
congress in 1921 generously created the veterans bureau authorized to operate hospitals and provide vocational rehabilitation for the disabled.
veterans quickly orga nized into pressure groups.
the american legion had been founded in paris in 1919 by colonel theodore roosevelt jr legionnaires met periodically to renew old hardships and let off steam in good natured horseplay.
the legion soon became distinguished for its militant patriotism rock ribbed conservatism and zealous antiradicalism.
the legion also became notorious for its aggressive lobbying for veterans benets.
the chief grievance of the former doughboys was monetary they wanted their dough the former ser vicemen demanded adjusted compensation to make up for the wages they had lost when they turned in their factory overalls for military uniforms during the great war.
critics denounced this demand as a holdup bonus but the millions of veterans deployed heavy political artillery.
they browbeat congress into passing a bonus bill in 1922 which harding promptly vetoed.
re forming their lines the repulsed veterans gathered for a nal attack.
in 1924 congress again hoisted the white ag and passed the adjusted compensation act.
it gave every former soldier a paid up insurance policy due in twenty years adding about 3 5 billion to the total cost of the war.
penny pinching calvin coolidge sternly vetoed the measure but congress overrode him leaving the veterans with their loot.
america seeks benets without burdens making peace with the fallen foe was the most pressing problem left on hardings doorstep.
the united states having rejected the treaty of versailles was still technically at war with germany austria and hungary nearly three years after the armistice.
peace was nally achieved by lone wolf tactics.
in july 1921 congress passed a simple joint resolution that declared the war ofcially ended.
isolation was enthroned in washington.
the harding administration with the senate irreconcilables holding a hatchet over its head continued to regard the league of nations as a thing unclean.
harding at rst refused even to support the leagues world health i sympathize deeply with you madam but i cannot associate with you 1923 president hardings secretary of state charles evans hughes broke the news to a desperate war tattered europe that america was going and staying home.
but the new world body was much too important to be completely ignored.
unofcial observers were sent to its seat in geneva switzerland to hang around like detectives shadowing a suspected criminal.
harding could not completely turn his back on the outside world especially the middle east where a sharp rivalry developed between america and britain for oil drilling concessions.
remembering that the allies had oated to victory on a ood of oil experts recognized that liquid black gold would be as necessary as blood in the battles of tomorrow.
secretary hughes eventually secured for american oil companies the right to share in the exploitation of the sandy regions oil riches.
disarmament was one international issue on which harding after much indecision nally seized the initiative.
he was prodded by businesspeople unwilling to dig deeper into their pockets for money to nance the ambitious naval building program started during the war.
a deadly contest was shaping up with britain and japan which watched with alarm as the chapter 32 the politics of boom and bust 1920 1932 battleships aircraft carrier tonnage battleship tonnage u s 525 000 135 000 britain 525 000 135 000 japan france 175 000 60 000 italy 175 000 60 000 315 000 81 000 figure 32 1 limits imposed by washington conference 1921 1922 the pledge of the british and americans to refrain from fortifying their far eastern possessions while japan was allowed to fortify its possessions was the key to the naval limitation treaty.
the united states and great britain thus won a temporary victory but later paid a horrendous price when they had to dislodge the well entrenched japanese from the pacic in world war ii.
oceans lled with american vessels.
britain still commanded the worlds largest navy but the clatter of american riveters proclaimed that the united states would soon overtake it.
public agitation in america fed by these worries brought about the headline making washington disarmament conference in 1921 1922.
invitations went to all the major naval powers except bolshevik russia whose government the united states refused ofcially to recognize.
the double agenda included naval disarmament and the situation in the far east.
at the outset secretary hughes startled the delegates who were expecting the usual diplomatic fencestraddling with a comprehensive concrete plan for declaring a ten year holiday on the construction of battleships and even for scrapping some of the huge dreadnoughts already built.
he proposed that the scaled down navies of america and britain should enjoy parity in battleships and aircraft carriers with japan on the small end of a 5 5 3 ratio.
this arrangement sounded to the sensitive japa nese ambassador like rolls royce rolls royce ford complex bargaining followed in the wake of hughess proposals.
the five power naval treaty of 1922 embodied hughess ideas on ship ratios but only after face saving compensation was offered to the insecure japa nese see figure 32 1.
the british and americans both conceded that they would refrain from fortifying their far eastern possessions including the philippines.
the japa nese were not subjected to such restraints in their possessions.
in addition a four power treaty replaced the twenty year old anglo japa nese alliance.
the new pact bound britain japan france and the united states to preserve the status quo in the pacic another concession to the jumpy japa nese.
finally the washington conference gave chaotic china the sick man of the far east a shot in the arm with the nine power treaty of 1922 whose signatories agreed to nail wide open the open door in china.
when the nal gavel banged the hardingites boasted with much fanfare and some justication of their globe shaking achievement in disarmament.
but their satisfaction was somewhat illusory.
no restrictions had been placed on small warships and the other powers churned ahead with the construction of cruisers destroyers and submarines while pennypinching uncle sam lagged dangerously behind.
congress also pointedly declared that it was making no commitment to the use of armed force or any kind of joint action when it ratied the four power treaty.
these reservations in effect rendered the treaty a dead letter.
ominously the american people seemed content to rely for their security on words and wishful thinking rather than on weapons and hardheaded realism.
a similar sentimentalism welled up later in the decade when americans clamored for the outlawry of war the conviction spread that if quarreling nations would only take the pledge to foreswear war as an instrument of national policy swords could be beaten into plowshares.
calvin coolidges secretary of state frank b kellogg who later won the nobel peace prize for his role was lukewarm about the idea.
raising the protective tariff but after petitions bearing more than 2 million signatures cascaded into washington he signed with the french foreign minister in 1928 the famed kelloggbriand pact.
ofcially known as the pact of paris it was ultimately ratied by sixty two nations.
this new parchment peace was delusory in the extreme.
defensive wars were still permitted and what scheming aggressor could not cook up an excuse of self defense.
lacking both muscles and teeth the pact was a diplomatic derelict and virtually useless in a showdown.
yet it accurately and dangerously reected the american mind in the 1920s which was all too willing to be lulled into a false sense of security.
this mood took even deeper hold in the ostrichlike neutralism of the 1930s.
hiking the tariff higher a comparable lack of realism aficted foreign economic policy in the 1920s.
businesspeople shortsightedly obsessed with the dazzling prospects in the prosperous home market sought to keep that market to themselves by inging up insurmountable tariff walls around the united states.
they were spurred into action by their fear of a ood of cheap goods from recovering europe especially during the brief but sharp recession of 1920 1921.
in 1922 congress passed the comprehensive fordney mccumber tariff law.
glib lobbyists once more descended upon washington and helped boost schedules from the average of 27 percent under wilsons underwood tariff of 1913 to an average of 38 5 percent which was almost as high as tafts payne aldrich tariff of 1909.
see the appendix.
duties on farm produce were increased and the principle was proclaimed that the general rates were designed to equalize the cost of american and foreign production.
a promising degree of exibility was introduced for the rst time when the president was authorized with the advice of the fact nding tariff commission to reduce or increase duties by as much as 50 percent.
presidents harding and coolidge true to their bigindustry sympathies were far more friendly to tariff increases than to reductions.
in six years they authorized thirty two upward changes including on their list vital commodities like dairy products chemicals and pig iron.
during the same period the white house ordered only ve reductions.
these included mill feed and such tri ing items as bobwhite quail paintbrush handles phenol and cresylic acid.
the high tariff course thus charted by the republican regimes set off an ominous chain reaction.
european producers felt the squeeze for the american tariff walls prolonged their postwar chaos.
an impoverished europe needed to sell its manufactured goods to the united states particularly if it hoped to achieve economic recovery and to pay its huge war debt to washington.
america needed to give foreign nations a chance to make a prot from it so that they could buy its manufactured articles and repay debts.
international trade americans were slow to learn is a twoway street.
in general they could not sell to others in quantity unless they bought from them in quantity or lent them more u s dollars.
erecting tariff walls was a game that two could play.
the american example spurred european nations throughout the feverish 1920s to pile up higher barriers themselves.
these articial obstacles were doubly bad they hurt not only american made goods but the products of european countries as well.
the whole vicious circle further deepened the international economic distress providing one more rung on the ladder by which adolf hitler scrambled to power.
the stench of scandal the loose morality and get rich quickism of the harding era manifested themselves spectacularly in a series of scandals.
early in 1923 colonel charles r forbes onetime deserter from the army was caught with his hand in the till and resigned as head of the veterans bureau.
an appointee of the gullible harding he and his accomplices looted the government to the tune of about 200 million chiey in connection with the building of veterans hospitals.
he was sentenced to two years in a federal penitentiary.
most shocking of all was the teapot dome scandal an affair that involved priceless naval oil reserves at teapot dome wyoming and elk hills cal i fornia.
in 1921 the slippery secretary of the interior albert b.
fall induced his careless colleague the secretary of the navy to transfer these valuable properties to the interior department.
harding indiscreetly signed the secret order.
fall then quietly leased the lands to oilmen harry f sinclair and edward l doheny but not until he had received a bribe loan of 100 000 from doheny and about three times that amount in all from sinclair.
chapter 32 the politics of boom and bust 1920 1932 released after a jury twice failed to agree.
during the trial daugherty hid behind the trousers of the nowdead harding by implying that persistent probing might uncover crookedness in the white house.
harding was mercifully spared the full revelation of these iniquities though his worst suspicions were aroused.
while news of the scandals was beginning to break he embarked upon a speechmaking tour across the country all the way to alaska.
on the return trip he died in san francisco on august 2 1923 of pneumonia and thrombosis.
his death may have been hastened by a broken heart resulting from the disloyalty of designing friends.
mourning millions not yet fully aware of the graft in washington expressed genuine sorrow.
the brutal fact is that harding was not a strong enough man for the presidency as he himself privately admitted.
such was his weakness that he tolerated people and conditions that subjected the republic to its worst disgrace since the days of president grant.
washington ofcials trying to outpace the teapot dome scandal ca.
1922 silent cal coolidge teapot dome no tempest in a teapot nally came to a whistling boil.
details of the crooked transaction gradually began to leak out in march 1923 two years after harding took ofce.
fall sinclair and doheny were indicted the next year but the case dragged through the courts until 1929.
finally fall was found guilty of taking a bribe and was sentenced to one year in jail.
by a curious quirk of justice the two bribe givers were acquitted while the bribe taker was convicted although sinclair served several months in jail for having shadowed jurors and for refusing to testify before a senate committee.
the oily smudge from teapot dome polluted the prestige of the washington government.
right thinking citizens wondered what was going on when public ofcials could sell out the nations vital resources especially those reserved for the u s navy.
the acquittal of sinclair and doheny undermined faith in the courts while giving further currency to the cynical sayings you cant put a million dollars in jail and in america everyone is assumed guilty until proven rich still more scandals erupted.
persistent reports as to the underhanded doings of attorney general daugherty prompted a senate investigation in 1924 of the illegal sale of pardons and liquor permits.
forced to resign the accused ofcial was tried in 1927 but was news of hardings death was sped to vice president coolidge then visiting at his fathers new eng land farmhouse.
by the light of two kerosene lamps the elder coolidge a justice of the peace used the old family bible to administer the presidential oath to his son.
this homespun setting was symbolic of coolidge.
quite unlike harding the stern faced vermonter with his thin nose and tightly set lips embodied the new eng land virtues of honesty morality industry and frugality.
as a youth his father reported he seemed to get more sap out of a maple tree than did any of the other boys.
practicing a rigid economy in both money and words silent cal came to be known in washington conversational circles for his brilliant ashes of silence.
his dour serious visage prompted the acid observation that he had been weaned on a pickle coolidge seemed to be a crystallization of the commonplace.
painfully shy he was blessed with only mediocre powers of leadership.
he would occasionally display a dry wit in private but his speeches delivered in a nasal new eng land twang were invariably boring.
a staunch apostle of the status quo he was no knight in armor riding forth to tilt at wrongs.
his only horse in fact was an electric powered steed on which he took his exercise.
true to republican philosophy he became the high priest of the great god business cautious cal coolidge calvin coolidge gentleman angler coolidge was a real conservative a fundamentalist in religion in the economic and social order and in shing said his successor herbert hoover who had a y shermans disdain for coolidges bait shing tactics and for his predecessors laissezfaire politics as well.
cash register chorus business croons its appreciation of coolidge prosperity he believed that the man who builds a factory builds a temple and that the man who works there worships there the hands off temperament of cautious cal coolidge suited the times perfectly.
his thrifty nature caused him to sympathize fully with secretary of the treasury mellons efforts to reduce both taxes and debts.
no foe of industrial bigness he let business have its head.
coolidge luck held during his ve and a half prosperity blessed years.
ever a pro le in caution coolidge slowly gave the harding regime a badly needed moral fumigation.
teapot dome had scalded the republican party badly but so transparently honest was the vinegary vermonter that the scandalous oil did not rub off on him.
the public though at rst shocked by the scandal quickly simmered down and an alarming tendency developed in certain quarters to excuse some of the wrongdoers on the grounds that they had gotten away with it some critics even condemned the government prosecutors for continuing to rock the boat.
americas moral sensibility was evidently being dulled by prosperity.
chapter 32 the politics of boom and bust 1920 1932 frustrated farmers sun bronzed farmers were caught squarely in a boomor bust cycle in the postwar decade.
while the ghting had raged they had raked in money hand over gnarled st by the spring of 1920 the price of wheat had shot up to an incredible 3 a bushel.
but peace brought an end to government guaranteed high prices and to massive purchases by other nations as foreign production reentered the stream of world commerce.
machines also threatened to plow the farmers under an avalanche of their own overabundant crops.
the gasoline engine tractor was working a revolution on american farms.
this steel mule was to cultivation and sowing what the mccormick reaper was to harvesting.
blue denimed farmers no longer had to plod after the horse drawn plow with high footed gait.
they could sit erect on their chugging mechanized chariots and turn under and harrow many acres in a single day.
they could grow bigger crops on larger areas using fewer horses and hired hands.
the wartime boom had encouraged them to bring vast new tracts under cultivation especially in the wheat belt of the upper midwest.
but such improved efciency and expanded agricultural acreage helped to pile up more pricedampening surpluses.
a withering depression swept through agricultural districts in the 1920s when one farm in four was sold for debt or taxes.
as a plaintive song of the period ran mechanizing agriculture just as the automobile replaced the horse on city streets so did the gas engine tractor replace horses and mules on the nations farms in the 1920s.
american farmers owned ten times more tractors in 1930 than they did in 1920.
the smoke belching tractors bolstered productivity but also increased the farmers debt burden as the great depression made tragically clear.
no use talkin any mans beat with leven cent cotton and forty cent meat.
schemes abounded for bringing relief to the hardpressed farmers.
a bipartisan farm bloc from the agricultural states coalesced in congress in 1921 and succeeded in driv ing through some helpful laws.
noteworthy was the capper volstead act which exempted farmers marketing cooperatives from antitrust prosecution.
the farm blocs favorite proposal was the mcnary haugen bill pushed energetically from 1924 to 1928.
it sought to keep agricultural prices high by authorizing the government to buy up surpluses and sell them abroad.
government losses were to be made up by a special tax on the farmers.
congress twice passed the bill but frugal coolidge twice vetoed it.
farm prices stayed down and farmers political temperatures stayed high reaching a fever pitch in the election of 1924.
a three way race for the white house in 1924 self satised republicans chanting keep cool and keep coolidge nominated silent cal for the presidency at their convention in cleveland in the simmering summer of 1924.
squabbling democrats had more difculty choosing a candidate when they met in new yorks sweltering madison square garden.
reecting farmers and reformers many of the cultural tensions of the decade the party was hopelessly split between wets and drys urbanites and farmers fundamentalists and modernists northern liberals and southern stand patters immigrants and old stock americans.
in one symptomatic spasm of discord the conventioneers failed by just one vote to pass a resolution condemning the ku klux klan.
deadlocked for an unprecedented 102 ballots the convention at last turned wearily sweatily and unenthusiastically to john w davis.
a wealthy corporation lawyer connected with the wall street banking house of j p morgan and company the polished nominee was no less conservative than cautious calvin coolidge.
the eld was now wide open for a liberal candidate.
the white pompadoured senator robert fighting bob la follette from wisconsin perennial aspirant to the presidency and now sixty nine years of age sprang forward to lead a new progressive party.
he gained the endorsement of the american federation of labor and enjoyed the support of the shrinking socialist party but his major constituency was made up of the pricepinched farmers.
la follettes new progressive party elding only a presidential ticket with no candidates for local ofce was a head without a body.
it proved to be only a shadow of the robust progressive coalition of prewar days.
its platform called for government ownership of railroads and relief for farmers lashed out at monopoly and antilabor injunctions and urged a constitutional amendment to limit the supreme courts power to invalidate laws passed by congress.
la follette turned in a respectable showing polling nearly 5 million votes.
but cautious cal and the oil smeared republicans slipped easily back into ofce overwhelming davis 15 718 211 to 8 385 283.
the electoral count stood at 382 for coolidge 136 for davis and 13 for la follette all from his home state of wisconsin see map 32 1.
as the so called conscience of the callous 1920s la follette injected a badly needed map 32 1 presidential election of 1924 showing popular vote by county note the concentration of la follettes votes in the old populist strongholds of the midwest and the mountain states.
his ticket did especially well in the graininteractive map growing districts battered by the postwar slump in agricultural prices.
wash n h vt r 4 r 7 mont.
r 6 r 5 oregon minn r 5 mass.
r 12 idaho s dak.
p 13 r 3 r 13 r 8 r 4 ill r 29 colo r 6 kansas r 10 ariz r 3 r i r 5 iowa nebr.
r 13 mich pa utah calif r 45 r 15 nev r 3 r 18 n y okla n mex.
d 10 r 3 ind.
r 15 r 38 ohio md.
r 8 n c d 12 d 12 s c ark.
d 9 d 9 miss.
d 10 d 20 va d 12 r 13 tenn texas r 14 r 3 w va ky r 18 n j r 7 del.
r 24 r 8 mo.
conn ala d 12 ga d 14 la.
d 10 fla d 6 candidate party electoral vote popular vote coolidge republican 72 15 718 211 54 0 davis democrat 26 8 385 283 28 8 2 4 831 289 16 6 la follette progressive no returns unsettled etc.
chapter 32 the politics of boom and bust 1920 1932 liberal tonic into a decade drugged on prosperity.
but times were too good for too many for his reforming message to carry the day.
foreign policy flounderings isolation continued to reign in the coolidge era.
despite presidential proddings the senate proved unwilling to allow america to adhere to the world court the judicial arm of the still suspect league of nations.
coolidge only halfheartedly and unsuccessfully pursued further naval disarmament after the loudly trumpeted agreements worked out at the washington conference in 1922.
a glaring exception to the united states inwardlooking indifference to the outside world was the armed interventionism in the caribbean and central america.
american troops were withdrawn after an eightyear stay from the dominican republic in 1924 but they remained in haiti from 1914 to 1934.
president coolidge in 1925 briey removed american bayonets from troubled nicaragua where they had glinted intermittently since 1909 but in 1926 he sent them back ve thousand strong and they stayed until 1933.
american oil companies clamored for a military expedition to mexico in 1926 when the mexican government began to assert its sovereignty over oil resources.
coolidge kept cool and defused the mexican crisis with some skillful diplomatic negotiating.
but his mailed st tactics elsewhere bred sore resentments south of the rio grande where angry critics loudly assailed yanqui imperialism overshadowing all other foreign policy problems in the 1920s was the knotty issue of international debts a complicated tangle of private loans allied war debts and german reparations payments see figure 32 2.
almost overnight world war i had reversed the international nancial position of the united states.
in 1914 america had been a debtor nation to the sum of about 4 billion by 1922 it had become a creditor nation to the sum of about 16 billion.
the almighty dollar rivaled the pound sterling as the nancial giant of the world.
american investors loaned some 10 billion to foreigners in the 1920s though even this huge river of money could not fully reoat the war shelled world economy.
americans bewitched by lucrative investment opportunities in their domestic economy did not lend nearly so large a fraction of their national income overseas as had the british in the prewar period.
the key knot in the debt tangle was the 10 billion that the u s treasury had loaned to the allies during and immediately after the war.
uncle sam held their ious and he wanted to be paid.
the allies in turn protested that the demand for repayment was grossly unfair.
the french and the british pointed out with much justice that they had held up a wall of esh and bone against the common foe until america the unready had nally entered the fray.
america they argued should write off its loans as war costs just as the allies had been tragically forced to write off the lives of millions of young men.
the debtors also complained that the real effect of their borrowed dollars had been to fuel the boom in the already roaring wartime economy in america where nearly all their purchases had been made.
and the nal straw protested the europe u s investors figure 32 2 aspects of the financial merry go round 1921 1933 great britain with a debt of over 4 billion owed to the u s treasury had a huge stake in proposals for inter allied debt cancellation but frances stake was even larger.
less prosperous than britain in the 1920s and more battered by the war which had been fought on its soil france owed nearly 3 5 billion to the united states and additional billions to britain.
wall street bankers private loans germany reparations reparations debt payments u s treasury allied war debt payments great britain allied war debt payments france the war debts tangle ans was that americas postwar tariff walls made it almost impossible for them to sell their goods to earn the dollars to pay their debts.
unraveling the debt knot americas tightsted insistence on getting its money back helped to harden the hearts of the allies against conquered germany.
the french and the british demanded that the germans make enormous reparations payments totaling some 32 billion as compensation for war in icted damages.
the allies hoped to settle their debts to the united states with the money received from germany.
the french seeking to extort lagging reparations payments sent troops into germanys industrialized ruhr valley in 1923.
berlin responded by permitting its currency to inate astronomically.
at one point in october 1923 a loaf of bread cost 480 million marks or about 120 million in preination money.
german society teetered on the brink of mad anarchy and the whole international house of nancial cards threatened to utter down in colossal chaos.
sensible statesmen now urged that war debts and reparations alike be drastically scaled down or even canceled outright.
but to americans such proposals smacked of welshing on a debt.
we went across but they wont come across cried a prominent politician.
scroogelike calvin coolidge turned aside suggestions of debt cancellation with a typically terse question they hired the money didnt they the washington administration proved especially unrealistic in its dogged insistence that there was no connection whatever between debts and reparations.
reality nally dawned in the dawes plan of 1924.
negotiated largely by charles dawes about to be nominated as coolidges running mate it rescheduled german reparations payments and opened the way for further american private loans to germany.
the whole nancial cycle now became still more complicated as u s bankers loaned money to germany germany paid reparations to france and britain and the former allies paid war debts to the united states.
clearly the source of this monetary merry go round was the owing well of american credit.
when that well dried up after the great crash in 1929 the jungle of international nance quickly turned into a desert.
president herbert hoover declared a one year debt moratorium in 1931 and before long all the debtors had defaulted except honest little finland which struggled along harmony in europe 1932 making payments until the last of its debt was discharged in 1976.
the united states never did get its money but it harvested a bumper crop of ill will.
irate french crowds on occasion attacked american tourists and throughout europe uncle sam was caricatured as uncle shylock greedily whetting his knife for the last pound of allied esh.
the bad taste left in american mouths by the whole sorry episode contributed powerfully to the storm cellar neutrality legislation passed by congress in the 1930s.
the triumph of herbert hoover 1928 poker faced calvin coolidge the tight lipped sphinx of the potomac bowed out of the 1928 presidential race when he announced i do not choose to run his logical successor was super secretary of commerce herbert hoover unpopular with the political bosses but the much admired darling of the masses who asked hoo but hoover he was nominated on a platform that clucked contentedly over both prosperity and prohibition.
chapter 32 the politics of boom and bust 1920 1932 still squabbling democrats nominated alfred e smith four time governor of new york and one of the most colorful personalities in american politics.
he was a wisecracking glad handing liberal who suffered from several fatal political handicaps.
al cohol smith was soakingly and drippingly wet at a time when the country was still devoted to the noble experiment of prohibition.
to a nation that had only recently moved to the city native new yorker smith seemed too abrasively urban.
he was a roman catholic in an overwhelmingly protestant and unfortunately prejudiced land.
many dry rural and fundamentalist democrats gagged on his candidacy and they saddled the wet smith with a dry running mate and a dry platform.
jauntily sporting a brown derby and a big cigar smith the happy warrior tried to carry alcohol on one shoulder and water on the other.
but his effort was doomed from the start.
radio gured prominently in this campaign for the rst time and it helped hoover more than smith.
the new yorker had more personal sparkle but he could not project it through the radio which in his lower east side twang he pronounced radd dee o grating on the ears of many listeners.
iowa born hoover with his double breasted dignity came out of the microphone better than he went in.
decrying un american socialism and preaching rugged individualism he sounded both grassrootish and statesmanlike.
chubby faced ruddy complexioned herbert hoover with his painfully high starched collar was a living example of the american success story and an intriguing mixture of two centuries.
as a poor orphan boy who had worked his way through stanford university he had absorbed the nineteenth century copybook maxims of industry thrift and self reliance.
as a fabulously successful mining engineer and a brilliant businessman he had honed to a high degree the efciency doctrines of the progressive era.
a small town boy from iowa and oregon he had traveled and worked abroad extensively.
long years of self imposed exile had deepened his determination abundantly supported by national tradition to avoid foreign entanglements.
his experiences abroad had further strengthened his faith in american individualism free enterprise and small government.
with his unshaken dignity and quaker restraint hoover was a far cry from the typical backslapping politician.
though a citizen of the world and laden with international honors he was quite shy standofsh and stiff.
personally colorless in public he had been accustomed during much of his life to giving orders to herbert hoover on the road whistle stop campaigns with candidates speaking from the rear platforms of trains were a standard feature of american politics before the advent of television.
herbert hoover here greets a crowd in newark new jersey during the 1928 campaign.
subordinates and not to soliciting votes.
never before elected to public ofce he was thin skinned in the face of criticism and he did not adapt readily to the necessary give and take of political accommodation.
his real power lay in his integrity his humanitarianism his passion for assembling the facts his efciency his talents for administration and his ability to inspire loyalty in close associates.
they called him the chief as betted americas newly mechanized civilization hoover was the ideal businesspersons candidate.
a self made millionaire he recoiled from anything suggesting socialism paternalism or planned economy yet as secretary of commerce he had exhibited some progressive instincts.
he endorsed labor unions and supported federal regulation of the new radio hoover trounces smith broadcasting industry.
he even irted for a time with the idea of government owned radio similar to the british broadcasting corporation bbc.
as bands blared smiths theme song the sidewalks of new york the campaign sank into the sewers beneath the sidewalks.
despite the best efforts of hoover and smith below the belt tactics were employed to a disgusting degree by lower level campaigners.
religious bigotry raised its hideous head over smiths catholicism.
an irresponsible whispering campaign claimed that a vote for al smith is a vote for the pope and that the white house under smith would become a branch of the vatican complete with rum romanism and ruin hoovers attempts to quash such rumors were in vain.
the proverbially solid south 100 percent american and a stronghold of protestant ku klux klanism shied away from city slicker al smith.
it might have accepted a catholic or a wet or the descendant of irish grandparents or an urbanite.
but a concoction of catholicism wettism foreignism and liberal wa mt or id nv ca nd wy sd co wi ia ne ut az mn ks ok nm il la tx mi in mo oh ky ms al wv va nc tn ar me vt 4 nh ma ny 4 18 ri pa nj ct 5 14 7 ga de md sc fl candidate party electoral vote popular vote hoover republican 83 6 21 391 381 58 7 16 4 15 016 443 41 2 smith democrat map 32 2 presidential election of 1928 with electoral vote by state smith despite his defeat managed to poll almost as many votes as the victorious coolidge had in 1924.
by attracting to the party an immense urban or sidewalk vote the breezy new yorker foreshadowed roosevelts new deal victory in 1932 when the democrats patched together the solid south and the urban north.
a cruel joke had the catholic smith cabling the pope a single word after the election unpack interactive map ism brewed on the sidewalks of new york was too bitter a dose for southern stomachs.
smiths theme song was a constant and rasping reminder that his upbringing had not been convincingly american.
hoover triumphed in a landslide.
he bagged 21 391 993 popular votes to 15 016 169 for his embittered opponent while rolling up an electoral count of 444 to 87.
a huge republican majority was returned to the house of representatives.
tens of thousands of dry southern democrats hoovercrats rebelled against al smith and hoover proved to be the rst republican candidate in fty two years except for hardings tennessee victory in 1920 to carry a state that had seceded.
he swept ve states of the former confederacy as well as all of the border states see map 32 2.
president hoovers first moves prosperity in the late 1920s smiled broadly as the hoover years began.
soaring stocks on the bull market continued to defy the laws of nancial gravitation.
but two immense groups of citizens were not getting their share of the riches owing from the national cornucopia the unorga nized wage earners and especially the disorga nized farmers.
hoovers administration in line with its philosophy of promoting self help responded to the outcry of the wounded farmers with legislative aspirin.
the agricultural marketing act passed by congress in june 1929 was designed to help the farmers help themselves largely through producers cooperatives.
it set up the federal farm board with a revolving fund of half a billion dollars at its disposal.
money was lent generously to farm orga ni zations seeking to buy sell and store agricultural surpluses.
in 1930 the farm board itself created both the grain stabilization corporation and the cotton stabilization corporation.
the prime goal was to bolster sagging prices by buying up surpluses.
but the two agencies were soon suffocated by an avalanche of farm produce as wheat dropped to fty seven cents a bushel and cotton to ve cents a pound.
farmers had meanwhile clutched at the tariff as a possible straw to help keep their heads above the waters of nancial ruin.
during the recent presidential campaign hoover an amateur in politics had been stampeded into a politically unwise pledge.
he had promised to call congress into special session to chapter 32 the politics of boom and bust 1920 1932 consider agricultural relief and specically to bring about limited changes in the tariff.
these hope giving assurances no doubt won many votes for hoover in the midwestern farm belt.
the hawley smoot tariff of 1930 followed the wellworn pattern of washington horse trading.
it started out in the house as a fairly reasonable protective mea sure designed to assist the farmers.
but by the time the high pressure lobbyists had pushed it through the senate it had acquired about a thousand amendments.
it thus turned out to be the highest protective tariff in the nations peacetime history.
the average duty on nonfree goods was raised from 38 5 percent as established by the fordney mccumber act of 1922 to nearly 60 percent.
to angered foreigners the hawley smoot tariff was a blow below the trade belt.
it seemed like a declaration of economic warfare on the entire outside world.
it reversed a promising worldwide trend toward reasonable tariffs and widened the yawning trade gaps.
it plunged both america and other nations deeper into the terrible depression that had already begun.
it increased international nancial chaos and forced the united states further into the bog of economic isolationism.
and economic isolationism both at home and abroad was playing directly into the hands of a hate lled german demagogue adolf hitler.
pride goes before a fall the great crash of 1929 humbled many a high ying investor.
the desperate curbside seller of this brandnew chrysler model 75 paid 1 550 for it just months before.
the great crash ends the golden twenties when herbert hoover condently took the presidential oath on march 4 1929 there were few black clouds on the economic horizon.
the long boom seemed endless with the painful exception of the debt blanketed farm belt.
americas productive colossus stimulated by the automobile radio movies and other new industries was roaring along at a dizzy speed that suggested a permanent plateau of prosperity.
few people sensed that it might smother its own res by pouring out too much.
the speculative bubble was actually near the bursting point.
prices on the stock exchange continued to spiral upward and create a fools paradise of paper profits despite hoovers early but fruitless efforts to curb speculation through the federal reserve board.
a few prophets of disaster were bold enough to sound warnings but were drowned out by the mad chatter of the ticker tape machine.
a catastrophic crash came in october 1929.
it was partially triggered by the british who raised their interest rates in an effort to bring back capital lured abroad by american investments.
foreign investors and wary domestic speculators began to dump their the depression descends new deal recovery fdr s election depression bull market crash insecurities and an orgy of selling followed.
tension built up to the panicky black tuesday of october 29 1929 when 16 410 030 shares of stocks were sold in a save who may scramble.
wall street became a wailing wall as gloom and doom replaced boom and suicides increased alarmingly.
a sick joke of the time had hotel room clerks ask registrants for sleeping or jumping losses even in blue chip securities were unbelievable.
by the end of 1929 two months after the ini figure 32 3 index of common stock prices 1926 100 tial crash stockholders had lost 40 billion in paper values or more than the total cost of world war i to the united states see figure 32 3.
the stock market collapse heralded a business depression at home and abroad that was the most prolonged and prostrating in american or world experience.
no other industrialized nation suffered so severe a setback.
by the end of 1930 more than 4 million workers in the united states were jobless two years later the gure had about tripled.
hungry and the unemployed by john langley howard 1937 in this painting howard soberly evokes the dispirited state of millions of unemployed americans during the depression.
chapter 32 the politics of boom and bust 1920 1932 despairing workers pounded pavements in search of nonexistent jobs were ring not hiring.
where employees were not discharged wages and salaries were often slashed.
a current jingle ran mellon pulled the whistle hoover rang the bell wall street gave the signal and the country went to hell.
the misery and gloom were incalculable as forests of dead chimneys stood stark against the sky.
over ve thousand banks collapsed in the rst three years of the depression carrying down with them the life savings of tens of thousands of ordinary citizens.
countless thousands of honest hard working people lost their homes and farms to the foreclosers hammer.
breadlines formed soup kitchens dispensed food and apple sellers stood shivering on street corners trying to peddle their wares for ve cents.
families felt the stress as jobless fathers nursed their guilt and shame at not being able to provide for their households.
breadless breadwinners often blamed themselves for their plight despite abundant evidence that the economic system not individual initiative had broken down.
mothers meanwhile nursed fewer babies as hard times reached even into the nations bedrooms precipitating a decade long dearth of births.
as cash registers gathered cobwebs the song my god how the money rolls in was replaced with brother can you spare a dime hooked on the horn of plenty what caused the great depression.
one basic explanation is overproduction by both farm and factory.
ironically the depression of the 1930s was one of abundance not want.
it was the great glut or the plague of plenty the nations ability to produce goods had clearly outrun its capacity to consume or pay for them.
too much money was going into the hands of a few wealthy people who in turn invested it in factories and other agencies of production.
not enough was going into salaries and wages where revitalizing purchasing power could be more quickly felt.
other maladies were at work.
overexpansion of credit through installment plan buying overstimulated production.
paying on so called easy terms caused many consumers to dive in beyond their depth.
normal technological unemployment resulting from new the depression spectacle of want in the shadow of surplus moved an observer to write in current history 1932 we still pray to be given each day our daily bread.
yet there is too much bread too much wheat and corn meat and oil and almost every commodity required by man for his subsistence and material happiness.
we are not able to purchase the abundance that modern methods of agriculture mining and manufacture make available in such bountiful quantities.
why is mankind being asked to go hungry and cold and poverty stricken in the midst of plenty.
laborsaving machines also added its burden to the abnormal unemployment of the threadbare thirties.
this already bleak picture was further darkened by economic anemia abroad.
britain and the continent had never fully recovered from the upheaval of world war i depression in america was given a further downward push by a chain reaction nancial collapse in europe following the failure in 1931 of a prominent vienna banking house.
a drying up of international trade moreover had been hastened by the shortsighted hawley smoot tariff of 1930.
european uncertainties over reparations war debts and defaults on loans owed to america caused tensions that reacted unfavorably on the united states.
many of these conditions had been created or worsened by uncle sams own narrow visioned policies but it was now too late to unscramble the omelet.
as if man made disasters were not enough a terrible drought scorched the mississippi valley in 1930.
thousands of farms were sold at auction for taxes though in some cases kind neighbors would intimidate prospective buyers bid one cent and return the property to its original owner.
farm tenancy or rental a species of peonage was spreading at an alarming rate among both whites and blacks.
by 1930 the depression had become a national calamity.
through no fault of their own a host of industrious citizens had lost every thing.
they wanted to work but there was no work.
the insidious effect of all this dazed despair on the nations spirit was incalculable and long lasting.
americas uniqueness no longer seemed so unique or its manifest destiny hoover and the depression hooverville in seattle 1934 in the early years of the depression desperate homeless people constructed shacks out of scavenged materials.
these shantytowns sprang up in cities across the country.
so manifest.
hitherto the people had grappled with storms trees stones and other physical obstacles.
but the depression was a baf ing wraith they could not grasp.
initiative and self respect were stied as panhandlers begged for food or charity soup in extreme cases ragged individualists slept under hoover blankets old newspapers fought over the contents of garbage cans or cooked their ndings in old oil drums in tin and paper shantytowns cynically named hoovervilles.
the very foundations of americas social and political structure trembled.
rugged times for rugged individualists hoovers exalted reputation as a wonder worker and efciency engineer crashed about as dismally as the stock market.
he doubtless would have shone in the prosperity drenched coolidge years when he had foreseen the abolition of poverty and poor houses.
but damming the great depression proved to be a task beyond his engineering talents.
the perplexed president was impaled on the horns of a cruel dilemma.
as a deservedly famed humanitarian he was profoundly distressed by the widespread misery about him.
yet as a rugged individualist deeply rooted in an earlier era of free enterprise he shrank from the heresy of government handouts.
convinced that industry thrift and self reliance were the virtues that had made america great president hoover feared that a government doling out doles would weaken perhaps destroy the national ber.
as the depression nightmare steadily worsened relief by local government agencies broke down.
hoover was nally forced to turn reluctantly from his doctrine of log cabin individualism and accept the proposition that the welfare of the people in a nationwide catastrophe is a direct concern of the national government.
wall streeter martin devries observing president herbert hoovers struggle to keep his footing as the tidal wave of the great depression washed over him decided he was a good man stuck in the wrong place at the wrong time hoover happened to be in a bad spot.
the depression came on and there he was.
if jesus christ had been there hed have had the same problem.
its too bad for poor old herbie that he happened to be there.
this was a world wide depression.
it wasnt hoovers fault.
a monkey could have been elected against him no question about it.
chapter 32 the politics of boom and bust 1920 1932 home relief station by louis ribak 1935 1936 destitute and despairing millions of hard working americans like these had to endure the degradation and humiliation of going on relief as the pall of depression descended over the land.
the president at last worked out a compromise between the old hands off philosophy and the souldestroying direct dole then being used in eng land.
he would assist the hard pressed railroads banks and rural credit corporations in the hope that if nancial health were restored at the top of the economic pyramid unemployment would be relieved at the bottom on a trickle down basis.
partisan critics sneered at the great humanitar herbert hoover 1874 1964 spoke approvingly in a campaign speech in 1928 of the american system of rugged individualism in 1930 he referred to clevelands 1887 veto of a bill to appropriate seed grain for the drought stricken farmers of texas i do not believe that the power and duty of the general government ought to be extended to the relief of individual suffering.
the lesson should be constantly enforced that though the people support the government the government should not support the people.
ian he who had fed the faraway belgians but would not use federal funds to feed needy americans.
hostile commentators remarked that he was willing to lend government money to the big bankers who allegedly had plunged the country into the mess.
he would likewise lend money to agricultural orga ni zations to feed pigs but not people.
pigs the cynics of the time noted had no character to undermine.
much of this criticism was unfair.
although continued suffering seemed to mock the effectiveness of hoovers mea sures his efforts probably prevented a more serious collapse than did occur.
and his expenditures for relief revolutionary for that day paved the path for the enormous federal outlays of his new deal successor franklin roosevelt.
hoover proved that the old bootstrap pulling techniques would no longer work in a crisis of this magnitude especially when people lacked boots.
hoover battles the great depression president hoover in line with his trickle down philosophy at last recommended that congress vote im lampooning hoover 1932 he pages of the american pageant are lled with political cartoons that provide pungent commentary on historical events.
with one image rather than many words a cartoonist can convey a point of view much the way an editorial writer does.
this cartoon appeared in the washington daily news on july 25 1932 three and a half months before republican president hoover lost the presidential election to his democratic challenger franklin d roosevelt.
the cartoonist foretells hoovers defeat in november and departure from the white house the following march not january as at present and expresses his support for the home loan bank bill.
with this proposal hoover sought to come to the aid of home mortgage lenders in order to forestall them from foreclosing on homeowners.
the cartoonist jokes that hoover supported this bill because he identied with homeowners about to lose their homes but he also cleverly insinuates that hoovers bank t ing reform was motivated by electoral opportunism.
surely hoover sought to win public support in return for his new banking program as he battled for reelection but the home loan bank bill also reected hoovers growing recognition that the federal government had to take direct action to remedy aws that had precipitated the crisis of the great depression.
as hoover later recorded in his memoirs all this seems dull economics but the poignant american drama revolving around the loss of the old homestead had a million repetitions straight from life not because of the designing villain but because of a fault in our nancial system how does the cartoonist use caricature to make his point.
what accounts for the political cartoons special power.
are there limitations to this genre.
find another cartoon in this book and subject it to similar analysis.
chapter 32 the politics of boom and bust 1920 1932 mense sums for useful public works.
though at heart an antispender he secured from congress appropriations totaling 2 25 billion for such projects.
most imposing of the public enterprises was the gigantic hoover dam on the colorado river.
voted by congress in the days of coolidge it was begun in 1930 under hoover and completed in 1936 under roosevelt.
it succeeded in creating a huge man made lake for purposes of irrigation ood control and electric power.
but hoover sternly fought all schemes that he regarded as socialistic conspicuous among them was the muscle shoals bill designed to dam the tennessee river and ultimately embraced by franklin roosevelts tennessee valley authority.
hoover emphatically vetoed this mea sure primarily because he opposed the governments selling electricity in competition with its own citizens in private companies.
early in 1932 congress responding to hoovers belated appeal established the reconstruction finance corporation rfc.
with an initial working capital of half a billion dollars this agency became a government lending bank.
it was designed to provide indirect relief by assisting insurance companies banks agricultural orga ni zations railroads and even hard pressed state and local governments.
but to preserve individualism and character there would be no loans to individuals from this billion dollar soup kitchen pump priming loans by the rfc were no doubt of widespread benet though the orga ni zation was established many months too late for maximum usefulness.
projects that it supported were largely selfliquidating and the government as a banker actually proted to the tune of many millions of dollars.
giant corporations so obviously beneted from this assistance that the rfc was dubbed rather unfairly the millionaires dole the irony is that the thrifty and individualistic hoover had sponsored the project though with initial reluctance.
it actually had a strong new dealish avor.
hoovers administration also provided some indirect benets for labor.
after stormy debate congress passed the norris la guardia anti injunction act in 1932 and hoover signed it.
the mea sure outlawed yellow dog antiunion contracts and forbade the federal courts to issue injunctions to restrain strikes boycotts and peaceful picketing.
the truth is that herbert hoover despite criticism of his heartlessness did inaugurate a signicant new policy.
in previous panics the masses had been forced to sweat it out slow though hoover was to abandon this nineteenth century bias by the end of his term he had started down the road toward government assistance for needy citizens a road that franklin roosevelt would travel much farther.
hoovers woes were increased by a hostile congress.
at critical times during his rst two years the republican majority proved highly uncooperative.
friction worsened during his last two years.
a depressioncursed electorate rebelling in the congressional elections of 1930 so reduced the republican majority that democrats controlled the new house and almost controlled the senate.
insurgent republicans could and did combine with opposition democrats to harass hoover.
some of the presidents troubles were deliberately manufactured by congress which in his words played politics with human misery routing the bonus army in washington many veterans of world war i were numbered among the hard hit victims of the depression.
industry had secured a bonus though a dubious one in the hawley smoot tariff.
so the thoughts of the former soldiers naturally turned to what the government owed them for their ser vices in 1917 1918 when they had saved democracy.
a drive developed for the premature payment of the deferred bonus voted by congress in 1924 and payable in 1945.
thousands of impoverished veterans both of war and of unemployment were now prepared to move on washington there to demand of congress the immediate payment of their entire bonus.
the bonus expeditionary force bef which mustered about twenty thousand souls converged on the capital in the summer of 1932.
these supplicants promptly set up unsanitary public camps and erected shacks on vacant lots a gigantic hooverville they thus created a menace to the public health while attempting to intimidate congress by their presence in force.
after the pending bonus bill had failed in congress by a narrow margin hoover arranged to pay the return fare of about six thousand bonus marchers.
the rest refused to decamp though ordered to do so.
following riots that cost two lives hoover responded to the demands of the washington authorities by ordering the army to evacuate the unwanted guests.
although hoover charged that the bonus army was led by riffraff and reds in fact only a sprinkling of bonus army on the march the bonus army in washington d c 1932 world war i veterans from muncie indiana were among many contingents to set up camp in the capital during the summer of 1932 determined to remain there until they received full payment of their promised bonuses.
them were former convicts and communist agitators.
the eviction was carried out by general douglas macarthur with bayonets and tear gas and with far more severity than hoover had planned.
a few of the former soldiers were injured as the torch was put to their pathetic shanties in the inglorious battle of anacostia flats an eleven month old bonus baby allegedly died from exposure to tear gas.
this brutal episode brought down additional abuse on the once popular hoover who by now was the most loudly booed man in the country.
the democrats not content with hoovers vulnerable record employed professional smear artists to drive him from ofce.
cynics sneered that the great engineer had in a few months ditched drained and damned the country the existing panic was unfairly branded the hoover depression in truth hoover had been oversold as a wizard and the public grumbled when his magicians wand failed to produce rabbits.
the time was ripening for the democratic party and franklin d roosevelt to cash in on hoovers calamities.
japa nese militarists attack china the great depression which brewed enough distress at home added immensely to difculties abroad.
militaristic japan stole the far eastern spotlight.
in september 1931 the japa nese imperialists noting that the western world was badly mired in a depression lunged into manchuria.
alleging provocation they rapidly overran the coveted chinese province and proceeded to bolt shut the open door in the conquered area.
america had a strong sentimental stake in china but few signicant economic interests.
in fact american commercial ties with japan far outweighed those with china.
yet most americans were stunned by this act of naked aggression.
it agrantly violated the league of nations covenant as well as various other international agreements solemnly signed by tokyo not to mention the american sense of fair play.
indignant americans though by no means a majority urged chapter 32 the politics of boom and bust 1920 1932 japanese aggression in manchuria this american cartoon lambastes japan for disregarding international treaty agreements when it seized manchuria in 1931.
the next year the japanese would set up the puppet state of manchukuo.
strong mea sures ranging from boycotts to blockades.
possibly a tight blockade by the league backed by the united states would have brought japan sharply to book.
but the league was handicapped in taking twosted action by the nonmembership of the united states.
washington atly rebuffed initial attempts in 1931 to secure american cooperation in applying economic pressure on japan.
washington and secretary hoover later wrote of his differences with secretary of state stimson over economic boycotts i was soon to realize that my able secretary was at times more of a warrior than a diplomat.
to him the phrase economic sanctions was the magic wand of force by which all peace could be summoned from the vasty deep.
ever since versailles i had held that economic sanctions meant war when applied to any large nation.
of state henry l stimson in the end decided to re only paper bullets at the japa nese aggressors.
the socalled stimson doctrine proclaimed in 1932 declared that the united states would not recognize any territorial acquisitions achieved by force.
righteous indignation or a preach and run policy would substitute for solid initiatives.
this verbal slap on the wrist from america did not deter the march of the japa nese militarists.
smarting under a chinese boycott they bombed shanghai in 1932 with shocking losses to civilians.
outraged americans launched informal boycotts of japa nese goods chiey dime store knickknacks.
but there was no real sentiment for armed intervention among a depressionridden people who remained strongly isolationist during the 1930s.
in a broad sense collective security died and world war ii was born in 1931 on the windswept plains of manchuria.
the league members had the economic and naval power to halt japan but lacked the courage to act.
one reason though not the only one was that they could not count on americas support.
even so the republic came closer to stepping into the chill waters of internationalism than american prophets would have dared to predict in the early 1920s.
relations with southern neighbors hoover pioneers the good neighbor policy hoovers arrival in the white house brought a more hopeful turn to relations with americas southern neighbors.
the new president was deeply interested in the often troubled nations below the rio grande.
shortly after his election in 1928 he had undertaken a goodwill tour of latin america on a u s battleship.
world depression softened an age old aggressive attitude in the united states toward weak latin neighbors.
following the stock market collapse of 1929 americans had less money to invest abroad.
as millions of dollars worth of investments in latin america went sour many yankees felt as though they were more preyed upon than preying.
so called economic imperialism became much less popular in the united states than it had been in the golden twenties.
as an advocate of international goodwill hoover strove to abandon the interventionist twist given to the monroe doctrine by theodore roosevelt.
in 1932 he negotiated a new treaty with the french speaking republic of haiti and this pact later supplanted by an executive agreement provided for the complete withdrawal of american platoons by 1934.
further pleasing omens came early in 1933 when the last marine leathernecks sailed away from nicaragua after an almost continuous stay of some twenty years.
herbert hoover the engineer in politics thus happily engineered the foundation stones of the good neighbor policy.
upon them rose an imposing edice in the days of his successor franklin roosevelt.
chronology american legion founded chicago race riot esch cummins transportation act merchant marine act veterans bureau created capper volstead act five power naval treaty signed four power and nine power treaties on the far east fordney mccumber tariff law adkins v childrens hospital teapot dome scandal harding dies coolidge assumes presidency adjusted compensation act for veterans dawes plan for international nance u s troops leave dominican republic coolidge wins three way presidential election u s troops occupy nicaragua kellogg briand pact hoover defeats smith for presidency hoover makes goodwill tour of latin america agricultural marketing act sets up federal farm board stock market crash hawley smoot tariff japa nese invade manchuria reconstruction finance corporation rfc established norris la guardia anti injunction act bonus army dispersed from washington d c chapter 32 the politics of boom and bust 1920 1932 key terms adkins v childrens hospital 799 nine power treaty 802 kellogg briand pact 803 fordney mccumber tariff law 803 teapot dome scandal 803 mcnary haugen bill 806 dawes plan 809 people to know agricultural marketing act 811 hawley smoot tariff 812 black tuesday 813 hoovervilles 815 reconstruction finance corporation rfc 818 norris la guardia antiinjunction act 818 bonus army 818 warren g harding albert b.
fall calvin coolidge john w davis robert m fighting bob la follette albert e smith to learn more michael a bernstein the great depression delayed recovery and economic change in america 1929 1939 1987 john d hicks republican ascendancy 1921 1933 1960 robert mcelvaine the great depression america 1929 1941 rev.
ed 1993 burl noggle into the twenties the united states from armistice to normalcy 1974 emily rosenberg financial missionaries to the world the politics and culture of dollar diplomacy 1900 1930 1999 peter temin did monetary factors cause the great depression.
1976 joan hoff wilson american business and foreign policy 1920 1933 1971 herbert hoover forgotten progressive 1975 robert h zieger american workers american unions 1920 1985 1986 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 the country needs and.
demands bold persistent experimentation.
it is common sense to take a method and try it.
if it fails admit it frankly and try another.
but above all try something.
franklin d roosevelt campaign speech 1932 v oters were in an ugly mood as the presidential campaign of 1932 neared.
countless factory chimneys remained ominously cold while more than 11 million unemployed workers and their families sank ever deeper into the pit of poverty.
herbert hoover may have won the 1928 election by promising a chicken in every pot but three years later that chicken seemed to have laid a discharge slip in every pay envelope.
hoover sick at heart was renominated by the republican convention in chicago without great enthusiasm.
the platform indulged in extravagant praise of republican antidepression policies while halfheartedly promising to repeal national prohibition and return control of liquor to the states.
the rising star of the democratic rmament was governor franklin delano roosevelt of new york a fth cousin of theodore roosevelt.
like the rough rider he had been born to a wealthy new york family had graduated from harvard had been elected as a kid gloved politician to the new york legislature had served as governor of the empire state had been nominated for the vice presidency though not elected and had served capably as assistant secretary of the navy.
although both men were master politicians adept with the colorful phrase tr was pugnacious and confrontational while fdr was suave and conciliatory qualities that appealed strongly to a people traumatized by one of the greatest crises in american history.
fdr politician in a wheelchair infantile paralysis while putting steel braces on franklin roosevelts legs put additional steel into his soul.
until 1921 when the dread disease struck young roosevelt tall six feet two inches athletic and handsome this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 impressed observers as charming and witty yet at times as a supercial and arrogant lightweight but suffering humbled him to the level of common clay.
in courageously ghting his way back from complete helplessness to a hobbling mobility he schooled himself in patience tolerance compassion and strength of will.
he once remarked that after trying for two years to wiggle one big toe all else seemed easy.
another of roosevelts great personal and political assets was his wife eleanor.
the niece of theodore roosevelt she was franklin roosevelts distant cousin as well as his spouse.
tall ungainly and toothy she overcame the misery of an unhappy childhood and emerged as a champion of the dispossessed and ultimately as the conscience of the new deal fdrs po eleanor roosevelt 1884 1962 roosevelt was americas most active first lady and commanded enormous popularity and inuence during fdrs presidency.
here she emerges miners cap in hand from an ohio coal mine.
litical career was as much hers as it was his own.
she traveled countless miles with him or on his behalf in all his campaigns beginning with his run for the new york legislature before world war i later considering herself his legs but mrs roosevelt also marched to her own drummer.
as a young woman she had worked in a new york settlement house and later on she joined the womens trade union league see p 710 and the league of women voters.
when she and franklin moved into the white house she brought an unprecedented number of women activists with her to washington.
this network of reformers helped make her the most active first lady in history.
through her lobbying of her husband her speeches and her syndicated newspaper column eleanor roosevelt powerfully inuenced the policies of the national government.
always she battled for the impoverished and the oppressed.
at one meeting in birmingham alabama she confounded local authorities and outed the segregation statutes by deliberately straddling the aisle separating the black and white seating sections.
sadly her personal relationship with her husband was often rocky due to his indelities.
condemned by conser vatives and loved by liberals she was one of the most controversial and consequential public gures of the twentieth century.
franklin roosevelts political appeal was amazing.
his commanding presence and his golden speaking voice despite a sophisticated accent combined to make him the premier american orator of his generation.
he could turn on his charm in private conversations as one would turn on a faucet.
as a popular depression governor of new york he had sponsored heavy state spending to relieve human suffering.
though favoring frugality he believed that money rather than humanity was expendable.
he revealed a deep concern for the plight of the forgotten man a phrase he used in a 1932 speech although he was assailed by the rich as a traitor to his class exuberant democrats met in chicago in june 1932 and speedily nominated roosevelt.
fellow new yorker al smith felt entitled to a second chance and a beautiful friendship wilted when he was elbowed aside for roosevelt.
the democratic platform promised not only a balanced budget but sweeping social and economic reforms.
roosevelt ew daringly through stormy weather to chicago where he smashed precedent by accepting the nomination in person.
he electried the delegates and the public with these words i pledge you i pledge myself to a new deal for the american people the appeal of roosevelt presidential hopefuls of 1932 in the campaign that followed roosevelt seized the offensive with a slashing attack on the republican old dealers.
he was especially eager to prove that he was not an invalid roosevelt is robust and to display his magnicent torso and radiant personality to as many voters as possible.
roosevelt consistently preached a new deal for the forgotten man but he was annoyingly vague and somewhat contradictory.
many of his speeches were ghostwritten by the brains trust popularly the brain trust a small group of reform minded intellectuals.
they were predominantly youngish college professors who as a kind of kitchen cabinet later authored much of the new deal legislation.
roosevelt rashly promised a balanced budget and berated heavy hooverian decits amid cries of throw the spenders out and out of the red with roosevelt all of this was to make ironic reading in later months.
the high spirits of the democrats found expression in the catchy air happy days are here again this theme song t fdrs indestructible smile his jauntily angled cigarette holder his breezy optimism and his promises to do something even at the risk of bold experimentation.
grim faced herbert hoover remained in the white house conscientiously battling the depression through short lunches and long hours.
out on the ring line his supporters halfheartedly assured half listening voters the worst is past it might have been worse and prosperity is just around the corner hoover never ceased to insist that the uncertainty and fear produced by roosevelts impending victory plunged the nation deeper into the depression.
with the campaign going badly for the republicans a weary and despondent hoover was persuaded to take to the stump.
he stoutly reafrmed his faith in american free enterprise and individual initiative and gloomily predicted that if the hawley smoot tariff was repealed grass would grow in the streets of a hundred cities such down at the mouthism contrasted sharply with roosevelts tooth ashing optimism and sparkling promises.
in his successful campaign for the governorship of new york in 1928 franklin roosevelt 1882 1945 had played down alleged democratic socialism we often hear it said that government operation of anything under the sun is socialistic.
if that is so our postal service is socialistic so is the parcel post which has largely taken the place of the old express companies so are the public highways which took the place of the toll roads.
the vanquished and the victor a dour hoover and an ebullient roosevelt ride to the inauguration ceremonies on march 4 1933.
this magazine cover was never published presumably because of the editors sensitivity about the attempted assassination of roosevelt when he was riding in an open car in florida on february 15 1933 less than three weeks earlier.
the attempt on roosevelts life ended in the death of chicago mayor anton j cermak.
chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 hoovers humiliation in 1932 hoover had been swept into ofce on the rising tide of prosperity he was swept out of ofce by the receding tide of depression.
the ood of votes totaled 22 809 638 for roosevelt and 15 758 901 for hoover the electoral count stood at 472 to 59.
in all the loser carried only six rock ribbed republican states.
one striking feature of the election was the beginning of a distinct shift of blacks traditionally grateful to the republican party of lincoln over to the roosevelt camp.
as the last hired and rst red black americans had been among the worst sufferers from the depression.
beginning with the election of 1932 they became notably in the great urban centers of the north a vital element in the democratic party.
hard times unquestionably ruined the republicans for the electoral upheaval in 1932 was as much anti hoover as it was pro roosevelt.
democrats had only to harness the national grudge and let it pull them to victory.
an overwhelming majority of democrats appear to have voiced a demand for change a new deal rather than the new deal for the latter was only a gleam in the eyes of its sponsors.
any upstanding democratic candidate probably could have won.
the preinauguration lame duck period now ground slowly to an end.
hoover though defeated and repudiated continued to be president for four long months until march 4 1933.
but he was helpless to embark upon any long range policies without the cooperation of roosevelt and the victorious president elect proved rather uncooperative.
hoover at length succeeded in arranging two meetings with him to discuss the wardebt muddle.
but roosevelt who airily remarked to the press its not my baby fought shy of assuming responsibility without authority.
as hoover privately confessed he was trying to bind his successor to an anti inationary policy that would have made impossible many of the later new deal experiments.
but in politics the winner not the loser calls the tune.
with washington deadlocked the vast and vaunted american economic machine clanked to a virtual halt.
one worker in four tramped the streets feet weary and hands idle.
banks were locking their doors all over the nation as people ner vously stuffed paper money under their mattresses.
hooverites then and later accused roosevelt of deliberately permitting the depression to worsen so that he could emerge the more spectacularly as a savior.
fdr and the three rs relief recovery reform great crises often call forth gifted leaders and the hand of destiny tapped roosevelt on the shoulder.
on a dreary inauguration day march 4 1933 his vibrant voice broadcast nationally from a bulletproof stand provided the american people with inspirational new hope.
he denounced the money changers who had brought on the calamity and declared that the government must wage war on the great depression as it would wage war on an armed foe.
his clarion note was let me assert my rm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself roosevelt moved decisively.
now that he had full responsibility he boldly declared a nationwide banking holiday march 6 10 as a prelude to opening the banks on a sounder basis.
he then summoned the over unemployed and frustrated democratic candidate franklin roosevelt offered hope if few concrete plans to the millions struggling to cope with the great depression.
roosevelt ousts hoover whelmingly democratic congress into special session to cope with the national emergency.
for the so called hundred days march 9 june 16 1933 members hastily cranked out an unprecedented basketful of remedial legislation see table 33 1.
some of it derived from earlier progressivism but these new mea sures mostly sought to deal with a desperate emergency.
roosevelts new deal programs aimed at three rs relief recovery and reform.
short range goals were relief and immediate recovery especially in the rst two years.
long range goals were permanent recovery and reform of current abuses particularly those that had produced the boom or bust catastrophe.
the three r objectives often overlapped and got in one table 33 1 principal new deal acts during the hundred days congress 1933 items in parentheses indicate secondary purposes recovery relief reform beer act beer act beer and wine revenue act march 22 1933 ccc unemployment relief act march 31 1933 creates civilian conservation corps ccc fdr closes banks march 6 1933 emergency banking relief act march 9 1933 fdr orders gold surrender april 5 1933 fdr abandons gold standard april 19 1933 fera federal emergency relief act may 12 1933 creates federal emergency relief administration fera aaa agricultural adjustment act aaa may 12 1933 tva tva tennessee valley authority act tva may 18 1933 federal securities act may 27 1933 gold payment clause repealed june 5 1933 holc home owners re nancing act june 13 1933 creates home owners loan corporation holc national industrial recovery act june 16 1933 creates national recovery administration nra public works administration pwa nra pwa nra glass steagall act glass steagall act glass steagall banking reform act june 16 1933 creates federal deposit insurance corporation for later new deal mea sures see p 831.
chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 anothers way.
but amid all the topsy turvy haste the gigantic new deal program lurched forward.
firmly ensconced in the drivers seat president roosevelt cracked the whip.
a green congress so fully shared the panicky feeling of the country that it was ready to rubber stamp bills drafted by white house advisers mea sures that roosevelt called must legislation more than that congress gave the president extraordinary blank check powers some of the laws it passed expressly delegated legislative authority to the chief executive.
one senator complained that if fdr asked congress to commit suicide tomorrow theyd do it roosevelt was delighted to exert executive leadership and congress responded to it although he did not always know precisely where he was going.
he was inclined to do things by intuition off the cuff.
he was like the quarterback as he put it whose next play depends on the outcome of the previous play.
so desperate was the mood of an action starved public that any movement even in the wrong direction seemed better than no movement at all.
one chinese observer of america no yong park 1899 1976 born in manchuria and educated in the united states remained optimistic about america even in the depths of the great depression.
he wrote in an oriental view of american civilization 1934 of all the peoples of the world americans to my mind are the most progressive.
they are the ones who live in the future tense.
their mind and soul are always bent for the future.
they never move backward and always march forward.
the frantic hundred days congress passed many essentials of the new deal three rs though important long range mea sures were added in later sessions.
these reforms owed much to the legacy of the pre world war i progressive movement.
many of them were long overdue sidetracked by the war in europe and the the champ fdr chatting with reporters roosevelt mastered the press as few presidents before or since have been able to do.
he was also ingenious in nding opportunities to converse with reporters in situations where he could conceal his physical limitations.
the hundred days of congress old guard reaction of the 1920s.
in an explosive burst of pent up energy new dealers raided le cabinets full of old pamphlets on german social insurance english housing and garden cities danish agricultural recovery and american world war i collectivization.
in time they embraced progressive ideas such as unemployment insurance old age insurance minimumwage regulations the conservation and development of natural resources and restrictions on child labor.
they also invented some new schemes such as the tennessee valley authority see p 839.
soon depressionweary europeans would come to the united states to marvel at the exciting din of reform activity under way.
no longer would america look as backward in the realm of social welfare as it once had.
roosevelt manages the money banking chaos cried aloud for immediate action.
congress pulled itself together and in an incredible eight hours had the emergency banking relief act of 1933 ready for roosevelts busy pen.
the new law invested the president with the power to regulate banking transactions and foreign exchange and to reopen solvent banks.
roosevelt the master showman next turned to the radio to deliver the rst of his thirty famous reside chats as some 35 million people hung on his soothing words he gave assurances that it was now safer to keep money in a reopened bank than under the mattress condence returned with a gush and the banks began to unlock their doors.
the hundred days or emergency congress buttressed public reliance on the banking system by enacting the memorable glass steagall banking reform act.
this mea sure provided for the federal deposit insurance corporation which insured individual deposits up to 5 000 later raised.
thus ended the disgraceful epidemic of bank failures which dated back to the wildcat days of andrew jackson see figure 33 1.
roosevelt moved swiftly elsewhere on the nancial front seeking to protect the melting gold reserves and to prevent panicky hoarding.
he ordered all private holdings of gold to be surrendered to the treasury in exchange for paper currency and then took the nation off the gold standard.
the emergency congress responded to his recommendation by canceling the when fdr was inaugurated in 1933 not a single canadian bank had failed.
figure 33 1 bank failures before and after the glass steagall banking reform act of 1933 gold payment clause in all contracts and authorizing repayment in paper money.
a managed currency was well on its way.
the goal of roosevelts managed currency was ination which he believed would relieve debtors burdens and stimulate new production.
roosevelts principal instrument for achieving ination was gold buying.
he instructed the treasury to purchase gold at increasing prices ratcheting the dollar price of gold up from 21 an ounce in 1933 to 35 an ounce in early 1934 a price that held for nearly four decades.
this policy did increase the amount of dollars in circulation as holders of gold cashed it in at the elevated prices.
but this inationary result also provoked the wrath of sound money critics who gagged on the baloney dollar the gold buying scheme came to an end in february 1934 when fdr returned the nation to a limited gold standard for purposes of international trade only.
thereafter until 1971 see p 1010 the united states pledged itself to pay foreign bills if requested in gold at the rate of one ounce of gold for every 35 due.
but domestic circulation of gold continued to be prohibited and gold coins became collectors items.
chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 creating jobs for the jobless overwhelming unemployment even more than banking clamored for prompt remedial action.
one out of every four workers was jobless when fdr took his inaugural oath the highest level of unemployment in the nations history before or since.
roosevelt had no hesitancy about using federal money to assist the unemployed and at the same time to prime the pump of industrial recovery.
a farmer has to pour a little water into a dry pump that is prime it to start the ow.
the hundred days congress responded to roosevelts spurs when it created the civilian conservation corps ccc which proved to be perhaps the most popular of all the new deal alphabetical agencies this law provided employment in fresh air government camps for about 3 million uniformed young men many of whom might otherwise have been driven by desperation into criminal habits.
their work was useful including reforestation reghting forty seven lost their lives ood control and swamp drainage.
the recruits were required to help their parents by sending home most of their pay.
both human resources and natural resources were thus conserved though there were minor complaints of militarizing the nations youth.
critics charged that ccc soldiers would later claim pensions for exposure to poison ivy.
the rst major effort of the new congress to grapple with the millions of adult unemployed was the federal emergency relief act.
its chief aim was immediate relief rather than long range recovery.
the resulting federal emergency relief administration fera was handed over to zealous harry l hopkins a painfully thin shabbily dressed chain smoking new york one desperate man wrote to a newspaper in 1932 i am forty eight married twenty one years four children three in school.
for the last eight years i was employed as a pullman conductor.
since september 1930 they have given me seven months part time work.
today i am an object of charity.
my small weak and frail wife and two small children are suffering and i have come to that terrible place where i could easily resort to violence in my desperation.
ccc workers in alaska 1939 these tlingit carvers in alaskas southeastern panhandle were part of a ccc project to restore totem poles.
here they stand with a pole carved in the likeness of abraham lincoln.
social worker who had earlier won roosevelts friendship and who became one of his most inuential advisers.
hopkinss agency in all granted about 3 billion to the states for direct dole payments or preferably for wages on work projects.
immediate relief was also given to two large and hard pressed special groups by the hundred days congress.
one section of the agricultural adjustment act aaa made available many millions of dollars to help farmers meet their mortgages.
another law created the home owners loan corporation holc.
designed to re nance mortgages on nonfarm homes it ultimately assisted about a million badly pinched a boast attributed to hopkins in 1938 was we will spend and spend tax and tax and elect and elect rooseveltian reforms households.
the agency not only bailed out mortgageholding banks it also bolted the political loyalties of relieved middle class homeowners securely to the democratic party.
harassed by the continuing plague of unemploy ment fdr himself established the civil works administration cwa late in 1933 see table 33 2.
as a branch of the fera it also fell under the direction of hopkins.
designed to provide purely temporary jobs during the cruel winter emergency it served a useful purpose.
table 33 2 later major new deal measures 1933 1939 items in parentheses indicate secondary purposes recovery relief cwa fdr establishes civil works administration cwa november 9 1933 gold reserve act january 30 1934 authorizes fdrs devaluation january 31 1934 reciprocal trade agreements act reform securities and exchange commission sec authorized by congress june 6 1934 reciprocal trade agreements act reciprocal trade agreements act june 12 1934 see pp.
855 856 indian reorga ni zation act june 18 fha national housing act june 28 1934 authorizes federal housing administration fha frazier lemke act frazier lemke farm bankruptcy act june 28 1934 resettlement administration fdr creates resettlement administration april 30 1935 wpa fdr creates works progress administration wpa may 6 1935 under act of april 8 1935 wagner act wagner act fha wagner act national labor relations act july 5 1935 social security act august 14 1935 public utility holding company act august 26 1935 soil conservation act soil conservation and domestic allotment act february 29 1936 usha usha second aaa second agricultural adjustment act february 16 1938 fair labor standards act fair labor standards act united states housing authority usha established by congress september 1 1937 fair labor standards act wages and hours bill june 25 1938 reorga ni zation act april 3 1939 hatch act august 2 1939 chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 tens of thousands of jobless were employed at leaf raking and other make work tasks which were dubbed boondoggling as this kind of labor put a premium on shovel leaning slow motion the scheme was widely criticized.
the only thing we have to fear scoffers remarked is work itself a day for every demagogue direct relief from washington to needy families helped pull the nation through the ghastly winter of 1933 1934.
but the disheartening persistence of unemployment and suffering demonstrated that emergency relief mea sures had to be not only continued but supplemented.
one danger signal was the appearance of various demagogues notably a magnetic microphone messiah father charles coughlin a catholic priest in michigan who began broadcasting in 1930 and whose slogan was social justice his anti new deal harangues to some 40 million radio fans nally became so anti semitic fascistic and demagogic that he was silenced in 1942 by his ecclesiastical superiors.
also notorious among the new brood of agitators were those who capitalized on popular discontent to make pie in the sky promises.
most conspicuous of these individuals were dr francis e townsend a retired cal i fornia physician who promised everyone over sixty 200 a month and senator huey p kingsh long of louisiana who was said to have more brass than a government mule.
he used his abundant rabble rousing talents to publicize his share our wealth program which promised to make every man a king every family was to receive 5 000 supposedly at the expense of the prosperous.
h l mencken called longs chief lieutenant former clergyman gerald l k smith the gutsiest goriest loudest and lustiest the deadliest and damndest orator ever heard on this or any other earth the champion boob bumper of all time fear of longs becoming a fascist dictator ended when he was shot by an assassin in the louisiana state capitol in 1935.
father coughlin and huey long frightened many americans because they raised troubling questions about the link between fascism and economic crisis.
danger seemed to be lurking ominously in many corners of the world.
authoritarian rule was strengthening in japan while adolf hitler was acquiring absolute in 1935 father charles coughlin 1891 1979 singlehandedly defeated president roosevelts effort to win senate ratication of a treaty providing for american membership in the world court a judicial body of limited authority established by the league of nations.
what fdr saw as a symbolic embrace of international responsibility coughlin convinced his radio listeners was a conspiracy of international moneyed interests against american sovereignty our thanks are due to almighty god in that america retains her sovereignty.
congratulations to the aroused people of the united states who by more than 200 000 telegrams containing at least 1 000 000 names demanded that the principles established by washington and jefferson shall keep us clear from foreign entanglements and european hatreds.
huey long 1893 1935 long pursued progressive policies as governor of louisiana even while he ruled the state with a dictatorial hand.
a amboyant and unpredictable populist he set the orthodox political establishment on its ear especially after he became a u s senator in 1930.
longs admirers called him the kingsh franklin roosevelt called him one of the two most dangerous men in the country the other said roosevelt was general douglas macarthur.
father coughlin and senator long wpa mural by victor arnautoff 1896 1979 1934 the pedestrian scene painted on a wall of coit tower in san francisco was one of a series of murals commissioned by the federal government to employ artists during the great depression.
authority in germany.
some even worried that franklin roosevelt himself would turn into a dictator.
partly to quiet the groundswell of unrest that might lead to a political explosion congress authorized the works progress administration wpa in 1935.
the objective was employment on useful projects.
launched under the supervision of the ailing but energetic hopkins this remarkable agency ultimately spent about 11 billion on thousands of public buildings bridges and hard surfaced roads.
not every wpa project strengthened the infrastructure for instance one controlled crickets in wyoming while another built a monkey pen in oklahoma city.
john steinbeck future nobel prize novelist counted dogs in his cal i fornia county.
one of the most well loved wpa programs was the federal art project which hired artists to create posters and murals many still adorning post ofce walls.
critics sneered that wpa meant we provide alms but the fact is that over a period of eight years nearly 9 million people were given jobs not handouts.
the wpa nourished much precious talent preserved self respect and fostered the creation of more than a million pieces of art many of them publicly displayed.
new visibility for women just over a decade after the ratication of the nineteenth amendment american women began to carve a larger space for themselves in the nations political and intellectual life.
first lady eleanor roosevelt may have been the most visible woman in the roosevelt white house but she was hardly the only female voice.
secretary of labor frances perkins 1880 1965 burst through the gender barrier when she became americas rst woman cabinet member.
mary mcleod bethune chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 frances perkins 1880 1965 at the site of the golden gate bridge project 1935 the rst woman cabinet member perkins served as secretary of labor under roosevelt.
she was subjected to much undeserved criticism from male businessmen laborites and politicians.
they sneered that fdr kept her in labor for many years.
1875 1955 director of the ofce of minority affairs in the national youth administration served as the highest ranking african american in the roosevelt administration.
women also made important contributions in the social sciences especially in the relatively new and open eld of anthropology.
ruth benedict 1887 1948 carried on the work of her mentor franz boas 1858 1942 by developing the culture and personality movement in the 1930s and 1940s.
benedicts landmark work patterns of culture 1934 established the study of cultures as collective personalities.
each culture like each individual had its own more or less consistent pattern of thought and action one of benedicts students margaret mead 1901 1978 drew from her own scholarly studies of adolescence among pacic island peoples to advance bold new ideas about sexuality gender roles and intergenerational relationships.
with thirty four books and a curatorship at the american museum of natural history in new york city to her credit mead helped popularize cultural anthropology and achieved a celebrity status rare among social scientists.
pearl s buck 1892 1973 won similar acclaim as a novelist.
raised in china by presbyterian missionary parents buck introduced american readers to chinese peasant society.
her best selling novel the good earth 1931 earned her the nobel prize for literature in 1938 making her the third american after sinclair lewis and eugene oneill to win the award.
the national recovery administration mary mcleod bethune 1875 1955 the daughter of ex slaves and founder of a college in florida bethune became the highest ranking african american in the roosevelt administration when she was appointed director of the ofce of minority affairs in the national youth administration nya.
from this base she organized the black cabinet to make sure blacks beneted from the new deal programs along with whites.
here she is picketing against segregated hiring practices at the peoples drug store chain one of the earliest targets of the black civil rights movement.
a prolic author all her life buck also used her fame to advance humanitarian causes.
helping industry and labor a daring attempt to stimulate a nationwide comeback was initiated when the emergency congress authorized the national recovery administration nra.
this ingenious scheme was by far the most complex and far reaching effort by the new dealers to combine immediate relief with long range recovery and reform.
triple barreled it was designed to assist industry labor and the unemployed.
individual industries over two hundred in all were to work out codes of fair competition under which hours of labor would be reduced so that employment could be spread over more people.
a ceiling was placed on the maximum hours of labor a oor was placed under wages to establish minimum levels.
labor under the nra was granted additional benets.
workers were formally guaranteed the right to organize and bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing not through handpicked agents of the companys choosing.
the hated yellowdog or antiunion contract was expressly forbidden and certain safeguarding restrictions were placed on the use of child labor.
industrial recovery through the nras fair competition codes would at best be painful for these called for self denial by both management and labor.
patriotism was aroused by mass meetings and monster parades which included 200 000 marchers on new york citys fifth avenue.
a handsome blue eagle was designed as the symbol of the nra and merchants subscribing to a code displayed it in their windows with the slogan we do our part a newly formed professional football team was christened the philadelphia eagles.
such was the enthusiasm for the nra that for a brief period there was a marked upswing in business activity although roosevelt had warned we cannot ballyhoo our way to prosperity but the high ying eagle gradually uttered to earth.
too much self sacrice was expected of labor industry and the public for such a scheme to work.
critics began to brand the nra national run around and nuts running america symbolized by what henry ford called that damn roosevelt buzzard a new age of chiselry dawned as certain unscrupulous chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 businesspeople chiselers publicly displayed the blue bird in their windows but secretly violated the codes.
complete collapse was imminent when in 1935 the supreme court shot down the dying eagle in the famed schechter sick chicken decision.
the learned justices unanimously held that congress could not delegate legislative powers to the executive.
they further declared that congressional control of interstate commerce could not properly apply to a local fowl business like that of the schechter brothers in brooklyn new york.
roosevelt was incensed by this horse and buggy interpretation of the constitution but actually the court helped him out of a bad jam.
grand coulee dam under construction on the columbia river 1939 located in central washington state the grand coulee dam was one of the most ambitious projects of the new deals public works administration.
it is the largest concrete structure in the united states and the central facility in the columbia basin project which generates electricity for the pacic northwest and provides irrigation for half a million acres of columbia valley farmland services that have transformed the life of the region.
the same act of congress that hatched the nra eagle also authorized the public works administration pwa likewise intended both for industrial recovery and for unemployment relief.
the agency was headed by the secretary of the interior acid tongued harold l ickes a free swinging former bull mooser.
long range recovery was the primary purpose of the new agency and in time over 4 billion was spent on some thirty four thousand projects which included public buildings highways and parkways.
one spectacular achievement was the grand coulee dam on the columbia river the largest structure erected by humans since the great wall of china.
in the depths of the depression the grand dam seemed the height of folly.
it made possible the irrigation of millions of acres of new farmland at a time when the government was desperately trying to reduce farm surpluses.
it created more electrical power than the entire tennessee valley authority in a region with little industry and virtually no market for additional power.
but with the outbreak of world war ii and then postwar prosperity the dam would come to seem a stroke of genius transforming the entire region with abundant water and power.
special stimulants aided the recovery of one segment of business the liquor industry.
the imminent repeal of the prohibition amendment afforded an opportunity to raise needed federal revenue and at the same time to provide a mea sure of employment.
prodded by roosevelt the hundred days congress in one of its earliest acts legalized light wine and beer with an alcoholic content presumably nonintoxicating not exceeding 3 2 percent by weight and levied a tax of 5 on every barrel so manufactured.
disgruntled drys unwilling to acknowledge the breakdown of law and order begotten by bootlegging damned roosevelt as a 3 2 percent american prohibition was ofcially repealed by the twenty rst amendment late in 1933 see the appendix and the saloon doors swung open.
paying farmers not to farm ever since the war boom days of 1918 farmers had suffered from low prices and overproduction especially in grain.
during the depression conditions became desperate as innumerable mortgages were foreclosed as corn was burned for fuel and as embattled farmers tried to prevent the shipment of crops to glutted markets.
in iowa several volatile counties were placed under martial law.
aid for agriculture a radical new approach to farm recovery was embraced when the emergency congress established the agricultural adjustment administration aaa.
through articial scarcity this agency was to establish parity prices for basic commodities.
parity was the price set for a product that gave it the same real value in purchasing power that it had enjoyed during the period from 1909 to 1914.
the aaa would eliminate price depressing surpluses by paying growers to reduce their crop acreage.
the millions of dollars needed for these payments were to be raised by taxing processors of farm products such as our millers who in turn would shift the burden to consumers.
unhappily the aaa got off to a wobbly start.
it was begun after much of the cotton crop for 1933 had been planted and balky mules trained otherwise were forced to plow under countless young plants.
several million squealing pigs were purchased and slaughtered.
much of their meat was distributed to people on relief but some of it was used for fertilizer.
this sinful destruction of food at a time when thousands of citizens were hungry increased condemnation of the american economic system by many left leaning voices.
subsidized scarcity did have the effect of raising farm income but the whole confused enterprise met with acid criticism.
farmers food processors consumers and taxpayers were all to some degree unhappy.
paying the farmers not to farm actually increased unemployment at a time when other new deal agencies were striving to decrease it.
when the supreme court nally killed the aaa in 1936 by declaring its regulatory taxation provisions unconstitutional foes of the plow under program rejoiced loudly.
quickly recovering from this blow the new deal congress hastened to pass the soil conservation and domestic allotment act of 1936.
the withdrawal of acreage from production was now achieved by paying farmers to plant soil conserving crops like soybeans or to let their land lie fallow.
with the emphasis thus on conservation the supreme court placed its stamp of approval on the revamped scheme.
the second agricultural adjustment act of 1938 passed two years later was a more comprehensive substitute although it continued conservation payments.
if growers observed acreage restrictions on specied commodities like cotton and wheat they would be eligible for parity payments.
other provisions of the new aaa were designed to give farmers not only a fairer price but a more substantial share of the national income.
both goals were partially achieved.
an okie family hits the road in the 1930s to escape the dust bowl dust bowls and black blizzards nature meanwhile had been providing some unplanned scarcity.
late in 1933 a prolonged drought struck the states of the trans mississippi great plains.
rainless weeks were followed by furious whining winds while the sun was darkened by millions of tons of powdery topsoil torn from homesteads in an area that stretched from eastern colorado to western missouri soon to be dubbed the dust bowl.
despondent citizens sat on front porches with protective masks on their faces watching their farms swirl by.
a sevenyear old boy in kansas suffocated.
overawed victims of the dust bowl disaster predicted the end of the world or the second coming of christ.
drought and wind triggered the dust storms but they were not the only culprits.
the human hand had also worked its mischief.
high grain prices during world war i had enticed farmers to bring countless acres of marginal land under cultivation.
worse dryfarming techniques and mechanization had revolutionized great plains agriculture.
the steam tractor and the disk plow tore up in nitely more sod than a team of oxen ever could leaving the powdery topsoil to be swept away at natures whim see map 33 1.
chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 110w 100w 90w 80w c a n a d a wash north dakota montana oregon wyoming pac i f nebraska ic calif colorado penn.
oc ea okla n n mex.
30n texas s c la.
severe wind erosion m e x i c o va n c tenn ark.
ala severest wind erosion me.
gulf of mexico states losing population ga ma.
r i ct n j del.
marginal cropland n h n y iowa ill vt mich kansas arizona 400 mi.
nevada utah minn south dakota idaho 40n 70w 200 400 km.
ocean 50n 120w md.
ntic n at l a 130w map 33 1 the extent of erosion in the 1930s note the extensive wind erosion in the western oklahoma panhandle region which was dubbed the dust bowl in the 1930s.
mechanized farmers had busted the sod of the southern plains so thoroughly that they literally broke the back of the land.
tons of dust blew out of the dust bowl in the 1930s and blotted the sun from the skies as far away as new york.
a kansas newspaperman reported in 1935 that in his dust darkened town lady godiva could ride through streets without even the horse seeing her interactive map burned and blown out of the dust bowl tens of thousands of refugees ed their ruined acres.
in ve years about 350 000 oklahomans and arkansans okies and arkies trekked to southern cal i fornia in junkyards on wheels undeterred by signs saying keep out many found a new home in the san joaquin valley which shared much in common with the southern plains arid climate cotton growing newfound oil deposits and abundant land.
yet the transition was cruel.
food shelter and clothing were scarce the winter months without work and heat proved nearly unendurable for the migrants.
the dismal story of these human tumbleweeds was realistically portrayed in john steinbecks best selling novel the grapes novelist john steinbeck 1902 1968 relates in his novel the grapes of wrath 1939 that when the okies and arkies reached california they found the big growers unwilling to pay more than twentyve cents an hour for work in the elds.
one owner mutters a red is any son of a bitch that wants thirty cents an hour when were paying twenty ve.
of wrath 1939 which proved to be the uncle toms cabin of the dust bowl.
zealous new dealers sympathetic toward the soiltillers made various other efforts to relieve their burdens.
the frazier lemke farm bankruptcy act passed in 1934 made possible a suspension of mortgage foreclosures for ve years but it was voided the next year by the supreme court.
a revised law limiting the grace period to three years was unanimously upheld.
in 1935 the president set up the resettlement administration charged with the task of removing nearfarmless farmers to better land.
and more than 200 million young trees were successfully planted on the bare prairies as windbreaks by the young men of the civilian conservation corps even though one governor jeered at trying to grow hair on a bald head native americans also felt the far reaching hand of new deal reform.
commissioner of indian affairs john collier ardently sought to reverse the forcedassimilation policies in place since the dawes act of 1887 see p 639.
inspired by a sojourn among the pueblo indians in taos new mexico collier promoted the indian reorga ni zation act of 1934 the indian new deal.
the new law encouraged tribes to establish local self government and to preserve their native crafts and traditions.
the act also helped to stop the loss of indian lands and revived tribes interest in their identity and culture.
yet not all indians applauded it.
the tennessee valley authority some denounced the legislation as a back to theblanket mea sure that sought to make museum pieces out of native americans.
seventy seven tribes refused to organize under its provisions though nearly two hundred others did establish tribal governments.
battling bankers and big business reformist new dealers were determined from the outset to curb the money changers who had played fast and loose with gullible investors before the wall street crash of 1929.
the hundred days congress passed the truth in securities act federal securities act which required promoters to transmit to investors sworn information regarding the soundness of their stocks and bonds.
an old saying was thus reversed to read let the seller beware although the buyer might never read the ne print.
in 1934 congress took further steps to protect the public against fraud deception and inside manipulation.
it authorized the securities and exchange commission sec which was designed as a watchdog administrative agency.
stock markets henceforth were to operate more as trading marts and less as gambling casinos.
new dealers likewise directed their re at public utility holding companies those supercorporations.
citizens had seen one of these incredible colossi collapse during the spring of 1932 when chicagoan samuel insulls multibillion dollar nancial empire crashed.
possibilities of controlling with a minimum of capital a half dozen or so pyramided layers of big business suggested to roosevelt a ninety six inch dog being wagged by a four inch tail the public utility holding company act of 1935 nally delivered a death sentence to this type of bloated growth except where it might be deemed economically needful.
the tva harnesses the tennessee inevitably the sprawling electric power industry attracted the re of new deal reformers.
within a few decades it had risen from nothingness to a behemoth with an investment of 13 billion.
as a public utility it reached directly and regularly into the pocketbooks of millions of consumers for vitally needed ser vices.
ardent new dealers accused it of gouging the public with excessive rates especially since it owed its success to having secured often for a song priceless waterpower sites from the public domain.
the tempestuous tennessee river provided new dealers with a rare opportunity.
with its tributaries the river drained a badly eroded area about the size of eng land and one containing some 2 5 million of the most poverty stricken people in america.
the federal government already owned valuable properties at muscle shoals where it had erected plants for needed nitrates in world war i.
by developing the hydroelectric potential of the entire area washington could combine the immediate advantage of putting thousands of people to work and a long term project for reforming the power monopoly.
an act creating the tennessee valley authority tva was passed in 1933 by the hundred days congress.
this far ranging enterprise was largely a result of the steadfast vision and unagging zeal of senator george w norris of nebraska after whom one of the mighty dams was named.
from the standpoint of planned economy the tva was by far the most revolutionary of all the new deal schemes.
this new agency was determined to discover precisely how much the production and distribution of electricity cost so that a yardstick could be set up to test the fairness of rates charged by private companies.
utility corporations lashed back at this entering wedge of government control charging that the low cost of tva power was due to dishonest bookkeeping and the absence of taxes.
critics complained that the whole dream was creeping socialism in concrete but the new dealers shrugging off such outcries pointed a prideful nger at the amazing achievements of the tva.
the gigantic project brought to the area not only full employment and the blessings of cheap electric power see figure 33 2 but low cost housing abundant cheap nitrates the restoration of eroded soil reforestation improved navigation and ood control.
rivers ran blue instead of brown and a once povertycursed area was being transformed into one of the most ourishing regions in the united states.
foreigners were greatly impressed with the possibilities of similar schemes in their own lands and exulting new dealers agitated for parallel enterprises in the valleys of the columbia colorado and missouri rivers.
federally built dams one day would span all those waterways impounding more than 30 percent of the total annual runoff from the roof of america in the rocky mountains.
hydroelectric power from those dams would drive the growth of the urban west and illinois o missouri hio r 88w 86w 84w kentucky dam c um paducah watts bar dam ssee r tennessee w po h st ol on r e ll w va 80w.
lin ch r virginia r knoxville coulter shoals dam du hiw pickwick ck r.
assee landing r hiwassee dam n e dam t chattanooga memphis wilson dam wheeler dam chickamauga dam guntersville dam muscle shoals tupelo br fr asheville north carolina great smoky mountains national park te n ne ss ee r ne r pi si p s is m is r h e n c d r oa n b erl an d norris dam norris oak ridge nashville 36n arkansas 82w kentucky c 90w georgia mississippi 34n south carolina atlanta birmingham tennessee river watershed alabama tva dams la.
area served by tva electric power 100 km.
power plant map 33 2 tva area more than twenty dams were constructed on the rivers tributaries as part of a massive project to control ooding generate hydroelectric power and revitalize the tennessee valley region while also creating jobs for the unemployed.
the shaded area represents the area served by tva electric power.
the waters they diverted would nurture agriculture in the previously bone dry western deserts.
but conser vative reaction against the socialistic new deal would con ne the tvas brand of federally guided resource management and comprehensive regional development to the tennessee valley see map 33 2.
percentage interactive map housing and social security 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 2000 08 year figure 33 2 occupied households with electric service 1900 2008 the tennessee valley authority contributed to making electricity available to almost all americans by 1960.
african american leader andrew young later claimed that the tva created the economic underpinnings of the civil rights movement it was the presence of the cheap electricity lower interest rates water projects that laid the foundation for the new south the new deal had meanwhile framed sturdy new policies for housing construction.
to speed recovery and better homes roosevelt set up the federal housing administration fha as early as 1934.
the building industry was to be stimulated by small loans to householders both for improving their dwellings and for completing new ones.
so popular did the fha prove to be that it was one of the few alphabetical agencies to outlast the age of roosevelt.
congress bolstered the program in 1937 by authorizing the united states housing authority usha an agency designed to lend money to states or communi social security ties for low cost construction.
although units for about 650 000 low income people were started new building fell tragically short of needs.
new deal efforts to expand the project collided with brick wall opposition from real estate promoters builders and landlords slumlords to say nothing of anti new dealers who attacked what they considered down the rathole spending.
nonetheless for the rst time in a century the slum areas in america ceased growing and even shrank.
incomparably more important was the success of new dealers in the eld of unemployment insurance and old age pensions.
their greatest victory was the epochal social security act of 1935 one of the most complicated and far reaching laws ever to pass congress.
to cushion future depressions the mea sure provided for federal state unemployment insurance.
to provide security for old age specied categories of retired workers were to receive regular payments from washington.
these payments ranged from 10 to 85 a month raised periodically and were nanced by a payroll tax on both employers and employees.
provision was also made for the blind the physically handicapped delinquent children and other dependents.
republican opposition to the sweeping new legislation was bitter.
social security insisted hoover must be builded upon a cult of work not a cult of leisure the gop national chairman falsely charged that every worker would have to wear a metal dog tag for life.
social security was largely inspired by the example of some of the more highly industrialized nations of europe.
in the agricultural america of an earlier day there had always been farm chores for all ages and the large family had cared for its own dependents.
but in an urbanized economy at the mercy of boomor bust cycles the government was now recognizing its responsibility for the welfare of its citizens.
by 1939 over 45 million people were eligible for social security benets.
in subsequent years further categories of workers were added including belatedly farm and domestic workers.
for decades millions of poor men and women were excluded from social security.
in contrast to europe where welfare programs generally were universal american workers had to be employed and in certain kinds of jobs to get coverage.
a new deal for labor the nra blue eagles with their call for collective bargaining had been a godsend to orga nized labor.
as new deal expenditures brought some slackening of unemployment labor began to feel more secure and hence more self assertive.
a rash of walkouts occurred in the summer of 1934 including a paralyzing general strike in san francisco following a bloody thursday which was broken only when outraged citizens resorted to vigilante tactics.
when the supreme court axed the blue eagle a congress sympathetic to labor unions undertook to ll the vacuum.
the fruit of its deliberations was the national labor relations act of 1935 more commonly known as the wagner act after its congressional sponsor new york senator robert f wagner.
this trailblazing law created a powerful new national labor relations board for administrative purposes and reasserted the right of labor to engage in self orga ni zation and to bargain collectively through representatives of its own choice.
considered the magna carta of american labor the wagner act proved to be a major milestone for american workers.
under the encouragement of a highly sympathetic national labor relations board a host of unskilled workers began to organize themselves into effective unions.
the leader of this drive was beetle browed domineering and melodramatic john l lewis boss of the united mine workers.
in 1935 he succeeded in forming the committee for industrial organization cio within the ranks of the skilled craft american federation of labor.
but skilled workers ever since the days of the ill fated knights of labor in the 1880s had shown only lukewarm sympathy for the cause of unskilled labor especially blacks.
in 1936 following inevitable friction with the cio the older federation suspended the upstart unions associated with the newer orga ni zation.
undaunted the rebellious cio moved on a concerted scale into the huge automobile industry.
late in 1936 the workers resorted to a revolutionary technique earlier used in both europe and america known as the sit down strike they refused to leave the factory building of general motors at flint michigan and thus prevented the importation of strikebreakers.
conservative respecters of private property were scandalized.
the cio nally won a resounding victory when its union after heated negotiations was recognized by general motors as the sole bargaining agency for its employees.
unskilled workers now pressed their advantage.
the united states steel company hitherto an impossible nut for labor to crack averted a costly strike when it voluntarily granted rights of unionization to its chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 john l lewis 1880 1969 inciting textile workers to strike 1937 a miner lewis worked his way up to the presidency of the united mine workers of america.
he then founded the committee for industrial organization later reconstituted as the congress of industrial organizations in the mid 1930s to unite all industrial workers in a powerful bloc of big labor to stand up to big business cio orga nized employees.
but the little steel companies fought back savagely.
citizens were shocked in 1937 by the memorial day massacre at the plant of the republic steel company in south chicago.
in a bloody general motors sit down strikers flint michigan 1937 strikers like these sometimes kept their spirits up with the song sit down when the boss wont talk dont take a walk sit down sit down.
fracas police red upon pickets and workers leaving the area strewn with several score dead and wounded.
a better deal for labor continued when congress in 1938 passed the memorable fair labor standards act wages and hours bill.
industries involved in interstate commerce were to set up minimum wage and maximum hour levels.
the eventual goals were forty cents an hour later raised and a forty hour week.
labor by children under sixteen under eighteen if the occupation was dangerous was forbidden.
these reforms were bitterly though futilely opposed by many industrialists especially by those southern textile manufacturers who had proted from low wage labor.
but the exclusion of agricultural ser vice and domestic workers meant that blacks mexican americans and women who were concentrated in these elds did not benet from the act.
in later new deal days labor unionization thrived see figure 33 3.
roosevelt wants you to join a union was the rallying cry of professional organizers.
the president received valuable support at ballot box time social security sweden percentage of employees unionized ireland japan united kingdom germany usa france year figure 33 3 labor union membership in selected countries 1913 2001 in the united states the percentage of the total labor force that was unionized increased until 1954 when it began to decline.
in the 1990s it had a brief rise with the organization of service and government workers only to decline again until it reached a low of 12 percent in 2006.
in 2007 unionized workers grew by 1 percent an increase of 311 000 workers which brought total union membership to 15 7 million the highest in many years.
note the very different fortunes of organized labor in other countries in the face of the great depression world war ii postwar prosperity and deindustrialization.
labor triumphant after generations of struggle organized labor made dramatic gains in membership and bargaining power during the new deal years.
from labor leaders and many appreciative workingpeople.
one mill worker remarked that roosevelt was the only man we ever had in the white house who would know that my boss is a s o b a worker at a chevrolet plant in flint michigan wrote after the united auto workers cio victory in 1937 the inhuman high speed is no more.
we now have a voice and have slowed up the speed of the line.
and we are now treated as human beings and not as part of the machinery.
the high pressure is taken off.
it proves clearly that united we stand divided or alone we fall.
source from james c docherty historical dictionary of organized labor 2nd ed pp.
408 415 and 420 421.
copyright 2004.
reprinted by permission of scavenger press lanham md.
the cio surged forward breaking completely with the af of l in 1938.
on that occasion the committee for industrial organization was formally reconstituted as the congress of industrial organizations the new cio under the visionary though high handed presidency of john l lewis.
by 1940 the cio could claim about 4 million members in its constituent unions including some 200 000 blacks.
nevertheless bitter and annoying jurisdictional feuding involving strikes continued with the af of l at times labor seemed more bent on costly civil war than on its age old war with management.
landon challenges the champ as the presidential campaign of 1936 neared the new dealers were on top of the world.
they had achieved chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 considerable progress and millions of reliefers were grateful to their bountiful government.
the exultant democrats renominated roosevelt on a platform squarely endorsing the new deal.
the republicans were hard pressed to nd someone to feed to the champ they nally settled on the colorless but homespun and honest governor of the sunower state of kansas alfred m landon.
landon himself was a moderate who accepted some new deal reforms although not the popular social security act.
but the republican platform vigorously condemned the new deal of franklin decit roosevelt for its radicalism experimentation confusion and frightful waste backing landon ex president hoover called for a holy crusade for liberty echoing the cry of the american liberty league a group of wealthy conservatives who had orga nized in 1934 to ght socialistic new deal schemes.
roosevelt gave as good as he got.
angry enough to stretch sheet iron the president took to the stump and denounced the economic royalists who sought to hide behind the ag and the constitution i welcome their hatred he proclaimed.
a landslide overwhelmed landon as the demoralized republicans carried only two states maine and vermont.
this dismal showing caused political wiseacres to make the old adage read as maine goes so goes vermont the popular vote was 27 752 869 to 16 674 665 the electoral count was 523 to 8 the most lopsided in 116 years.
a good humored newspaper columnist quipped if landon had given one more speech roosevelt would have carried canada too democratic majorities riding in on roosevelts magic coattails were again returned to congress.
jubilant democrats could now claim more than two thirds of the seats in the house and a like proportion in the senate.
the battle of 1936 perhaps the most bitter since bryans defeat in 1896 partially bore out republican charges of class warfare.
even more than in 1932 the needy economic groups were lined up against the socalled greedy economic groups.
cio units contributed generously to fdrs campaign chest.
many left wingers turned to roosevelt as the customary third party protest vote sharply declined.
blacks several million of whom had also appreciated welcome relief checks had maine which traditionally held its state elections in september was long regarded as a political weathervane hence the expression as maine goes so goes the nation three days before the 1936 election roosevelt took the moral high ground in his speech at new yorks madison square garden i should like to have it said of my rst administration that in it the forces of selshness and of lust for power met their match.
i should like to have it said of my second administration that in it these forces met their master.
by now largely shaken off their traditional allegiance to the republican party.
to them lincoln was nally dead fdr won primarily because he appealed to the forgotten man whom he never forgot.
some of the presidents support was only pocketbook deep reliefers were not going to bite the hand that doled out the government checks.
no one as al smith remarked shoots at santa claus but roosevelt in fact had forged a powerful and enduring coalition of the south blacks urbanites and the poor.
he proved especially effective in marshaling the support of the multitudes of new immigrants mostly the catholics and jews who had swarmed into the great cities since the turn of the century.
these once scorned newcomers with their now numerous sons and daughters had at last come politically of age.
in the 1920s one out of every twentyve federal judgeships went to a catholic roosevelt appointed catholics to one out of every four.
nine old men on the bench bowing his head to the sleety blasts roosevelt took the presidential oath on january 20 1937 instead of the traditional march 4.
the twentieth amendment to the constitution had been ratied in 1933.
see the appendix.
it swept away the postelection lame duck session of congress and shortened by six weeks the awkward period before inauguration.
flushed with victory roosevelt interpreted his reelection as a mandate to continue new deal reforms.
but in his eyes the cloistered old men on the supreme bench like fossilized stumbling blocks stood stubbornly in the pathway of progress.
in nine major cases involving the new deal the roosevelt administration the court packing controversy had been thwarted seven times.
the court was ultraconser vative and six of the nine oldsters in black were over seventy.
as luck would have it not a single member had been appointed by fdr in his rst term.
roosevelt his dutch up viewed with mounting impatience what he regarded as the obstructive conservatism of the court.
some of these old guard appointees were hanging on with a senile grip partly because they felt it their patriotic duty to curb the socialistic tendencies of that radical in the white house.
roosevelt believed that the voters in three successive elections the presidential elections of 1932 and 1936 and the midterm congressional elections of 1934 had returned a smashing verdict in favor of his program of reform.
democracy in his view meant rule by the people.
if the american way of life was to be preserved roosevelt argued the supreme court ought to get in line with the supreme court of public opinion.
roosevelt nally hit upon a court scheme that he regarded as the answer to a maidens prayer in fact it proved to be one of the most costly political misjudgments of his career.
when he sprang his brainstorm on a shocked nation early in 1937 he caught the country and congress completely by surprise.
roosevelt bluntly asked congress for legislation to permit him to add a new justice to the supreme court for every member over seventy who would not retire.
the maximum membership could then be fteen.
roosevelt pointed to the necessity of injecting vigorous new blood for the court he alleged was far behind in its work.
this charge which turned out to be false brought heated accusations of dishonesty.
at best roosevelt was headstrong and not fully aware of the fact that the court in popular thinking had become something of a sacred cow.
the court changes course congress and the nation were promptly convulsed over roosevelts court packing plan to expand the supreme court.
franklin double crossing roosevelt was vilied for attempting to break down the delicate checks and balances among the three branches of the government.
he was accused of grooming himself as a dictator by trying to browbeat the judiciary.
in the eyes of countless citizens mostly republicans but including many democrats basic liberties seemed to be in jeopardy.
god bless the supreme court was a fervent prayer.
the response to roosevelts court packing plan 1937 even the democratic donkey kicked up a storm in opposition to president roosevelts plan to expand the supreme court to as many as fteen judges.
chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 the court had meanwhile seen the ax hanging over its head.
whatever his motives justice owen j roberts formerly regarded as a conser vative began to vote on the side of his liberal colleagues.
a switch in time saves nine was the classic witticism inspired by this ideological change.
by a ve to four decision the court in march 1937 upheld the principle of a state minimum wage for women thereby reversing its stand on a different case a year earlier.
in succeeding decisions a court more sympathetic to the new deal upheld the national labor relations act wagner act and the social security act.
roosevelts court packing was further undermined when congress voted full pay for justices over seventy who retired whereupon one of the oldest conser vative members resigned to be replaced by a new dealer justice hugo black.
congress nally passed a court reform bill but this watered down version applied only to lower courts.
roosevelt the master politician thus suffered his rst major legislative defeat at the hands of his own party in congress.
americans have never viewed lightly a presidents tampering with the supreme court no matter how popular their chief executive may be.
yet in losing this battle roosevelt incidentally won his campaign.
the court as he had hoped became markedly more friendly to new deal reforms.
furthermore a succession of deaths and resignations enabled him in time to make nine appointments to the tribunal more than any of his predecessors since george washington.
the clock unpacked the court.
yet in a sense fdr lost both the court battle and the war.
he so aroused conser vatives of both parties in congress that few new deal reforms were passed after 1937 the year of the ght to pack the bench.
with this catastrophic miscalculation he squandered much of the political goodwill that had carried him to such a resounding victory in the 1936 election.
twilight of the new deal roosevelts rst term from 1933 to 1937 did not banish the depression from the land.
unemployment stubbornly persisted in 1936 at about 15 percent down from the grim 25 percent of 1933 but still miserably high see figure 33 4.
despite the inventiveness of new deal programs and the billions of dollars in pump priming recovery had been dishearteningly modest though the country seemed to be inching its way back to economic health.
then in 1937 the economy took another sharp downturn a surprisingly severe depression within the depression that the presidents critics quickly dubbed the roosevelt recession in fact government policies had caused the nosedive as new social security taxes began to bite into payrolls and as the administration cut back on spending out of continuing reverence for the orthodox economic doctrine of the balanced budget.
only at this late date did roosevelt at last frankly and deliberately embrace the recommendations of the british economist john maynard keynes.
the new deal had run decits for several years but all of them had been rather small and none was intended.
now in april 1937 roosevelt announced a bold program to stimulate the economy by planned decit spending.
although the decits were still undersized for the herculean task of conquering the depression this abrupt policy reversal marked a major turning point in the governments relation to the economy.
keynesianism the use of government spending and scal policy to prime the pump of the economy and encourage consumer spending became the new economic orthodoxy and remained so for decades.
roosevelt had meanwhile been pushing the remaining reform mea sures of the new deal.
early in 1937 he urged congress a congress growing more conser vative to authorize a sweeping reorga ni zation of the national administration in the interests of streamlined efciency.
but the issue became tangled up with his presumed autocratic ambitions in regard to the supreme court and he suffered another stinging defeat.
two years later in 1939 congress partially relented and in the reorga ni zation act gave him limited powers for administrative reforms including the key new executive ofce in the white house.
the new dealers were accused of having the richest campaign chest in history and in truth government relief checks had a curious habit of coming in bunches just before ballot time.
to remedy such practices congress adopted the much heralded hatch act a basic objective of the new deal was featured in roosevelts second inaugural address 1937 i see one third of a nation ill housed illclad ill nourished.
the test of our progress is not whether we add more to the abundance of those who have much it is whether we provide enough for those who have too little.
the controversial new deal index of industrial production percentage in 1929 levels percentage of work force unemployed germany united kingdom 4 germany 2 3 united states1 united kingdom united states 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 year 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 year figure 33 4 economic impact of the great depression on the united states the united kingdom and germany 1929 1940 federal emergency relief administration workers are counted as employed.
figure shows registered unemployment in germany in 1929 industrial unemployment as reported by unions was 13 1 percent.
unemployment ceased to be an issue in germany by 1939 with the mobilization for war.
the labor force was actually augmented by the often forced importation of foreign workers and the use of prison labor.
those who were unemployed suffered from a disability of some kind.
this is an average of the industrial indexes in the united kingdom for the rst six months of 1939 only.
thereafter no gures are available until 1946.
sources united states historical statistics vol.
2 statistical yearbook of the league of nations 1938 1939 and 1941 1942 international historical statistics 1750 2005 europe state economy and society in western europe 1815 1975 vol.
this act barred federal administrative ofcials except the highest policy making ofcers from active political campaigning and soliciting.
it also forbade the use of government funds for political purposes as well as the collection of campaign contributions from people receiving relief payments.
the hatch act was broadened in 1940 to place limits on campaign contributions and expenditures but such clever ways of getting around it were found that on the whole the legislation proved disappointing.
by 1938 the new deal had clearly lost most of its early momentum.
magician roosevelt could nd few dazzling new reform rabbits to pull out of his tall silk hat.
in the congressional elections of 1938 the republicans for the rst time cut heavily into the new deal majorities in congress though failing to gain control of either house.
the international crisis that came to a boil in 1938 1939 shifted public attention away from domestic reform and no doubt helped save the political hide of the roosevelt spendocracy the new deal for all practical purposes had shot its bolt.
new deal or raw deal.
foes of the new deal condemned its alleged waste incompetence confusion contradictions and crosspurposes as well as the chiseling and graft in the alphabetical agencies alphabet soup sneered al smith.
roosevelt had done nothing cynics said that an earthquake could not have done better.
critics deplored the employment of crackpot college professors leftist pinkos and outright communists.
such subversives it was charged were trying to make america over in the bolshevik marxist image under rooseveltski the hearst newspapers lambasted the red new deal with a soviet seal endorsed by a moscow hand the strange result of an alien cult in a liberty loving land.
roosevelt was further accused by conser vatives of being jewish roseneld and of tapping too many chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 employment agency by isaac soyer 1937 millions of jobless americans felt the despair soyer captured in this painting as depression era unemployment reached levels never seen before or since in american history.
bright young jewish leftists the jew deal for his drain trust hardheaded businesspeople who had met a payroll were shocked by the leap before you look tryanything once spirit of roosevelt the jolly improviser.
they accused him of confusing noise and movement with progress.
others appreciated the presidents dosomething approach.
humorist will rogers the ropetwirling poet lariat of the era remarked that if roosevelt were to burn down the capitol people would say well we at least got a re started anyhow bureaucratic meddling and regimentation were also bitter complaints of anti new dealers in truth bureaucracy did blossom.
the federal government with its hundreds of thousands of employees became incomparably the largest single business in the country as the states faded further into the background.
promises of budget balancing to say nothing of other promises had own out the window so foes of the new deal pointed out.
the national debt had stood at the already enormous gure of 19 487 000 000 in 1932 and had skyrocketed to 40 440 000 000 by 1939.
america was becoming its critics charged a handout state trying to squander itself into prosperity u s.
stood for unlimited spending such lavish benefactions were undermining the old virtues of thrift and initiative.
ordinary americans once self reliant citizens were getting a bad case of the gimmies their wishbones were becoming larger than their back bones.
in the nineteenth century hard pressed workers went west now they went on relief.
business was bitter.
accusing the new deal of fomenting class strife conser vatives insisted that the laborer and the farmer especially the big operator were being pampered.
why soak the successful.
countless businesspeople especially republicans declared that they could pull themselves out of the depression if they could only get the federal government an interventionist big government off their backs.
private enterprise they charged was being stied by planned economy planned bankruptcy creeping socialism and the philosophy washington can do it better with a federal pill for every ill states rights were being ignored while the government was competing in business with its own citizens under a dictatorship of do gooders the aggressive leadership of roosevelt one man supergovernment also came in for denunciation.
heavy re was especially directed at his attempts to browbeat the supreme court and to create a dummy congress roosevelt had even tried in the 1938 elections with back ring results to purge members of congress who would not march in lockstep with him.
the three senators whom he publicly opposed were all triumphantly reelected.
the most damning indictment of the new deal was that it had failed to cure the depression.
aoat in a sea of red ink some argued it had merely adminis roosevelt s record tered aspirin sedatives and band aids.
many economists came to believe that better results would have been achieved by much greater decit spending.
despite some 20 billion poured out in six years of deficit spending and lending of leaf raking and pump priming the gap was not closed between production and consumption.
there were even more mountainous farm surpluses under roosevelt than under hoover.
millions of dispirited men and women were still unemployed in 1939 after six years of drain strain and pain.
not until world war ii blazed forth in europe was the unemployment headache solved.
fdrs balance sheet new dealers staunchly defended their record.
admitting that there had been some waste they pointed out that relief not economy had been the primary object of their multifront war on the depression.
conceding also that there had been some graft they argued that it had been trivial in view of the immense sums spent and the obvious need for haste.
apologists for roosevelt further declared that the new deal had relieved the worst of the crisis in 1933.
it promoted the philosophy of balancing the human budget and accepted the principle that the federal government was morally bound to prevent mass hunger and starvation by managing the economy.
the washington regime was to be used not feared.
the collapse of americas economic system was averted a fairer distribution of the national income was achieved and the citizens were enabled to regain and retain their self respect.
nobody is going to starve was roosevelts promise.
though hated by business tycoons fdr should have been their patron saint so his admirers claimed.
he deected popular resentments against business and may have saved the american system of free enterprise.
roosevelts quarrel was not with capitalism but with capitalists he purged american capitalism of some of its worst abuses so that it might be saved from itself.
he may even have headed off a more radical swing to the left by a mild dose of what was mistakenly reviled as socialism the head of the american socialist party when once asked if the new deal had carried out the socialist program reportedly replied that it had indeed on a stretcher.
nor roosevelts defenders claimed did the new deal bankrupt the united states the sensational increase in the national debt was caused by world war ii not the new deal.
the national debt was only 40 billion in 1939 but 258 billion in 1945.
roosevelt like jefferson provided bold reform without a bloody revolution at a time in history when some foreign nations were suffering armed uprisings and when many europeans were predicting either communism or fascism for america.
he was upbraided by the left wing radicals for not going far enough by the right wing radicals for going too far.
choosing the middle road he has been called the greatest amer ican conser vative since hamilton.
he was in fact hamiltonian in his espousal of big government but jeffersonian in his concern for the forgotten man demonstrating anew the value of powerful presidential leadership he exercised that power to relieve the erosion of the nations greatest physical resource its people.
he helped preserve democracy in america in a time when democracies abroad were disappearing down the sinkhole of dictatorship.
and in playing this role he unwittingly girded the nation for its part in the titanic war that loomed on the horizon a war in which democracy the world over would be at stake.
our skipper this pro fdr cartoon depicts a condent roosevelt ignoring his critics while heading cheerily toward economic recovery.
in fact fdrs new deal brought neither the recovery he promised nor the ruin his detractors prophesied.
the depression dragged on with only periodic improvement for nearly eight years under his leadership until the cataclysmic emergency of world war ii nally banished unemployment from the land.
chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 chronology roosevelt defeats hoover for presidency bank holiday emergency banking relief act beer and wine revenue act hundred days congress enacts aaa tva holc nra and pwa federal securities act glass steagall banking reform act cwa established twentieth amendment changed calendar of congressional sessions and date of presidential inauguration twenty rst amendment prohibition repealed nazis legally come to power in germany with passage of enabling act gold reserve act securities and exchange commission authorized indian reorga ni zation act fha established frazier lemke farm bankruptcy act key terms brain trust 725 new deal 825 hundred days 827 glass steagall banking reform act 829 civilian conservation corps ccc 830 national recovery administration nra 835 agricultural adjustment administration aaa 837 wpa established wagner act resettlement administration social security act public utility holding company act schechter sick chicken case cio orga nized soil conservation and domestic allotment act roosevelt defeats landon for presidency usha established roosevelt announces court packing plan second aaa fair labor standards act reorga ni zation act hatch act people to know dust bowl 837 tennessee valley authority tva 839 social security act 841 wagner act 841 fair labor standards act 842 congress of industrial organizations cio 843 court packing plan 845 keynesianism 846 franklin delano roosevelt eleanor roosevelt harry l hopkins father charles coughlin francis e townsend huey p kingsh long frances perkins mary mcleod bethune robert f wagner varying viewpoints how radical was the new deal.
t he great depression was both a great calamity and a great opportunity.
how effectively franklin roosevelt responded to the calamity and what use he made of the opportunity are the two great questions that have animated historical debate about the new deal.
some historians have actually denied that there was much of a connection between the depression and the new deal.
arthur m schlesinger jr for example who believed in cycles of reform and reaction in american history wrote that there would very likely have been some sort of new deal in the 1930s even without the depression but most of the rst generation of historians who wrote about the new deal in the 1940s 1950s and early 1960s agreed with carl deglers judgment that the new deal was a revolutionary response to a revolutionary situation in this view though roosevelt never found a means short of war to bring about economic recovery he shrewdly utilized the stubborn economic crisis as a means to enact sweeping reforms.
some leftist scholars writing in the 1960s however notably barton j bernstein charged that the new deal did not reach far enough.
this criticism echoed the socialist complaint in the 1930s that the depression represented the total collapse of american capitalism and that the new deal had muffed the chance truly to remake american society.
roosevelt had the chance these historians argued to redistribute wealth improve race relations and bring the giant corporations to heel.
instead said these critics the new deal simply represented a conser vative holding action to shore up a sagging and corrupt capitalist order.
those charges against the new deal stimulated another generation of scholars in the 1970s 1980s and 1990s to look closely at the concrete institutional attitudinal and economic circumstances in which the new deal unfolded.
historians such as james patterson alan brinkley kenneth jackson harvard sitkoff and lizabeth cohen sometimes loosely referred to as the constraints school concluded that the new deal offered just about as much reform as circumstances allowed and as the majority of americans wanted.
the ndings of these historians are impressive the system of checks and balances limited presidential power the disproportionate inuence of southern democrats in congress stalled attempts to move toward racial justice the federal system in fact inhibited all efforts to initiate change from washington.
most important a majority of the american people at the time wanted to reform capitalism not overthrow it.
industrial workers for example were not hapless pawns upon whom the new deal was foisted frustrating their yearning for more radical change.
instead as david kennedy has argued they sought security and self determination in ways quite compatible with the new deals programs for unemployment insurance old age pensions and guarantees of labors right to organize.
most recently scholars such as alice kesslerharris linda gordon and suzanne mettler have argued that the new deal had a more radical effect on men than on women.
social security for example was designed to assist male breadwinners who were then expected to share their benets with their dependent wives and children.
in addition married women were rarely favored for government jobs in agencies such as the wpa.
as a result many women found themselves cast ever more rmly in the traditional role of wife and mother.
at the time however most people believed that these were fair if unequal solutions to the catastrophic great depression.
perhaps william leuchtenburg summed it up best when he described the new deal as a half way revolution neither radical nor conser vative but accurately reecting the american peoples needs and desires in the 1930s and for a long time thereafter.
the great new deal coalition that dominated american politics for nearly four decades after roosevelts election in 1932 represented a broad consensus in american society about the opportunities and legitimate limits of government efforts to shape the social and economic order.
chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 to learn more alan brinkley the end of reform new deal liberalism in depression and war 1995 voices of protest huey long father coughlin and the great depression 1982 lizabeth cohen making a new deal industrial workers in chicago 1919 1939 rev.
ed 2008 blanche wiesen cook eleanor roosevelt a life 1992.
michael denning the cultural front the laboring of american culture in the twentieth century 1996 james n gregory american exodus the dustbowl migration and okie culture in california 1989 robin d g kelley hammer and hoe alabama communists during the great depression 1990 david kennedy freedom from fear the american people in depression and war 1999 alice kessler harris in pursuit of equity men women and the quest for economic citizenship in twentieth century america 2001 lois scharf eleanor roosevelt first lady of american liberalism 1987 studs terkel hard times an oral history of the great depression 1970 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at franklin d roosevelt and the shadow of war 1933 1941 the epidemic of world lawlessness is spreading.
when an epidemic of physical disease starts to spread the community approves and joins in a quarantine of the patients in order to protect the health of the community against the spread of the disease.
there must be positive endeavors to preserve peace.
franklin d roosevelt chicago quarantine speech 1937 a mericans in the 1930s tried to turn their backs on the worlds problems.
their president at rst seemed to share these views.
the only battle roosevelt sought was against the depression.
america had its own burdens to shoulder and the costs of foreign involvement whether in blood or trea sure simply seemed too great.
but as the clouds of war gathered over europe roosevelt eventually concluded that the united states could no longer remain aloof.
events gradually brought the american people around to his thinking no nation was safe in an era of international anarchy and the world could not remain half enchained and half free.
the london conference the sixty six nation london economic conference meeting in the summer of 1933 revealed how thor oughly roosevelts early foreign policy was subordinated to his strategy for domestic economic recovery.
the delegates to the london conference hoped to organize a coordinated international attack on the global depression.
they were particularly eager to stabilize the values of the various nations currencies and the rates at which they could be exchanged.
exchange rate stabilization was essential to the revival of world trade which had all but evaporated by 1933.
roosevelt at rst agreed to send an american delegation to the conference including secretary of state cordell hull.
but the president soon began to have second thoughts about the conferences agenda.
he wanted to pursue his gold juggling and other inationary policies at home as a means of stimulating american recovery.
an international agreement to maintain the value of the dollar in terms of other currencies might tie his hands and at bottom roosevelt was unwilling to this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 the long economic boom 1950 1970 gross national product began to climb haltingly in 1948.
then beginning about 1950 the american economy surged onto a dazzling plateau of sustained growth that was to last virtually uninterrupted for two decades.
americas economic per for mance became the envy of the world.
national income nearly doubled in the 1950s and almost doubled again in the 1960s shooting through the trillion dollar mark in 1973.
americans some 6 percent of the worlds people were enjoying about 40 percent of the planets wealth.
nothing loomed larger in the history of the post world war ii era than this fantastic eruption of afuence.
it did not enrich all americans and it did coca colonizing the world american consumerism and american products ooded over the globe after world war ii as this 1950 cover from time magazine illustrates.
not touch all people evenly but it transformed the lives of a majority of citizens and molded the agenda of politics and society for at least two generations.
prosperity underwrote social mobility it paved the way for the eventual success of the civil rights movement it funded vast new welfare programs like medicare and it gave americans the condence to exercise unprecedented international leadership in the cold war era.
as the gusher of postwar prosperity poured forth its riches americans drank deeply from the gilded goblet.
millions of depression pinched souls sought to make up for the sufferings of the 1930s.
they determined to get theirs while the getting was good.
a people who had once considered a chicken in every pot the standard of comfort and security now hungered for two cars in every garage swimming pools in their backyards vacation homes and gas guzzling recreational vehicles.
the size of the middle class de ned as households earning between 3 000 and 10 000 a year doubled from pre great depression days and included 60 percent of the american people by the mid 1950s.
by the end of that decade the vast majority of american families owned their own cars and washing machines and nearly 90 percent owned a television set a gadget invented in the 1920s but virtually unknown until the late 1940s.
in another revolution of sweeping consequences almost 60 percent of american families owned their own homes by 1960 compared with less than 40 percent in the 1920s.
of all the beneciaries of postwar prosperity none reaped greater rewards than women.
more than ever urban ofces and shops provided a bonanza of employment for female workers.
the great majority of new jobs created in the postwar era went to women as the ser vice sector of the economy dramatically outgrew the old industrial and manufacturing sectors.
women accounted for a quarter of the american work force at the end of world war ii and for nearly half the labor pool ve decades later.
yet even as women continued their march into the workplace in the 1940s and 1950s popular culture gloried the traditional feminine roles of homemaker and mother.
the clash between the demands of suburban housewifery and the realities of employment eventually sparked a feminist revolt in the 1960s.
the roots of postwar prosperity what propelled this unprecedented economic explosion.
the second world war itself provided a powerful advertising prosperity 1956 his ford advertisement in a popular magazine encouraged readers to buy a second car.
by the mid 1950s once manufacturers had met the demand for cars homes appliances and other consumer goods that a decade and a half of depression and world war had pent up they worried about how to keep expanding their markets.
planned obsolescence changing design frequently enough to necessitate replacement purchasing was one strategy.
altering expectations about what consumers needed t was another.
this advertisement suggests that the up to date family living in its modern style suburban home had no choice but to own two cars one for the male breadwinners business the other for the wifes ferrying the family what kinds of gender role prescriptions are reinforced in this advertisement.
what assumptions has ford made about prospective buyers of its cars.
how much can mass advertising tell us about the actual values of americans living at a particular time.
chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 outlays percentage of federal budget 1940 1 6 1 7 17 5 5 1 32 2 13 7 52 2 48 1 81 7 3 7 3 0 16 5 495 3 5 2 17 9 294 5 6 4 23 9 272 1 4 9 26 7 299 3 8 1 22 7 252 7 9 3 41 8 134 0 percentage of gnp gdp 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 4 0 20 0 billions of dollars unadjusted for inflation percentage 9 10 percentage figure 36 1 national defense budget 1940 2005 gross national product gnp was used before 1960.
it includes income from overseas investment and excludes prots generated in the united states but accruing to foreign accounts.
gross domestic product gdp used thereafter excludes overseas prots owed to american accounts but includes the value of all items originating in the united states regardless of the destination of the prots.
until recent years those factors made for negligible differences in the calculation of national and domestic product but most economists now prefer the latter approach.
sources congressional budget ofce historical tables statistical abstract of the united states relevant years whitehouse gov omb budget fy2007 budget html.
while other countries had been ravaged by years of ghting the united states had used the war crisis to re up its smokeless factories and rebuild its depression plagued economy.
invigorated by battle america had almost effortlessly come to dominate the ruined global landscape of the postwar period.
ominously much of the glittering prosperity of the 1950s and 1960s rested on the underpinnings of colossal military budgets leading some critics to speak of a permanent war economy see figure 36 1.
the economic upturn of 1950 was fueled by massive appropriations for the korean war and defense spending accounted for some 10 percent of the gnp throughout the ensuing decade.
pentagon dollars primed the pumps of high technology industries such as aerospace plastics and electronics areas in which the united states reigned supreme over all foreign competitors.
the military budget also nanced much scientic research and development r and d hence the name of one of the most famous think tanks the rand corporation.
more than ever before unlocking the secrets of nature was the key to unleashing economic growth.
cheap energy also fed the economic boom.
american and european companies controlled the ow of abundant petroleum from the sandy expanses of the middle east and they kept prices low.
americans doubled their consumption of inexpensive and seemingly inexhaustible oil in the quarter century after the war.
anticipating a limitless future of low cost fuels they ung out endless ribbons of highways installed airconditioning in their homes and engineered a sixfold increase in the countrys electricity generating capacity between 1945 and 1970.
spidery grids of electrical cables carried the pent up power of oil gas coal and falling water to activate the tools of workers on the factory oor.
with the forces of nature increasingly harnessed in their hands workers chalked up spectacular gains in productivity the amount of output per hour of work.
in the two decades after the outbreak of the korean war in 1950 productivity increased at an average rate of more than 3 percent per year.
gains in productivity were also enhanced by the rising educational level of the work force.
by 1970 nearly 90 percent of the school age population was enrolled in educational institutions a dramatic contrast with the opening years of the century when only half of this age group had attended school.
better educated and the rise of the sunbelt better equipped american workers in 1970 could produce nearly twice as much in an hours labor as they had in 1950.
productivity was the key to prosperity.
rising productivity in the 1950s and 1960s virtually doubled the average americans standard of living in the postwar quarter century.
also contributing to the vigor of the postwar economy were some momentous changes in the nations basic economic structure.
conspicuous was the accelerating shift of the work force out of agriculture which achieved productivity gains virtually unmatched by any other economic sector.
the family farm nearly became an antique artifact as consolidation produced giant agribusinesses able to employ costly machinery.
thanks largely to mechanization and to rich new fertilizers as well as to government subsidies and price supports one farmworker by the centurys end could agribusiness expensive machinery of the sort shown here made most of american agriculture a capitalintensive phenomenally productive big business by the twenty rst century and sounded the death knell for many small scale family farms.
produce food for over fty people compared with about fteen people in the 1940s.
farmers whose forebears had busted sod with oxen or horses now plowed their elds in air conditioned tractor cabs listening on their stereophonic radios to weather forecasts or the latest chicago commodities market quotations.
once the mighty backbone of the agricultural republic and still some 15 percent of the labor force at the end of world war ii farmers made up a slim 2 percent of working americans by the turn of the twenty rst century yet they fed much of the world.
the smiling sunbelt the convulsive economic changes of the post 1945 period shook and shifted the american people amplifying the population redistribution set in motion by world war ii.
as immigrants and westward trekking pioneers americans had always been a people on the move but they were astonishingly footloose in the postwar years.
for some three decades after 1945 an average of 30 million people changed residences every year.
families especially felt the strain as distance divided parents from children and brothers and sisters from one another.
one sign of this sort of stress was the phenomenal popularity of advice books on child rearing especially dr benjamin spocks the common sense book of baby and child care.
first published in 1945 it instructed millions of parents during the ensuing decades in the kind of homely wisdom that was once transmitted naturally from grandparent to parent and from parent to child.
in uid postwar neighborhoods friendships were also hard to sustain.
mobility could exact a high human cost in loneliness and isolation.
especially striking was the growth of the sunbelt a fteen state area stretching in a smiling crescent from virginia through florida and texas to arizona and cal i fornia.
this region increased its population at a rate nearly double that of the old industrial zones of the northeast the frostbelt.
in the 1950s cal ifornia alone accounted for one fth of the entire nations population growth and by 1963 had outdistanced new york as the most populous state a position it still holds in the early years of the twenty rst century with more than 36 million people or more than one out of every eight americans.
the south and southwest were a new frontier for americans after world war ii.
these modern pioneers chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 wa nh vt 146 me 164 mt nd 58 or 65 44 3 mn 139 id 72 sd 142 75 ca ut 258 241 il 46 ks 44 az 956 pa ia co 252 mi 13 33 ok nm 59 183 114 81 ms 196 nc tn 34 tx va 128 42 al 49 sc ga 101 163 la 69 fl 542 states growing faster than national rate of 97 1950 2005 ak 415 hi 214 states growing slower than national rate of 97 1950 2005 came in search of jobs a better climate and lower taxes.
jobs they found in abundance especially in the cal ifornia electronics industry in the aerospace complexes in florida and texas and in the huge military installations that powerful southern congressional representatives secured for their districts see map 36 1.
a niagara of federal dollars accounted for much of the sunbelts prosperity though ironically southern and western politicians led the cry against govern nj 75 80 165 wv 9 ky ar ri 36 ct de 44 59 47 18 oh in mo 45 36 ny 30 59 ne nv 1 409 ma wi 61 19 wy md 139 dc 31 map 36 1 distribution of population increase 1950 2005 states with gures higher than 97 percent were growing faster than the national average between 1950 and 2005.
note that much of the growth was in the sunbelt a loose geographical concept as some deep south states had very little population growth whereas the mountain and pacic states were booming.
sources statistical abstract of the united states and u s census relevant years.
interactive map ment spending.
by the early twenty rst century states in the south and west were annually receiving some 444 billion more in federal funds than those in the northeast and midwest.
a new economic war between the states seemed to be shaping up.
northeasterners and their allies from the hard hit heavy industry region of the ohio valley the rustbelt tried to rally political support with the sarcastic slogan the north shall rise again sunbelt prosperity the old and new west are evident in this view of booming dallas.
the growth of the suburbs these dramatic shifts of population and wealth further broke the historic grip of the north on the nations political life.
every elected occupant of the white house from 1964 to 2008 hailed from the sunbelt and the regions congressional representation rose as its population grew.
the rush to the suburbs in all regions americas modern migrants if they were white ed from the cities to the burgeoning new suburbs see makers of america the suburbanites pp.
while other industrial countries struggled to rebuild their war ravaged cities government policies in the united states encouraged movement away from urban centers.
federal housing administration fha and veterans administration va homeloan guarantees made it more economically attractive to own a home in the suburbs than to rent an apartment in the city.
tax deductions for interest payments on home mortgages provided additional nancial incentive.
and government built highways that sped commuters from suburban homes to city jobs further facilitated this mass migration.
by 1960 one in every four americans dwelt in suburbia and a half century later more than half the nations population did.
the construction industry boomed in the 1950s and 1960s to satisfy this demand.
pioneered by innovators like the levitt brothers whose rst levittown sprouted on new yorks long island in the 1940s builders revolutionized the techniques of home construction.
erecting hundreds or even thousands of dwellings in a single project specialized crews work ing from standardized plans laid foundations while others raised factory assembled framing modules put on roofs strung wires installed plumbing and n ished the walls in record time and with cost cutting efciency.
snooty critics wailed about the aesthetic monotony of the suburban tract developments but eager home buyers nevertheless moved into them by the millions.
white ight to the leafy green suburbs left the inner cities especially those in the northeast and midwest black brown and broke.
migrating blacks from the south lled up the urban neighborhoods that were abandoned by the departing white middle class see makers of america the great african american migration pp.
in effect the incoming blacks imported the grinding poverty of the rural south into the inner cores of northern cities.
taxpaying businesses ed with their afuent customers from downtown shops to suburban shopping malls another post world war ii invention.
government policies sometimes aggravated this spreading pattern of residential segregation.
fha administrators citing the risk of making loans to blacks and other unharmonious racial or nationality groups often refused them mortgages for private home purchases thus limiting black mobility out of the inner cities and driv ing many minorities into public housing projects.
even public housing programs frequently followed a so called neighborhood composition rule which effectively built housing for blacks in neighborhoods that were already identied as predominantly black thus solidifying racial separation.
the postwar baby boom of all the upheavals in postwar america none was more dramatic than the baby boom the huge leap in the birthrate in the decade and a half after 1945.
condent young men and women tied the nuptial knot in record numbers at wars end and they began immediately to ll the nations empty cradles.
they thus touched off a demographic explosion that added more than 50 million bawling babies to the nations population by the end of the 1950s.
the soaring birthrate nally crested in 1957 and was followed by a deepening birth dearth.
by 1973 fertility rates had dropped below the point necessary to maintain existing population gures without further immigration.
this boom or bust cycle of births begot a bulging wave along the american population curve.
as the oversize postwar generation grew to maturity it was destined like the fabled pig passing through the python to strain and distort many aspects of american life.
elementary school enrollments for example swelled to nearly 34 million pupils in 1970.
then began a steady decline as the onward marching age group left in its wake closed schools and unemployed teachers.
the maturing babies of the postwar boom sent economic shock waves undulating through the decades.
as tykes and toddlers in the 1940s and 1950s they made up a lucrative market for manufacturers of canned food and other baby products.
as teenagers in the 1960s the same youngsters spent an estimated 20 billion a year for clothes and recorded rock music and their sheer numbers laid the basis of the much ballyhooed youth culture of that tumultuous decade.
in the 1970s the consumer tastes of the aging makers of america theafricanthe great suburbanites american migration f ew images evoke more vividly the prosperity of the postwar era than aerial photographs of sprawling suburbs.
neat rows of look alike tract houses each with a driveway and lawn and here and there a backyard swimming pool came to symbolize the capacity of the economy to deliver the american dream to millions of families.
suburbanization was hardly new.
well off city dwellers had beaten paths to leafy outlying neighborhoods since the nineteenth century.
but after 1945 the steady ow became a stampede.
the baby boom new highways government guarantees for mortgage lending and favorable tax policies all made suburbia blossom.
who were the americans racing to the new postwar suburbs.
war veterans led the way in the late 1940s aided by veterans administration mortgages that featured tiny down payments and low interest rates.
the general public soon followed.
the federal housing administration fha offered insured mortgages with low down payments and 2 to 3 percent interest rates on thirty year loans.
with deals like this it was hardly surprising that american families ocked into levittowns built by william and alfred levitt and other similar suburban developments.
people of all kinds found their way to suburbia heading for neighborhoods that varied from the posh to the plain.
yet for all this diversity the overwhelming majority of suburbanites were white and middle class.
in 1967 sociologist herbert gans published the levittowners based on his own move to a levitt built community outside philadelphia.
he described suburban families in tract developments as predominantly thirdor fourth generation americans with some college education and at least two children.
men tended to work in either white collar jobs or upper level blue collar positions such as foremen.
women usually worked in the home so much so that suburbia came to symbolize the domestic con nement that feminists in the 1960s and 1970s decried in their campaign for womens rights.
the house itself became more important than ever as postwar suburbanites built their leisure lives around television home improvement projects and barbecues on the patio.
the center of family life shifted to the fenced in backyard as neighborly city habits of visiting on the front stoop gabbing on the sidewalk and strolling to local stores disappeared.
institutions that had thrived as social centers in the city churches womens clubs fraternal orga ni zations and taverns had a tougher time attracting patrons in the privatized world of postwar suburbia.
life in the suburbs was a boon to the automobile as parents jumped behind the wheel to shuttle children groceries and golf clubs to and fro.
the second car once an unheard of luxury became a practical necessity for suburban families constantly on the go a car culture sprang up with new destinations like drive thru restaurants and drive in movies.
roadside shopping centers edged out downtowns as places to shop.
meanwhile the new interstate highway system enabled breadwinners to live farther and farther from their jobs and still commute to work daily.
drive in caf in los angeles the mother and model of all suburbias middle class african americans began to move to the suburbs in substantial numbers by the 1980s but even that migration failed to alter dramatically the racial divide of metropolitan america.
black suburbanites settled in towns like rolling oaks outside miami or brook glen near atlanta black middle class towns in white majority counties.
by the end of the twentieth century suburbia as a whole was more racially diverse than at midcentury.
but old patterns of urban white ight and residential segregation endured.
aerial view of the on ramps to a typical new interstate highway 1950s many suburbanites continued to depend on cities for jobs though by the 1980s the suburbs themselves became important sites of employment.
wherever they worked suburbanites turned their backs on the city and its problems.
they fought to maintain their communities as secluded retreats independent municipalities with their own taxes schools and zoning restrictions designed to keep out public housing and the poor.
even the naming of towns and streets reected a pastoral ideal.
poplar terrace and mountainview drive were popular street names east paterson new jersey was renamed elmwood park in 1973.
with a majority of americans living in suburbs by the 1980s cities lost their political clout.
bereft of state and federal aid cities festered with worsening social problems poverty drug addiction and crime.
moving to the suburbs after world war ii americans by the millions moved to suburban housing developments like this one.
although criticized for their architectural monotony and cultural barrenness the suburbs provided inexpensive and spacious housing for growing families seeking to escape the crowded connes of the cities.
chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 baby boomers changed again and the most popular jeans maker began marketing pants with a fuller cut for those former kids who could no longer squeeze into their size thirty levis.
in the 1980s the horde of baby boomers bumped and jostled one another in the job market struggling to get a foothold on the crowded ladder of social mobility.
as the boomers entered middle age a secondary boom of children peaked in the early 1990s a faint demographic echo of the post war population explosion.
the impact of the huge postwar generation will continue to ripple through american society well into the twenty rst century when its members pass eventually into retirement placing enormous strains on the social security system.
truman the gutty man from missouri presiding over the opening of the postwar period was an accidental president harry s truman.
the moon the stars and all the planets had fallen on him he remarked when he was called upon to shoulder the dead roosevelts awesome burdens of leadership.
trim and owlishly bespectacled with his graying hair and friendly toothy grin truman was called the average mans average man even his height ve feet eight inches was average.
the rst president in many years without a college education he had farmed served as an artillery ofcer in france during world war i and failed as a haberdasher.
he then tried his hand at precinct level missouri politics through which he rose from a judgeship to the u s senate.
though a protg of a notorious political machine in kansas city he had managed to keep his own hands clean.
the problems of the postwar period were staggering and the suddenly burdened new president at rst approached his tasks with humility.
but gradually he evolved from a shrinking pipsqueak into a scrappy little cuss gaining condence to the point of cockiness.
when the soviet foreign minister complained i have never been talked to like that in my life truman shot back carry out your agreements and you wont get talked to like that truman later boasted i gave him the one two right to the jaw a smallish man thrust suddenly into a giant job truman permitted designing old associates of the missouri gang to gather around him and like grant was stubbornly loyal to them when they were caught with cream on their whiskers.
on occasion he would send critics hot tempered and profane s o b letters.
most troubling in trying to demonstrate to a skeptical public his decisiveness and power of command he was inclined to go off half cocked or stick mulishly to a wrongheaded notion.
to err is truman cynics jibed.
but if he was sometimes small in the small things he was often big in the big things.
he had down home authenticity few pretensions rock solid probity and a lot of that old fashioned character trait called moxie.
not one to dodge responsibility he placed a sign on his white house desk that read the buck stops here among his favorite sayings was if you cant stand the heat get out of the kitchen yalta bargain or betrayal.
vast and silent the soviet union continued to be the great enigma.
the conference at tehran in 1943 where roosevelt rst met joseph stalin man to man had cleared the air somewhat but much remained unresolved especially questions about the postwar fates of germany eastern europe and asia.
the yalta conference the nal fateful conference of the big three took place in february 1945.
at this former tsarist resort on the relatively warm shores of the black sea stalin churchill and the fast failing roosevelt reached momentous agreements after pledging their faith with vodka.
final plans were laid for smashing the buckling german lines and assigning occupation zones in germany to the victorious powers.
stalin agreed that poland with revised boundaries should have a representative government based on free elections a pledge he soon broke.
bulgaria and romania were likewise to have free elections a promise also outed.
the big three further announced plans for fashioning a new international peacekeeping organi zation the united nations.
of all the grave decisions at yalta the most controversial concerned the far east.
the atomic bomb had not yet been tested and washington strategists expected frightful american casualties in the projected assault on japan.
from roosevelts standpoint it seemed highly desirable that stalin should enter the asian war pin down japa nese troops in manchuria and korea and lighten american losses.
but soviet casualties had already been enormous and moscow presumably needed inducements to bring it into the far eastern conagration.
horse trader stalin was in a position at yalta to exact a high price.
he agreed to attack japan within three months after the collapse of germany and he the big three at yalta the big three from left to right churchill roosevelt and stalin sit somberly at their fateful meeting at yalta in february 1945.
roosevelt was only weeks away from death.
later redeemed this pledge in full.
in return the soviets were promised the southern half of sakhalin island lost by russia to japan in 1905 and japans kurile islands as well.
the soviet union was also granted joint control over the railroads of chinas manchuria and special privileges in the two key seaports of that area dairen and port arthur.
these concessions evidently would give stalin control over vital industrial centers of americas weakening chinese ally.
as it turned out moscows muscle was not necessary to knock out japan.
critics charged that roosevelt had sold jiang jieshi chiang kai shek down the river when he conceded control of manchuria to stalin.
the consequent undermining of chinese morale so the accusation ran contributed powerfully to jiangs overthrow by the communists four years later.
the critics also assailed the sellout of poland and other eastern european countries.
roosevelts defenders countered that stalin with his mighty red army could have secured much more of china if he wished and that the yalta conference really set limits on his ambitions.
apologists for roosevelt also contended that if stalin had kept his promise to support free elections in poland and the liberated balkans the sorry sequel would have been different.
actually soviet troops had then occupied much of eastern europe and a war to throw them out was unthinkable.
the fact is that the big three at yalta were not drafting a comprehensive peace settlement at most they were sketching general intentions and testing one anothers reactions.
later critics who howled about broken promises overlooked that fundamental point.
in the case of poland roosevelt admitted that the yalta agreement was so elastic that the russians can stretch it all the way from yalta to washington without ever technically breaking it more specic understandings among the wartime allies especially the two emerging superpowers the united states and the soviet union awaited the arrival of peace.
the united states and the soviet union history provided little hope that the united states and the soviet union would reach cordial understandings about the shape of the postwar world.
mutual suspicions were ancient abundant and abiding.
communism and capitalism were historically hostile social philosophies.
the united states had refused ofcially to recognize the bolshevik revolutionary government chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 the communist menace first appearing in the new york daily news on january 6 1946 this map reected americans rising anxiety after world war ii that the soviet union was an aggressively expansionist power relentlessly gobbling up territory and imposing its will across both europe and asia.
in moscow until it was sixteen years old in 1933.
soviet skepticism toward the west was nourished by the british and american delays in opening up a second front against germany while the soviet army paid a grisly price to roll the nazi invaders back across russia and eastern europe.
britain and america had also frozen their soviet ally out of the project to develop atomic weapons further feeding stalins mistrust.
the washington government rubbed salt in soviet wounds when it abruptly terminated vital lend lease aid to a battered ussr in 1945 and spurned moscows plea for a 6 billion reconstruction loan while approving a similar loan of 3 75 billion to britain in 1946.
different visions of the postwar world also separated the two superpowers.
stalin aimed above all to guarantee the security of the soviet union.
the ussr had twice in the twentieth century been stabbed in its heartland by attacks across the windswept plains of eastern europe.
stalin made it clear from the outset of the war that he was determined to have friendly governments along the soviet western border especially in poland.
by maintaining an extensive soviet sphere of inuence in eastern and central europe the ussr could protect itself and consolidate its revolutionary base as the worlds leading communist country.
to many americans that sphere of inuence the new united nations looked like an ill gained empire doubting that soviet goals were purely defensive they remembered the earlier bolshevik call for world revolution.
stalins emphasis on spheres also clashed with franklin roosevelts wilsonian dream of an open world decolonized demilitarized and democratized with a strong international orga ni zation to oversee global peace.
even the ways in which the united states and the soviet union resembled each other were troublesome.
both countries had been largely isolated from world affairs before world war ii the united states through choice the soviet union through rejection by the other powers.
both nations also had a history of conducting a kind of missionary diplomacy of trying to export to all the world the political doctrines precipitated out of their respective revolutionary origins.
unaccustomed to their great power roles unfamiliar with or even antagonistic to each other and each believing in the universal applicability of its own particular ideology america and the ussr suddenly found themselves staring eyeball to eyeball over the prostrate body of a battered europe a europe that had been the traditional center of international affairs.
in these circumstances some sort of confrontation was virtually unavoidable.
the wartime grand alliance of the united states the soviet union and britain had been a misbegotten child of necessity kept alive only until the mutual enemy was crushed.
when the hated hitler fell suspicion and rivalry between communistic despotic russia and capitalistic democratic america were all but inevitable.
in a fateful progression of events marked often by misperceptions as well as by genuine con icts of interest the two powers provoked each other into a tense standoff known as the cold war.
enduring four and a half decades the cold war not only shaped soviet american relations it overshadowed the entire postwar international order in every corner of the globe.
the cold war also molded societies and economies and the lives of individual people all over the planet.
shaping the postwar world despite these obstacles the united states did manage at wars end to erect some of the structures that would support roosevelts vision of an open world.
at the bretton woods conference in bretton woods new hampshire in 1944 the western allies established the international monetary fund imf to encourage world trade by regulating currency exchange rates.
they also founded the international bank for reconstruction and development world bank to promote economic growth in war ravaged and underdeveloped areas.
in contrast to its behavior after world war i the united states took the lead in creating these important international bodies and supplied most of their funding.
the stubborn soviets declined to participate see thinking globally the era of globalization pp.
as ags wept at half mast the united nations conference opened on schedule april 25 1945 despite roosevelts dismaying death thirteen days earlier.
unlike woodrow wilson roosevelt had shrewdly moved to establish the new international body before the wars conclusion so as to capitalize on the wartime spirit of cooperation and insulate planning for the united nations from the potentially divisive issue of the peace settlement.
meeting at the san francisco war memorial opera house representatives from fty nations fashioned the united nations charter.
the united nations u n was a successor to the old league of nations but it differed from its predecessor in signicant ways.
born in a moment of idealism and designed to prevent another great power war the league had adopted rules denying the veto power to any party to a dispute.
the u n by contrast more realistically provided that no member of the security council dominated by the big five powers the united states britain the ussr france and china could have action taken against it without its consent.
the league in short presumed great power con ict the u n presumed great power cooperation.
both approaches had their liabilities.
the u n also featured the general assembly which could be controlled by smaller countries.
in contrast to the chilly american reception of the league in 1919 the senate overwhelmingly approved the u n charter on july 28 1945 by a vote of 89 to 2 not least because it provided safeguards for american sovereignty and freedom of action.
the united nations setting up its permanent glass home in new york city had some gratifying initial successes.
it helped preserve peace in iran kashmir and other trouble spots.
it played a large role in creating the new jewish state of israel.
the u n trusteeship council guided former colonies to independence.
through such arms as unesco united nations educational scientic and cultural organization fao food and agricultural organization and who world health organization the u n brought benets to peoples the world over.
thinking globally the era of globalization w oodrow wilson had envisioned a world order organized around the principles of self determination and free trade a world made safe for democracy but wilsons dream perished in the turbulent aftermath of world war i.
the united states retreated into a selsh and shortsighted isolationism hiking tariffs to record levels refusing to join the new league of nations and stoutly asserting its neutrality even as the great depression plunged the planet into economic chaos and world war ii eventually wreathed the globe in re and destruction.
franklin roosevelt had served wilson as assistant secretary of the navy.
he had shared his chiefs idealistic goals as well as wilsons bitter disappointment when they failed to be achieved.
fdr also believed that many of the ills that beset the world in the post world war i era could have been avoided if only the united states had played an international role commensurate with its power and its own highest ideals.
he resolved not to squander another opportunity for american international leadership.
so on august 9 1941 as much of europe writhed under the nazi jackboot president roosevelt rendezvoused with british prime minister winston churchill aboard two warships anchored off the coast of newfoundland.
after three days of talks they publicly announced their vision of the postwar world.
what came to be called the atlantic charter proclaimed for all nations the rights to selfdetermination and free access to trade.
it also foresaw the creation of a new international organization to replace the defunct league of nations.
and it declared that a postwar peace must ensure freedom from fear and want for all individuals every where the rst time global economic prosperity was formally declared to be an objective of any countrys foreign policy.
roosevelt and churchill had drafted the charter for a new era in american diplomacy and for a new phase of world history as well.
after world war ii the united states victorious and robust at the end of a conict that had laid waste all the traditional great powers was uniquely positioned to shape the world order after world war ii.
to a remarkable degree it followed the wilsonian principles embodied in the atlantic charter.
it gave birth to an array of multilateral institutions to promote trade and international investment support the rule of law and nurture democracy.
they included the world bank to fund postwar reconstruction the international monetary fund imf to stabilize world currencies and the general agreement on tariffs and trade gatt to lower barriers to international commerce.
in the ensuing decades 102 nations accounting great hopes for world peace with the united nations 1947 the achievements of the new international regime were dramatic.
international trade doubled in the 1950s and again in the 1960s.
by centurys end the volume of global commerce was ten times larger than in 1950 see table 36 1 increased trade fueled postwar recovery in europe and japan and set several underdeveloped countries notably taiwan singapore south korea india and china on the path to modernization and prosperity.
for 80 percent of world trade signed gatt succeeded by the world trade organization or wto in the 1990s.
the united states also took the lead in founding and funding the united nations u n which worked to arbitrate international disputes improve standards of living worldwide and encourage decolonization particularly in asia and africa.
as roosevelt and churchill anticipated the benets of trade extended far beyond rising incomes.
as goods owed across borders so too did advances in medicine and nutri table 36 1 international trade 1948 2005 total volume of world trade in billions of u s dollars total volume of u s exports in billions of u s dollars share of world exports united states europe africa middle east asia gatt wto members 1 838 3 675 7 369 10 159 sources all data except total volume of u s exports are from world trade organization international trade statistics 2005.
u s export data for 1948 1993 are from united states historical statistics of the united states vol.
5 data for 2003 and 2005 are from foreign exports division u s census bureau.
because different or ganizations rely on different methodologies for estimating total exports wto estimates used to compute the u s share of world exports differ slightly from those presented in this table.
since 1950 the average life expectancy worldwide has increased by twenty years with the biggest gains in the developing world.
rising prosperity and improved standards of living also strengthened the middle classes in developing countries with democracy often following in the footsteps of globalization.
the number of electoral democracies increased from 44 in 1950 to 120 in 2000.
recent studies conrm that states with open trade policies are three times more likely to protect civil liberties than those without such policies.
for some four decades the full effects of this liberalized world order were mufed by the cold war.
eastern europe and the soviet union in particular were conspicuous nonparticipants in the emerging global economy and the united states often supported repressive undemocratic regimes simply to keep them out of the soviet camp.
but the end of the cold war and the dissolution of the soviet bloc in the early 1990s unleashed the full force of globalization.
international trade investment and migration exploded.
more than fty new electoral democracies notably in eastern europe asia and latin america emerged in the last decade of the twentieth century.
global trade already at record levels doubled between 1990 and 2003.
despite these gains problems persist.
critics decry the job insecurity exploitative labor practices inationary pressures widening income disparities both within and between nations and environmental degradation that have accompanied worldwide industrial growth.
many african nations have proved chronically unable to overcome political instability systemic poverty and devastating epidemics.
africas woes and those of many middle eastern states as well demonstrate that many parts of the world are still very far from safe for democracy.
yet the liberalized world order that the united states took the lead in building after world war ii left an impressive legacy of international stability burgeoning prosperity and freedom from fear and want for millions of human beings a lasting testament to wilsons vision and to roosevelts leadership.
chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 in june 1946 bernard baruch 1870 1965 in presenting his plan for the control of atomic energy to the united nations said we are here to make a choice between the quick and the dead.
that is our business.
behind the black portent of the new atomic age lies a hope which seized upon with faith can work our salvation.
if we fail then we have damned every man to be the slave of fear.
let us not deceive ourselves we must elect world peace or world destruction.
the fearsome new technology of the atom put to an early test the spirit of cooperation on which the u n had been founded.
the new orga ni zation failed badly.
u s delegate bernard baruch called in 1946 for a u n agency free from the great power veto with worldwide authority over atomic energy weapons and research.
the soviet delegate countered that the possession of nuclear weapons simply be outlawed by every nation.
president truman said that it would be folly to throw away our gun until we are sure the rest of the world cant arm against us the suspicious soviets felt the same way and used their veto power to scuttle the proposals.
a priceless opportunity to tame the nuremberg war crimes trial 1946 of the nazi defendants pictured here from left to right in the rst row hermann goering committed suicide during the trial rudolf hess was sentenced to life in prison and died of an apparent suicide in his cell in 1987 joachim von ribbentrop wilhelm keitel and ernest kaltenbrunner were executed in the second row karl doenitz was sentenced to ten years in prison erich raeder was sentenced to life in prison but released in 1955 baldur von schirach was sentenced to twenty years in prison and fritz sauckel was executed.
the nuclear monster in its infancy was lost.
the atomic clock ticked ominously on for the next forty ve years shadowing all relations between the soviet union and the united states and threatening the very future of the human race.
the problem of germany hitlers ruined reich posed especially thorny problems for all the wartime allies.
they agreed only that the cancer of nazism had to be cut out of the german body politic which involved punishing nazi leaders for war crimes.
the allies joined in trying twenty two top culprits at the nuremberg war crimes trial dur ing 1945 1946.
accusations included committing crimes against the laws of war and humanity and plotting aggressions contrary to solemn treaty pledges.
justice nuremberg style was harsh.
twelve of the accused nazis swung from the gallows and seven were sentenced to long jail terms.
foxy hermann goering whose blubbery chest had once blazed with ribbons cheated the hangman a few hours before his scheduled execution by swallowing a hidden cyanide capsule.
the trials of several small fry nazis continued for years.
legal critics in america and elsewhere condemned these proceedings as judicial lynchings because the victims were tried for offenses that had not been clear cut crimes when the war began.
the division of germany denmark 10e north sea baltic sea berlin hannover braunschweig frankfurt ce ze to u s s r os fr munich berlin east germany lo west berlin va k east berlin ia vienna potsdam airport austria switzerland poland prague ch an w est germany 1948 1990 c lux.
to poland east germany 1949 1990 bonn 50n 20e hamburg bremen neth.
berlin wall 1961 1989 hungary n 200 km.
prewar 1937 boundary of germany 200 mi.
ad ria tic i t a ly se a map 36 2 postwar partition of germany germany lost much of its territory in the east to poland and the soviet union.
the military occupation zones were the bases for the formation of two separate countries in 1949 when the british french and american zones became west germany and the soviet zone became east germany.
the two germanys were reunited in 1990.
berlin remained under joint four power occupation from 1945 to 1990 and became a focus and symbol of cold war tensions.
military occupation zones territory lost by germany u s boundary between east and west germany 1949 1990 british airlift route soviet french interactive map beyond punishing the top nazis the allies could agree on little about postwar germany.
some american hitler haters noting that an industrialized germany had been a brutal aggressor at rst wanted to dismantle german factories and reduce the country to a potato patch.
the soviets denied american economic assistance were determined to rebuild their shattered land by extracting enormous reparations from the germans.
both these desires clashed headlong with the reality that an industrial healthy german economy was indispensable to the recovery of europe.
the americans soon came to appreciate that fact.
but the soviets deeply fearful of another blitzkrieg resisted all efforts to revitalize germany.
along with austria germany had been divided at wars end into four military occupation zones each assigned to one of the big four powers france britain america and the ussr see map 36 2.
the western allies refused to allow moscow to bleed their zones of the reparations that stalin insisted he had been promised at yalta.
they also began to promote the idea of a reunited germany.
the communists responded by tightening their grip on their eastern zone.
before long it was apparent that germany would remain indenitely divided.
west germany eventually became an independent country wedded to the west.
east germany along with other soviet dominated eastern european countries such as poland and hungary became nominally independent satellite states bound to the soviet union.
eastern europe virtually disappeared from western sight behind the iron curtain of secrecy and isolation that stalin clanged down across former british prime minister winston churchill 1874 1965 in a highly controversial speech at fulton missouri march 1946 warned of soviet expansionism from stettin in the baltic to trieste in the adriatic an iron curtain has descended across the continent.
chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 europe from the baltic to the adriatic.
the division of europe would endure for more than four decades.
with germany now split in two there remained the problem of the rubble heap known as berlin.
lying deep within the soviet zone this beleaguered isle in a red sea had been broken like germany as a whole into sectors occupied by troops of each of the four victorious powers.
in 1948 following controversies over german currency reform and four power control the soviets abruptly choked off all rail and highway access to berlin.
they evidently reasoned that the allies would be starved out.
berlin became a hugely symbolic issue for both sides.
at stake was not only the fate of the city but a test of wills between moscow and washington.
the americans orga nized the gigantic berlin airlift in the midst of hair trigger tension.
for nearly a year ying some of the very aircraft that had recently dropped bombs on berlin american pilots ferried thousands of tons berlin 1948 grateful city residents watch a u s airplane y in much needed supplies.
of supplies a day to the grateful berliners their former enemies.
western europeans took heart from this vivid demonstration of americas determination to honor its commitments in europe.
the soviets their bluff dramatically called nally lifted their blockade in may 1949.
in the same year the governments of the two germanys east and west were formally established.
the cold war had icily congealed.
the cold war congeals a crafty stalin also probed the wests resolve at other sensitive points including oil rich iran.
seeking to secure oil concessions similar to those held by the british and americans stalin in 1946 broke an agreement to remove his troops from irans northernmost province which the ussr had occupied with british and american approval during world war ii.
instead he used the troops to aid a rebel movement.
truman sent off a stinging protest and the soviet dictator backed down.
moscows hard line policies in germany eastern europe and the middle east wrought a psychological pearl harbor.
the eyes of americans were jarred wide open by the kremlins apparent unwillingness to continue the wartime partnership.
any remaining goodwill from the period of comradeship in arms evaporated in a cloud of dark distrust.
im tired of babying the soviets truman remarked privately in 1946 as attitudes on both sides began to harden frostily.
trumans piecemeal responses to various soviet challenges took on intellectual coherence in 1947 with the formulation of the containment doctrine.
crafted by a brilliant young diplomat and soviet specialist george f kennan this concept held that russia whether tsarist or communist was relentlessly expansionary.
but the kremlin was also cautious kennan argued and the ow of soviet power into every nook and cranny available to it could be stemmed by rm and vigilant containment truman embraced kennans advice when he formally and publicly adopted a get tough with russia policy in 1947.
his rst dramatic move was triggered by word that heavily burdened britain could no longer bear the nancial and military load of defending greece against communist pressures.
if greece fell turkey would presumably collapse and the strategic eastern mediterranean would pass into the soviet orbit.
in a surprise appearance the president went before congress on march 12 1947 and requested sup the truman doctrine and the marshall plan port for what came to be known as the truman doctrine.
specically he asked for 400 million to bolster greece and turkey which congress quickly granted.
more generally he declared that it must be the policy of the united states to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures a sweeping and openended commitment of vast and worrisome proportions.
critics then and later charged that truman had overreacted by promising unlimited support to any tinhorn despot who claimed to be resisting communist aggression critics also complained that the truman doctrine needlessly polarized the world into pro soviet and pro american camps and unwisely construed the soviet threat as primarily military in nature.
apologists for truman have explained that it was trumans fear of a revived isolationism that led him to exaggerate the soviet threat and to pitch his message in the charged language of a holy global war against god less communism a description of the cold war that straightjacketed future policymakers who would seek to tone down soviet american competition and animosity.
truman found support for casting the cold war as a battle between good and evil from theologians like the inuential liberal protestant clergyman reinhold niebuhr 1892 1971.
for over ve decades after world war i niebuhr crusaded against what he perceived as the drift away from christian foundations.
a vocal enemy of fascism pacism and communism in in february 1946 kremlin specialist george f kennan 1904 2005 sent his landmark long telegram to the state department.
in the eightthousand word eighteen page message kennan assessed the soviet threat and called for a new kind of response which would eventually become known as the containment doctrine in summary we have here a political force stalins regime committed fanatically to the belief that with the us there can be no permanent modus vivendi that it is desirable and necessary that the internal harmony of our society be disrupted our traditional way of life be destroyed the international authority of our state be broken if soviet power is to be secure.
1947 as this satirical view of the truman doctrine shows not all americans were sure where the countrys new foreign policy was taking them.
the 1940s and 1950s niebuhr divided the world into two polarized camps the children of light and the children of darkness for niebuhr christian justice including force if necessary required a realist response to children of darkness like hitler and stalin.
a threat of a different sort loomed in western europe especially france italy and germany.
these key nations were still suffering from the hunger and economic chaos spawned by war.
they were in grave danger of being taken over from the inside by communist parties that could exploit these hardships.
president truman responded with a bold policy.
in a commencement address at harvard university on june 5 1947 secretary of state george c marshall invited the europeans to get together and work out a joint plan for their economic recovery.
if they did so then the united states would provide substantial nancial assistance.
this forced cooperation constituted a powerful nudge on the road to the eventual creation of the european community ec.
the democratic nations of europe rose enthusiastically to the life giving bait of the so called marshall plan.
they met in paris in july 1947 to thrash out the chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 other asia and pacific europe 8 9 billion united states china bi l 0 6 billio n o illi 1 0 1b 1 n lio n billio 35 3 n all others latin america australia near east and africa map 36 3 united states foreign aid military and economic 1945 1954 marshall plan aid swelled the outlay for europe.
note the emphasis on the developed world with relatively little aid going to developing interactive map details.
there marshall offered the same aid to the soviet union and its allies if they would make political reforms and accept certain outside controls.
in fact the americans worried that the russian bear might hug the marshall plan to death and therefore made the terms deliberately difcult for the ussr to accept.
nobody was surprised when the soviets walked out denouncing the martial plan as one more capitalist trick.
the marshall plan called for spending 12 5 billion over four years in sixteen cooperating countries see map 36 3.
congress at rst balked at this mam the marshall plan turns enemies into friends the poster in this 1950 photograph in berlin reads berlin rebuilt with help from the marshall plan moth sum.
it looked even more huge when added to the nearly 2 billion the united states had already contributed to european relief through the united nations relief and rehabilitation administration unrra and the hefty american contributions to the united nations imf and world bank.
but a soviet sponsored communist coup in czechoslovakia nally awakened the legislators to reality and they voted the initial appropriations in april 1948.
congress evidently concluded that if uncle sam did not get the europeans back on their feet they would never get off his back.
responding to the soviet threat inuence in the jewish state and to retain the support of american jewish voters.
trumans policy of strong support for israel would vastly complicate u s relations with the arab world in the decades ahead.
america begins to rearm american motor of the latest type in this russian cartoon the conquering truman uses u s moneybags to induce dollar hungry european nations to draw the american capitalistic chariot.
trumans marshall plan was a spectacular success.
american dollars pumped reviving blood into the economic veins of the anemic western european nations.
within a few years most of them were exceeding their prewar outputs as an economic miracle drenched europe in prosperity.
the communist parties in italy and france lost ground and these two keystone countries were saved from the westward thrust of communism.
a resolute truman made another fateful decision in 1948.
access to middle eastern oil was crucial to the european recovery program and increasingly to the health of the u s economy given nite american oil reserves.
yet the arab oil countries adamantly opposed the creation of the jewish state of israel in the british mandate territory of palestine.
should israel be born a saudi arabian leader warned truman the arabs will lay siege to it until it dies of famine defying arab wrath as well as the objections of his own state and defense departments and the european allies all of them afraid to antagonize the oil endowed arabs truman ofcially recognized the state of israel on the day of its birth may 14 1948.
humanitarian sympathy for the jewish survivors of the holocaust ranked high among his reasons as did his wishes to preempt soviet the cold war the struggle to contain soviet communism was not war yet it was not peace.
the standoff with the kremlin banished the dreams of tax fatigued americans that tanks could be beaten into automobiles.
the soviet menace spurred the unication of the armed ser vices as well as the creation of a huge new national security apparatus.
congress in 1947 passed the national security act creating the department of defense.
the department was to be housed in the sprawling pentagon building on the banks of the potomac and to be headed by a new cabinet ofcer the secretary of defense.
under the secretary but now without cabinet status were the civilian secretaries of the navy the army replacing the old secretary of war and the air force a recognition of the rising importance of airpower.
the uniformed heads of each service were brought together as the joint chiefs of staff.
the national security act also established the national security council nsc to advise the president on security matters and the central intelligence agency cia to coordinate the governments foreign fact gathering.
the voice of america authorized by congress in 1948 began beaming american radio broadcasts behind the iron curtain.
in the same year congress resurrected the military draft providing for the conscription of selected young men from nineteen to twenty ve years of age.
the forbidding presence of the selective service system shaped millions of young peoples educational marital and career plans in the following quarter century.
one shoe at a time a war weary america was reluctantly returning to a war footing.
the soviet threat was also forcing the democracies of western europe into an unforeseen degree of unity.
in 1948 britain france belgium the netherlands and luxembourg signed a path breaking treaty of defensive alliance at brussels.
they then invited the united states to join them.
the proposal confronted the united states with a historic decision.
america had traditionally avoided entangling alliances especially in peacetime if the cold war could be considered peacetime.
yet american participation in the emerging coalition could serve many purposes it would strengthen the policy of chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 reaching across the atlantic in peacetime 1948 when the united states joined with the western european powers in the north atlantic alliance soon to be called the north atlantic treaty organization it overcame its historic isolationism in the wake of wars.
by 1955 former enemy west germany would be admitted to nato to help defend western europe against soviet aggression.
containing the soviet union it would provide a framework for the reintegration of germany into the european family and it would reassure jittery europeans that a traditionally isolationist uncle sam was not about to abandon them to the marauding russian bear or to a resurgent and domineering germany.
the truman administration decided to join the european pact called the north atlantic treaty organization nato in recognition of its transatlantic character.
with white tie pageantry the nato treaty was signed in washington on april 4 1949.
the twelve original signatories pledged to regard an attack on one as an attack on all and promised to respond with armed force if necessary.
despite last ditch howls from immovable isolationists the senate approved the treaty on july 21 1949 by a vote of 82 to 13.
membership was boosted to fourteen in 1952 by the inclusion of greece and turkey to fteen in 1955 by the addition of west germany.
the nato pact was epochal.
it marked a dramatic departure from american diplomatic convention a gigantic boost for european unication and a signicant step in the militarization of the cold war.
nato became the cornerstone of all cold war american policy toward europe.
with good reason pundits summed up natos threefold purpose to keep the russians out the germans down and the americans in reconstruction and revolution in asia reconstruction in japan was simpler than in germany primarily because it was largely a one man show.
the occupying american army under the supreme allied commander ve star general douglas macarthur sat in the drivers seat.
in the teeth of violent protests from soviet ofcials macarthur went inexibly ahead with his program for the democratization of japan.
following the pattern in germany top japa nese war criminals were tried in tokyo from 1946 to 1948.
eighteen of them were sentenced to prison terms and seven were hanged.
general macarthur as a kind of yankee mikado enjoyed stunning success.
the japa nese cooperated to an astonishing degree.
they saw that good behavior and the adoption of democracy would speed the end of the occupation as it did.
a macarthur dictated constitution was adopted in 1946.
it renounced militarism provided for womens equality and introduced western style democratic government paving the way for a phenomenal economic recovery that within a few decades made japan one of the worlds mightiest industrial powers.
the cold war in asia in august 1949 secretary of state dean acheson 1893 1971 explained publicly why america had dumped jiang jieshi the unfortunate but inescapable fact is that the ominous result of the civil war in china was beyond the control of the government of the united states.
nothing that this country did or could have done within the reasonable limits of its capabilities could have changed that result nothing that was left undone by this country has contributed to it.
it was the product of internal chinese forces forces which this country tried to inuence but could not.
if japan was a success story for american policymakers the opposite was true in china where a bitter civil war had raged for years between nationalists and communists.
washington had halfheartedly supported the nationalist government of generalissimo jiang jieshi in his struggle with the communists under mao zedong mao tse tung.
but ineptitude and corruption within the generalissimos regime gradually began to corrode the condence of his people.
communist armies swept south overwhelmingly and late in 1949 jiang was forced to ee with the remnants of his once powerful force to the last hope island of formosa taiwan.
the collapse of nationalist china was a depressing defeat for america and its allies in the cold war the worst to date.
at one fell swoop nearly one fourth of the worlds population some 500 million people was swept into the communist camp.
the so called fall of china became a bitterly partisan issue in the united states.
the republicans seeking goats who had lost china assailed president truman and his bristly mustached british appearing secretary of state dean acheson.
they insisted that democratic agencies wormy with communists had deliberately withheld aid from jiang jieshi so that he would fall.
democrats heatedly replied that when a regime has forfeited the support of its people no amount of outside help will save it.
truman the argument ran did not lose china because he never had china to lose.
jiang himself had never controlled all of china.
more bad news came in september 1949 when president truman shocked the nation by announcing that the soviets had exploded an atomic bomb approximately three years earlier than many experts had thought possible.
american strategists since 1945 had counted on keeping the soviets in line by threats of a one sided aerial attack with nuclear weapons.
but atomic bombing was now a game that two could play.
to outpace the soviets in nuclear weaponry truman ordered the development of the h bomb hydrogen bomb a city smashing thermonuclear weapon that was a thousand times more powerful than the atomic bomb.
j robert oppenheimer former scientic director of the manhattan project and current chair of the atomic energy commission led a group of scientists in opposition to the crash program to design thermonuclear weapons.
the h bomb these scientists warned was so deadly that it becomes a weapon which in practical effect is almost one of genocide famed physicist albert einstein whose theories had helped give birth to the atomic age declared that annihilation of any life on earth has been brought within the range of technical possibilities but einstein and oppenheimer the nations two most famous scientists could not persuade truman anxious over communist threats in east asia.
the united states exploded its rst hydrogen device on a south pacic atoll in 1952.
not to be outdone the soviets countered with their rst h bomb explosion in 1953 and the nuclear arms race entered a perilously competitive cycle.
nuclear superiority became a dangerous and delusive dream as each side tried to outdo the other in the scramble to build more destructive atomic scientist edward condon 1902 1974 warned as early as 1946 three years before the soviets exploded their own atomic bomb that americans condence in their nuclear monopoly was a dangerous delusion that could unleash vicious accusations and scapegoating the laws of nature some seem to think are ours exclusively.
having created an air of suspicion and distrust there will be persons among us who think our nations can know nothing except what is learned by espionage.
so when other countries make atom bombs these persons will cry treason at our scientists for they will nd it inconceivable that another country could make a bomb in any other way.
chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 the hydrogen bomb 1954 this test blast at bikini atoll in the marshall islands was so powerful that one japanese sherman was killed and all twenty two of his crewmates were seriously injured by radioactive ash that fell on their vessel some eighty miles away.
fishing boats a thousand miles from bikini later brought in radioactively contaminated catches.
if the cold war should ever blaze into a hot war there might be no world left for the communists to communize or the democracies to democratize a chilling thought that constrained both camps.
peace through mutual terror brought a shaky stability to the superpower standoff.
ferreting out alleged communists one of the most active cold war fronts was at home where a new anti red chase was in full cry.
many nervous citizens feared that communist spies paid with moscow gold were undermining the government and treacherously misdirecting foreign policy.
in 1947 truman launched a massive loyalty program.
the attorney general drew up a list of ninety supposedly disloyal orga ni zations none of which was given the opportunity to prove its innocence.
the loyalty review board investigated more than 3 million federal employees some 3 000 of whom either resigned or were dismissed none under formal indictment.
individual states likewise became intensely security conscious.
loyalty oaths in increasing numbers were demanded of employees especially teachers.
the gnawing question for many earnest americans was could the nation continue to enjoy traditional freedoms especially freedom of speech freedom of thought and the right of political dissent in a cold war climate.
in 1949 eleven communists were brought before a new york jury for violating the smith act of 1940 the rst peacetime antisedition law since 1798.
convicted of advocating the overthrow of the american government by force the defendants were sent to prison.
the supreme court upheld their convictions in dennis v united states 1951.
the house of representatives in 1938 had established the house un american activities committee huac to investigate subversion in 1948 committee member richard m nixon an ambitious red catcher led the chase after alger hiss a prominent ex new dealer and a distinguished member of the eastern establishment accused of being a communist agent in the 1930s hiss demanded the right to defend himself.
he dramatically met his chief accuser before huac in august 1948.
hiss denied every thing but was caught in embarrassing falsehoods convicted of perjury in 1950 and sentenced to ve years in prison.
was america really riddled with soviet spies.
soviet agents did in ltrate certain government agencies though without severely damaging consequences and espionage may have helped the soviets to develop an the anti communist crusade at home hunt.
in 1950 truman vetoed the mccarran internal secu rity bill which among other provisions authorized the president to arrest and detain suspicious people during an internal security emergency critics protested that the bill smacked of police state concentration camp tactics.
but the congressional guardians of the republics liberties enacted the bill over trumans veto.
the stunning success of the soviet scientists in developing an atomic bomb was attributed by many to the cleverness of communist spies in stealing american secrets.
notorious among those who had allegedly leaked atomic data to moscow were two american citizens julius and ethel rosenberg.
they were convicted in 1951 of espionage and went to the electric chair in 1953 the only people in american history ever executed in peacetime for espionage.
their sensational trial and electrocution combined with sympathy for their two orphaned children began to sour some sober citizens on the excesses of the red hunters.
democratic divisions in 1948 richard nixon red hunter congressman nixon examines the microlm that gured as important evidence in alger hisss conviction for perjury in 1950 atomic bomb somewhat sooner than they would have otherwise.
trumans loyalty program thus had a basis in reality.
but for many ordinary americans the hunt for communists was not just about fending off the military threat of the soviet union.
unsettling dangers lurked closer to home.
while men like nixon and senator joseph mccarthy led the search for communists in washington conser vative politicians at the state and local levels discovered that all manner of real or perceived social changes including declining religious sentiment increased sexual freedom and agitation for civil rights could be tarred with a red brush.
anticommunist crusaders ransacked school libraries for subversive textbooks and drove debtors drinkers and homosexuals all alleged to be security risks from their jobs.
some americans including president truman realized that the red hunt was turning into a witch attacking high prices and high tax harry truman the republicans had won control of congress in the congressional elections of 1946.
their prospects had seldom looked rosier as they gathered in philadelphia to choose their 1948 presidential candidate.
they noisily renominated warmed over new york governor thomas e dewey still as debonair as if he had stepped out of a bandbox.
also gathering in philadelphia democratic politicos looked without enthusiasm on their hand medown president and sang im just mild about harry but their dump truman movement collapsed when war hero dwight d eisenhower refused to be drafted.
the peppery president unwanted but undaunted was then chosen in the face of vehement opposition by southern delegates who had been alienated by his strong stand in favor of civil rights for blacks especially his decision in 1948 to desegregate the military.
trumans nomination split the party wide open.
embittered southern democrats from thirteen states like their re eating forebears of 1860 next met in their own convention in birmingham alabama with confederate ags brashly in evidence.
amid scenes of heated deance these dixiecrats nominated governor j strom thurmond of south carolina on a states rights party ticket.
chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 to add to the confusion within democratic ranks former vice president henry a wallace threw his hat into the ring.
having parted company with the administration over its get tough with russia policy he was nominated at philadelphia by the new progressive party a bizarre collection of disgruntled former new dealers starry eyed pacists well meaning liberals and communist fronters.
wallace a vigorous if misguided liberal assailed uncle sams dollar imperialism from the stump.
this so called pied piper of the politburo took an apparently pro soviet line that earned him drenchings with rotten eggs in hostile cities.
but to many americans wallace raised the only hopeful voice in the deepening gloom of the cold war.
with the democrats ruptured three ways and the republican congressional victory of 1946 just past deweys victory seemed assured.
succumbing to overcondence engendered by his massive lead in publicopinion polls the cold smug dewey con ned himself to dispensing soothing syrup trivialities like our future lies before us the harried piano player 1948 besieged by the left and right wings of his own party and by a host of domestic and foreign problems truman was a long shot for reelection in 1948.
but the scrappy president surprised his legions of critics by handily defeating his opponent thomas e dewey.
that aint the way i heard it.
truman wins.
the seemingly doomed truman with little money and few active supporters had to rely on his gutghter instincts and folksy personality.
traveling the country by train to deliver some three hundred give em hell speeches he lashed out at the taft hartley slavelabor law and the do nothing republican congress while whipping up support for his program of civil rights improved labor benets and health insurance.
pour it on em harry cried increasingly large and enthusiastic crowds as the pugnacious president rained a barrage of verbal uppercuts on his opponent.
on election night the chicago tribune ran off an early edition with the headline dewey defeats truman but in the morning it turned out that president dewey had embarrassingly snatched defeat from the jaws of victory.
truman had swept to a stunning triumph to the complete bewilderment of politicians pollsters prophets and pundits.
even though thurmond took away 39 electoral votes in the south truman won 303 electoral votes primarily from the south midwest and west.
deweys 189 electoral votes came principally from the east.
the popular vote was 24 179 345 for truman 21 991 291 for dewey 1 176 125 for thurmond and 1 157 326 for wallace.
to make the victory sweeter the democrats regained control of congress as well.
trumans victory rested on farmers workers and blacks all of whom were republican wary.
republican overcondence and trumans lone wolf never say die the election of 1948 in his inaugural address in january 1949 president harry s truman 1884 1972 said communism is based on the belief that man is so weak and inadequate that he is unable to govern himself and therefore requires the rule of strong masters.
democracy is based on the conviction that man has the moral and intellectual capacity as well as the inalienable right to govern himself with reason and justice.
campaign also won him the support of many americans who admired his guts no one wanted him someone remarked except the people.
dewey in contrast struck many voters as arrogant evasive and wooden.
when dewey took the platform to give a speech said one commentator he comes out like a man who has been mounted on casters and given a tremendous shove from behind smiling and self assured truman sounded a clarion note in the fourth point of his inaugural address when he called for a bold new program known thereafter as point four.
the plan was to lend u s money and technical aid to underdeveloped lands to help them help themselves.
truman wanted to spend millions to keep underprivileged peoples from becoming communists rather than spend billions to shoot them after they had become communists.
this farseeing program was ofcially launched in 1950 and it brought badly needed assistance to impoverished countries notably in latin america africa the near east and the far east.
at home truman outlined a sweeping fair deal program in his 1949 message to congress.
it called for as trumans fair deal was rebuffed by a hostile congress critics like the conservative new york daily news gloated that the odious new deal was nally vanquished the new deal is kaput like the thirty years war or the black plague or other disasters.
its demise is like coming out of the darkness into sunlight.
like feeling clean again after a long time in the muck.
improved housing full employment a higher minimum wage better farm price supports new tvas and an extension of social security.
but most of the fair deal fell victim to congressional opposition from republicans and southern democrats.
the only major successes came in raising the minimum wage providing for public housing in the housing act of 1949 and extending old age insurance to many more beneciaries in the social security act of 1950.
the korean volcano erupts korea the land of the morning calm heralded a new and more disturbing phase of the cold war a shooting phase in june 1950.
when japan collapsed in 1945 soviet troops had accepted the japa nese surrender north of the thirty eighth parallel on the korean peninsula and american troops had done likewise south of that line.
both superpowers professed to want the reunication and independence of korea a japanese colony since 1910.
but as in germany each helped to set up rival regimes above and below the parallel.
by 1949 when the soviets and americans had both withdrawn their forces the entire peninsula was a bristling armed camp with two hostile regimes eyeing each other suspiciously.
secretary of state acheson seemed to wash his hands of the dispute early in 1950 when he declared in a memorable speech that korea was outside the essential united states defense perimeter in the pacic.
the explosion came on june 25 1950.
spearheaded by soviet made tanks north korean army columns rumbled across the thirty eighth parallel.
caught atfooted the south korean forces were shoved back southward to a dangerously tiny defensive area around pusan their weary backs to the sea.
president truman sprang quickly into the breach.
the invasion seemed to provide devastating proof of a fundamental premise in the containment doctrine that shaped washingtons foreign policy that even a slight relaxation of americas guard was an invitation to communist aggression somewhere.
the korean invasion prompted a massive expansion of the american military.
a few months before trumans national security council had issued its famous national security council memorandum number 68 nsc 68 recommending that the united states quadruple its defense spending.
ignored at rst because it seemed politically impossible to implement nsc 68 got a new lease on life from the korean crisis.
chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 korea saved us secretary of state acheson later commented.
truman now ordered a massive military buildup well beyond what was necessary for korea.
soon the united states had 3 5 million men under arms and was spending 50 billion per year on the defense budget some 13 percent of the gnp.
nsc 68 was a key document of the cold war period not only because it marked a major step in the militarization of american foreign policy but also because it vividly reected the sense of almost limitless possibility that pervaded postwar american society.
nsc 68 rested on the assumption that the enormous american economy could bear without strain the huge costs of a gigantic rearmament program.
said one nsc 68 planner there was practically nothing the country could not do if it wanted to do it truman took full advantage of a temporary soviet absence from the united nations security council on june 25 1950 to obtain a unanimous condemnation of north korea as an aggressor.
why the soviets were absent remains controversial.
scholars once believed that the soviets were just as surprised as the americans by the attack.
it now appears that stalin had given his reluctant approval to north koreas strike plan but believed that the ghting would be brief and that the united states would take little interest in it.
the security council also called upon all u n members including the united states to render every assistance to restore peace.
two days later without consulting congress truman ordered american air and naval units to support south korea.
before the week was out he also ordered general douglas macarthurs japan based occupation troops into action alongside the beleaguered south koreans.
so began the ill fated korean war.
ofcially the united states was simply participating in a united nations police action but in fact the united states made up the overwhelming bulk of the u n contingents and general macarthur appointed u n commander of the entire operation took his orders from washington not from the security council.
korea to its former borders but the pursuing south koreans had already crossed the thirty eighth parallel and there seemed little point in permitting the north koreans to regroup and come again.
the u n general assembly tacitly authorized a crossing by macarthur whom president truman ordered northward provided that there was no intervention in force by the chinese or soviets see map 36 4.
ussr june 25 1950 manchuria china china l ya.
ur north korea ussr sept 14 1950 manchuria lu ya 40n r north korea pyongyang 40n pyongyang 38n 38n seoul seoul south korea 35n 35n pusan 125e 130e 130e north korean attack ussr manchuria manchuria china r lu ya 40n pyongyang north korea seoul pusan 125e 130e 38n south korea 35n pusan 125e 40n pyongyang 38n south korea 35n r north korea seoul inchon ussr july 27 1953 china lu ya pusan 125e north korean attack nov 25 1950 south korea 130e chinese counterattack armistice line macarthur attack n the military seesaw in korea rather than ght his way out of the southern pusan perimeter macarthur launched a daring amphibious landing behind the enemys lines at inchon.
this bold gamble on september 15 1950 succeeded brilliantly within two weeks the north koreans had scrambled back behind the sanctuary of the thirty eighth parallel.
trumans avowed intention was to restore south territory held by south korean forces territory held by north korean forces front 100 200 km.
map 36 4 the shifting front in korea interactive map the korean war the americans thus raised the stakes in korea and in so doing they quickened the fears of another potential player in this dangerous game.
the chinese communists had publicly warned that they would not sit idly by and watch hostile troops approach the strategic yalu river boundary between korea and china.
but macarthur pooh poohed all predictions of an effective intervention by the chinese and reportedly boasted that he would have the boys home by christmas macarthur erred badly.
in november 1950 tens of thousands of chinese volunteers fell upon his rashly overextended lines and hurled the u n forces reeling back down the peninsula.
the ghting now sank into a frostbitten stalemate on the icy terrain near the thirty eighth parallel.
an imperious macarthur humiliated by this rout pressed for drastic retaliation.
he favored a blockade of the chinese coast and bombardment of chinese bases in manchuria.
he even suggested that the united states use nuclear weapons on the advancing chinese and their supply lines.
but washington policymakers with anxious eyes on moscow refused to enlarge the already costly con ict.
the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff declared that a wider clash in asia would be the wrong war at the wrong place at the wrong time and with the wrong enemy europe not asia was the administrations rst concern and the ussr not china loomed as the more sinister foe.
two sted general macarthur felt that he was being asked to ght with one hand tied behind his back.
he sneered at the concept of a limited war and insisted that there is no substitute for victory truman bravely resisted calls for nuclear escalation a rare example of a military commander refusing to use the most powerful weapons at his disposal.
when macarthur began to criticize the presidents policies publicly truman had no choice but to remove the insubordinate macarthur from command on april 11 1951.
truman takes the heat macarthur a legend in his own mind returned to an uproarious welcome whereas truman was condemned as a pig an imbecile a judas and an appeaser of communist russia and communist china in july 1951 truce discussions began in a rude eld tent near the ring line but were almost immediately snagged on the issue of prisoner exchange.
talks dragged on unproductively for nearly two years while men continued to die.
chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 chronology spock publishes the common sense book of baby and child care yalta conference united states ends lend lease to ussr united nations established israel founded united states recognizes it voice of america begins radio broadcasts behind iron curtain alger hiss case begins truman defeats dewey for presidency 1948 berlin blockade 1945 nuremberg war crimes trial in germany nato established communists defeat nationalists in china soviets explode their rst atomic bomb employment act creates council of economic advisers iran crisis kennans long telegram lays out containment doctrine american economy begins postwar growth mccarthy red hunt begins mccarran internal security bill passed by congress over trumans veto servicemens readjustment act gi bill bretton woods economic conference 1946 tokyo war crimes trials 1950 korean war truman doctrine marshall plan taft hartley act national security act creates department of defense national security council nsc and central intelligence agency cia truman res macarthur rosenbergs convicted of treason united states explodes rst hydrogen bomb postwar peak of u s birthrate u s birthrate falls below replacement level key terms taft hartley act 910 operation dixie 911 employment act of 1946 911 gi bill 911 sunbelt 915 levittown 917 baby boom 917 yalta conference 920 cold war 923 bretton woods conference 923 united nations u n 923 nuremberg war crimes trial 926 people to know berlin airlift 928 containment doctrine 928 truman doctrine 929 marshall plan 929 north atlantic treaty organization nato 932 house un american activities committee huac 934 fair deal 937 national security council memorandum number 68 nsc 68 937 korean war 938 benjamin spock joseph stalin jiang jieshi george f kennan reinhold niebuhr george c marshall varying viewpoints who was to blame for the cold war.
w hose fault was the cold war.
and for that matter who should get credit for ending it.
for two decades after world war ii american historians generally agreed that the aggressive soviets were solely responsible.
this orthodox or ofcial appraisal squared with the traditional view of the united states as a virtuous innocent land with an idealistic foreign policy.
this point of view also justied americas cold war containment policy which cast the soviet union as the aggressor that must be con ned by an ever vigilant united states.
america supposedly had only defensive intentions with no expansionary ambitions of its own.
in the 1960s a vigorous revisionist interpretation owered powerfully inuenced by disillusion over u s involvement in vietnam.
the revisionists stood the orthodox view on its head.
the soviets they argued had only defensive intentions at the end of world war ii it was the americans who had behaved provocatively by brandishing their new atomic weaponry.
some of these critics pointed an accusing nger at president truman alleging that he abandoned roosevelts conciliatory approach to the soviets and adopted a bullying attitude emboldened by the american atomic monopoly.
more radical revisionists like gabriel and joyce kolko even claimed to have found the roots of trumans alleged belligerence in long standing american policies of economic imperialism policies that eventually resulted in the tragedy of vietnam see pp.
in this view the vietnam war followed logically from americas insatiable need for overseas markets and raw materials.
vietnam itself may have been economically unimportant but so the argument ran a communist vietnam represented an intolerable challenge to american hegemony.
revisionists cited their own version of the domino theory which war apologists used to defend americas military actions in vietnam.
according to the domino theory if the united states declined to ght in vietnam other countries would lose their faith in americas will or their fear of american power and would tumble one after the other like dominoes into the soviet camp.
revisionists stressed what they saw as the economic necessity behind the domino theory losing in vietnam they claimed would unravel the american economy.
in the 1970s a postrevisionist interpretation emerged that is widely agreed upon today.
historians such as john lewis gaddis and melvyn lefer poohpooh the economic determinism of the revisionists while frankly acknowledging that the united states did have vital security interests at stake in the post world war ii era.
the postrevisionists analyze the ways in which inherited ideas like isolationism and the contentious nature of postwar domestic politics as well as miscalculations by american leaders led a nation in search of security into seeking not simply a sufciency but a preponderance of power.
the american overreaction to its security needs these scholars suggest exacerbated u s soviet relations and precipitated the four decade long nuclear arms race that formed the centerpiece of the cold war.
in the case of vietnam the postrevisionist historians focus not on economic necessity but on a failure of political intelligence induced by the stressful conditions of the cold war that made the dubious domino theory seem plausible.
misunderstanding vietnamese intentions exaggerating soviet ambitions and fearing to appear soft on communism in the eyes of their domestic political rivals american leaders plunged into vietnam sadly misguided by their own cold war obsessions.
most postrevisionists however still lay the lions share of the blame for the cold war on the soviet union.
by the same token they credit the soviets with ending the cold war a view hotly disputed by ronald reagans champions who claim that it was his anti soviet policies in the 1980s that brought the russians to their knees see pp.
the great unknown of course is the precise nature of soviet thinking in the cold war years.
were soviet aims predominantly defensive or did the kremlin incessantly plot world conquest.
was there an opportunity for reconciliation with the west following stalins death in 1953.
should mikhail gorbachev or ronald reagan be remembered as the leader who ended the cold war.
with the opening of soviet archives scholars are eagerly pursuing answers to such questions.
chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 to learn more dean acheson present at the creation 1969 lizabeth cohen a consumers republic the politics of mass consumption in postwar america 2003 john lewis gaddis the cold war a new history 2005 herbert j gans the levittowners 1967 kenneth t jackson crabgrass frontier the suburbanization of the united states 1985 kevin kruse and thomas sugrue eds the new suburban history 2006 marvyn p lefer a preponderance of power national security the truman administration and the cold war 1945 1950 1980 thomas mccormick americas half century u s foreign policy in the cold war and after 1995 ellen schrecker many are the crimes 1998 bruce schulman from cotton belt to sunbelt federal policy economic development and the transformation of the south 1991 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the eisenhower era 1952 1960 every warship launched every rocket red signies.
a theft from those who hunger and are not fed those who are cold and are not clothed.
dwight d eisenhower april 16 1953 i n president dwight d eisenhower the man and the hour met.
americans yearned for a period of calm in which they could pursue without distraction their new visions of consumerist afuence.
the nation sorely needed a respite from twenty years of depression and war.
yet the american people unexpectedly found themselves in the early 1950s dug into the frontlines of the cold war abroad and dangerously divided at home over the explosive issues of communist subversion and civil rights.
they longed for reassuring leadership.
ike seemed ready both to reassure and to lead.
afuence and its anxieties the continuing post world war ii economic boom wrought wondrous changes in american society in the 1950s.
prosperity triggered a fabulous surge in home construction as a nation of renters became a nation of homeowners.
one of every four homes standing in america in 1960 had been built during the 1950s and 83 percent of those new homes were in suburbia.
more than ever science and technology drove economic growth.
the invention of the transistor in 1948 sparked a revolution in electronics and especially in computers.
the rst electronic computers assembled in the 1940s were massive machines with hundreds of miles of wiring and thousands of ckle cathode ray tubes.
transistors and later printed circuits on silicon wafers made possible dramatic min iaturization and phenomenal computational speed.
computer giant international business machines ibm expanded robustly becoming the prototype of the high tech corporation in the dawning information age eventually personal computers and even inexpensive pocket calculators contained more computing power than room size early models.
computers transformed ageold business practices like billing and inventory control and opened genuine new frontiers in areas like airline scheduling high speed printing and telecommunications.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
chapter 34 franklin d roosevelt and the shadow of war 1933 1941 sacrice the possibility of domestic recovery for the sake of international cooperation.
while vacationing on a yacht along the new eng land coast he dashed off a radio message to london scolding the conference for attempting to stabilize currencies and essentially declaring americas withdrawal from the negotiations.
roosevelts bombshell announcement yanked the rug from under the london conference.
the delegates adjourned empty handed amid cries of american bad faith.
whether the conference could have arrested the worldwide economic slide is debatable but roosevelts every man for himself attitude plunged the planet even deeper into economic crisis.
the collapse of the london conference also strengthened the global trend toward extreme nationalism making international cooperation ever more difcult as the dangerous decade of the 1930s unfolded.
reecting the powerful persistence of american isolationism roosevelts action played directly into the hands of the power mad dictators who were determined to shatter the peace of the world.
americans themselves would eventually pay a high price for the narrow minded belief that the united states could go it alone in the modern world.
freedom for from.
the filipinos and recognition for the rus sians roosevelt matched isolationism from europe with withdrawal from asia.
the great depression burst the fragile bubble of president mckinleys imperialistic dream in the far east.
with the descent into hard times american taxpayers were eager to throw overboard their expensive tropical liability in the philippine islands.
organized labor demanded the exclusion of low wage filipino workers and american sugar producers clamored for the elimination of philippine competition.
remembering its earlier promises of freedom for the philippines congress passed the tydings mcdufe act in 1934.
the act provided for the independence of the philippines after a twelve year period of economic and political tutelage that is by 1946.
the united states agreed to relinquish its army bases but naval bases were reserved for future discussion and retention.
in truth the american people were not so much giving freedom to the philippines as they were freeing themselves from the philippines.
with a selsh eye to their own welfare and with apparent disregard for the political situation in asia they proposed to leave the just another customer 1933 the united states recognizes the soviet union.
philippines to their fate while imposing upon the filipinos economic terms so ungenerous as to threaten the islands with economic prostration.
once again american isolationists rejoiced.
yet in tokyo japa nese militarists were calculating that they had little to fear from an inward looking america that was abandoning its principal possession in asia.
at the same time roosevelt made at least one internationalist gesture when he formally recognized the soviet union in 1933.
over the noisy protests of anticommunist conser vatives as well as roman catholics offended by the kremlins antireligious policies roosevelt extended the hand of diplomatic recognition to the sixteen year old bolshevik regime.
he was motivated in part by the hope for trade with soviet russia as well as by the desire to bolster the soviet union as a friendly counterweight to the possible threat of german power in europe and japa nese power in asia.
roosevelt s early foreign policies becoming a good neighbor closer to home roosevelt inaugurated a refreshing new era in relations with latin america.
he proclaimed in his inaugural address i would dedicate this nation to the policy of the good neighbor taken together roosevelts noninvolvement in europe and withdrawal from asia along with this brotherly embrace of his new world neighbors suggested that the united states was giving up its ambition to be a world power and would content itself instead with being merely a regional power its interests and activities con ned exclusively to the western hemisphere.
old fashioned intervention by bayonet in the caribbean had not paid off except in an evil harvest of resentment suspicion and fear.
the great depression had cooled off yankee economic aggressiveness as thousands of investors in latin american securities became sackholders rather than stockholders.
there were now fewer dollars to be protected by the ries of the hated marines.
with war thirsty dictators seizing power in europe and asia roosevelt was eager to line up the latin americans to help defend the western hemisphere.
embittered neighbors would be potential tools of transoceanic aggressors.
president roosevelt made clear at the outset that he was going to renounce armed intervention particularly the vexatious corollary to the monroe doctrine devised by his cousin theodore roosevelt.
late in 1933 at the seventh pan american conference in montevideo uruguay the u s delegation formally endorsed nonintervention.
deeds followed words.
the last marines departed from haiti in 1934.
the same year after military strongman fulgencio batista had come to power restive cuba was released from the worst hobbles of the platt amendment under which america had been free to intervene although the united states retained its naval base at guantnamo see p 684.
the tiny country of panama received a similar uplift in 1936 when washington partially relaxed its grip on the isthmus nation.
the hope inspiring good neighbor policy with the accent on consultation and nonintervention received its acid test in mexico.
when the mexican government seized yankee oil properties in 1938 american investors vehemently demanded armed intervention to repossess their conscated businesses.
but roosevelt successfully resisted the badgering and a settlement was nally threshed out in 1941 even though the oil companies lost much of their original stake.
spectacular success crowned roosevelts good neighbor policy.
his earnest attempts to usher in a new era of friendliness though hurting some u s bondholders paid rich dividends in goodwill among the peoples to the south.
no other citizen of the united states has ever been held in such high esteem in latin america during his lifetime.
roosevelt was cheered with tumultuous enthusiasm when as a traveling salesman for peace he journeyed to the special interamerican conference at buenos aires argentina in 1936.
the colossus of the north now seemed less a vulture and more an eagle.
secretary hulls reciprocal trade agreements intimately associated with good neighborism and also popular in latin america was the reciprocal trade policy of the new dealers.
its chief architect was idealistic secretary of state hull a high minded tennessean of the low tariff school.
like roosevelt he believed that trade was a two way street that a nation can sell abroad only as it buys abroad that tariff barriers choke off foreign trade and that trade wars beget shooting wars.
responding to the hull roosevelt leadership congress passed the reciprocal trade agreements act in 1934.
designed in part to lift american export trade from the depression doldrums this enlightened mea sure was aimed at both relief and recovery.
at the same time it activated the low tariff policies of the new dealers.
see the tariff chart in the appendix.
the reciprocal trade agreements act avoided the dangerous uncertainties of a wholesale tariff revision it merely whittled down the most objectionable schedules of the hawley smoot law by amending them.
roosevelt was empowered to lower existing rates by as much as 50 percent provided that the other country involved was willing to respond with similar reductions.
the resulting pacts moreover were to become effective without the formal approval of the senate.
this novel feature not only ensured speedier action but sidestepped the twin evils of high stakes logrolling and high pressure lobbying in congress.
secretary hull whose zeal for reciprocity was unagging succeeded in negotiating pacts with twentyone countries by the end of 1939.
during these same years u s foreign trade increased appreciably presumably in part as a result of the hull roosevelt policies.
trade agreements undoubtedly bettered economic chapter 34 franklin d roosevelt and the shadow of war 1933 1941 and political relations with latin america and proved to be an inuence for peace in a war bent world.
the reciprocal trade agreements act was a landmark piece of legislation.
it reversed the traditional high protective tariff policy that had persisted almost unbroken since civil war days and that had so damaged the american and international economies following world war i.
it also paved the way for the american led free trade international economic system that took shape after world war ii a period that witnessed the most robust growth in the history of international trade.
space for its teeming millions cooped up in their crowded island nation.
japa nese navalists were not to be denied.
determined to nd a place in the asiatic sun tokyo gave notice in 1934 of the termination of the twelve yearold washington naval treaty.
a year later at london the japa nese torpedoed all hope of effective naval disarmament.
upon being denied complete parity they walked out of the multipower conference and accelerated their construction of giant battleships.
by 1935 japan too had quit the league of nations.
five years later it joined arms with germany and italy in the tripartite pact.
storm cellar isolationism post 1918 chaos in europe followed by the great depression spawned the ominous spread of totalitarianism.
the individual was nothing the state was every thing.
the communist ussr led the way with the crafty and ruthless joseph stalin nally emerging as dictator.
in 1936 he began to purge his communist state of all suspected dissidents ultimately executing hundreds of thousands and banishing millions to remote siberian forced labor camps.
blustery benito mussolini a swaggering fascist seized the reins of power in italy during 1922.
and adolf hitler a fanatic with a toothbrush mustache plotted and harangued his way into control of germany in 1933 with liberal use of the big lie hitler was the most dangerous of the dictators because he combined tremendous power with impulsiveness.
a frustrated austrian painter with hypnotic talents as an orator and a leader he had secured control of the nazi party by making political capital of the treaty of versailles and germanys depression spawned unemployment.
he was thus a misbegotten child of the shortsighted postwar policies of the victorious allies including the united states.
the desperate german people had fallen in behind the new pied piper for they saw no other hope of escape from the plague of economic chaos and national disgrace.
hitler withdrew germany from the league of nations in 1933 and began clandestinely and illegally rearming.
in 1936 the nazi hitler and the fascist mussolini allied themselves in the rome berlin axis.
international gangsterism was likewise spreading in the far east where imperial japan was on the make.
like germany and italy japan was a so called have not power.
like them it resented the ungenerous treaty of versailles.
like them it demanded additional adolf hitler reviewing troops berlin 1939 egging his people on with theatrical displays of pomp and ceremony hitler had created a vast military machine by 1939 when he started world war ii with a brutal attack against poland.
isolationism enthroned jut jawed mussolini seeking both glory and empire in africa brutally attacked ethiopia in 1935 with bombers and tanks.
the brave defenders armed with spears and ancient rearms were speedily crushed.
members of the league of nations could have caused mussolinis war machine to creak to a halt if they had only dared to embargo oil.
but when the league quailed rather than risk global hostilities it merely signed its own death warrant.
isolationism long festering in america received a strong boost from these alarms abroad.
though disapproving of the dictators americans still believed that their encircling seas conferred a kind of mystic immunity.
they were continuing to suffer the disillusion the thirst of benito mussolini 1883 1945 for national glory in ethiopia is indicated by his remark in 1940 to make a people great it is necessary to send them to battle even if you have to kick the italians were them in the pants.
notoriously unwarlike.
in 1934 mussolini proclaimed in a public speech we have buried the putrid corpse of liberty.
ment born of their participation in world war i which they now regarded as a colossal blunder.
they likewise nursed bitter memories of the ungrateful and defaulting debtors.
as early as 1934 a spiteful congress passed the johnson debt default act which prevented debtdodging nations from borrowing further in the united states.
if attacked again by aggressors these delinquents could stew in their own juices mired down in the great depression americans had no real appreciation of the revolutionary forces being harnessed by the dictators.
the have not powers were out to become have powers.
americans were not so much afraid that totalitarian aggression would cause trouble as they were fearful that they might be drawn into it.
strong nationwide sentiment welled up for a constitutional amendment to forbid a declaration of war by congress except in case of invasion unless there was a favorable popular referendum.
with a mixture of seriousness and frivolity a group of princeton university students began to agitate in 1936 for a bonus to be paid to the veterans of future wars vfw while the prospective frontliners were still alive.
congress legislates neutrality the wages of despair disillusioned and desperate millions of germans in the 1930s looked to adolf hitler as their savior from the harsh terms of the treaty of versailles which had concluded world war i.
this nazi poster reads our last hope hitler as the gloomy 1930s lengthened an avalanche of lurid articles and books condemning the munitions manufacturers as war fomenting merchants of death poured from american presses.
a senate committee headed by senator gerald nye of north dakota was appointed in 1934 to investigate the blood business by sensationalizing evidence regarding americas entry into world war i the senatorial probers tended to chapter 34 franklin d roosevelt and the shadow of war 1933 1941 shift the blame away from the german submarines onto the american bankers and arms manufacturers.
because the munitions makers had obviously made money out of the war many a naive citizen leaped to the illogical conclusion that these soulless scavengers had caused the war in order to make money.
this kind of reasoning suggested that if the prots could only be removed from the arms trafc one hell of a business the country could steer clear of any world con ict that might erupt in the future.
responding to overwhelming popular pressure congress made haste to legislate the nation out of war.
action was spurred by the danger that mussolinis ethiopian assault would plunge the world into a new bloodbath.
the neutrality acts of 1935 1936 and 1937 taken together stipulated that when the president proclaimed the existence of a foreign war certain restrictions would automatically go into effect.
no american could legally sail on a belligerent ship sell or transport munitions to a belligerent or make loans to a belligerent.
this head in the sand legislation in effect marked an abandonment of the traditional policy of freedom of the seas a policy for which america had professedly fought two full edged wars and several undeclared wars.
the neutrality acts were specically tailored to keep the nation out of a con ict like world war i.
if they had been in effect at that time america probably would not have been sucked in at least not in april 1917.
congress was one war too late with its legislation.
what had seemed dishonorable to wilson seemed honorable and desirable to a later disillusioned generation.
storm cellar neutrality proved to be tragically shortsighted.
america falsely assumed that the decision for peace or war lay in its own hands not in those of the satanic forces already unleashed in the world.
prisoner of its own fears it failed to recognize that it might have used its enormous power to shape international events.
instead it remained at the mercy of events controlled by the dictators.
statutory neutrality though of undoubted legality was of dubious morality.
america served notice that it would make no distinction whatever between brutal aggressors and innocent victims.
by striving to hold the scales even it actually overbalanced them in favor of the dictators who had armed themselves to the teeth.
by declining to use its vast industrial strength to aid its democratic friends and defeat its totalitarian foes it helped goad the aggressors along their bloodspattered path of conquest.
america dooms loyalist spain the only way we can save her 1939 even as war broke out in europe many americans continued to insist on the morality of u s neutrality.
the spanish civil war of 1936 1939 a proving ground and dress rehearsal in miniature for world war ii was a painful object lesson in the folly of neutralityby legislation.
spanish rebels who rose against the left leaning republican government in madrid were headed by fascistic general francisco franco.
generously aided by his fellow conspirators hitler and mussolini he undertook to overthrow the established loyalist regime which in turn was assisted on a smaller scale by the soviet union.
this pipeline from communist moscow chilled the natural sympathies of many americans especially roman catholics for the republican loyalists.
but other americans burned with passion to defend the struggling republic against francos fascist coup.
some three thousand young men and women headed to spain to ght as volunteers in the abraham lincoln brigade.
washington continued ofcial relations with the loyalist government.
but congress with the encour the spanish civil war agement of roosevelt and with only one dissenting vote amended the existing neutrality legislation so as to apply an arms embargo to both loyalists and rebels.
roosevelt remarked the dictator franco behaved in the manner of a true gentleman fdr later regretted being so gentlemanly.
uncle sam thus sat on the sidelines while franco abundantly supplied with arms and men by his fellow dictators strangled the republican government of spain.
the democracies including the united states were so determined to stay out of war that they helped to condemn a fellow democracy to death.
in so doing they further encouraged the dictators to take the dangerous road that led over the precipice to world war ii.
such peace at any price ism was further cursed with illogic.
although determined to stay out of war america declined to build up its armed forces to a point where it could deter the aggressors.
in fact it allowed its navy to decline in relative strength.
it had been led to believe that huge eets caused huge wars it was also trying to spare the complaining taxpayer during the grim days of the great depression.
when president roosevelt repeatedly called for preparedness he was branded a warmonger.
not until 1938 the year canute frankson 1890 194.
an african american member of the abraham lincoln brigade explained why he went to spain to ght against the fascist franco in 1937 since this is a war between whites who for centuries have held us in slavery and have heaped every kind of insult and abuse upon us segregated and jim crowed us why am i a negro.
in spain today.
because we are no longer an isolated minority group ghting hopelessly against an immense giant.
because if we crush fascism here well save our people in america and in other parts of the world from the vicious persecution wholesale imprisonment and slaughter which the jewish people.
are suffering under hitlers fascist heels.
we will build us a new society a society of peace and plenty.
there will be no color line no jim crow trains no lynching.
that is why my dear im here in spain.
americas policy toward spain had been a grave mistake franklin d roosevelt 1882 1945 told his cabinet in early 1939 the policy we should have adopted was to forbid the transportation of munitions of war in american bottoms ships.
this could have been done and loyalist spain would still have been able to come to us for what she needed to ght for her life against franco to ght for her life and for the lives of some of the rest of us as well as events will very likely prove.
before world war ii exploded did congress come to grips with the problem when it passed a billion dollar naval construction act.
the calamitous story was repeated of too little too late.
appeasing japan and germany sulfurous war clouds had meanwhile been gathering in the tension taut far east.
in 1937 the japa nese militarists at the marco polo bridge near beijing peking touched off the explosion that led to an all out invasion of china.
in a sense this attack was the curtainraiser of world war ii.
roosevelt shrewdly declined to invoke the recently passed neutrality legislation by refusing to call the china incident an ofcially declared war.
if he had put the existing restrictions into effect he would have cut off the trickle of munitions on which the chinese were desperately dependent.
the japa nese of course could continue to buy mountains of war supplies in the united states.
in chicago unofcial isolationist capital of america president roosevelt delivered his sensational quarantine speech in the autumn of 1937.
alarmed by the recent aggressions of italy and japan he called for positive endeavors to quarantine the aggressors presumably by economic embargoes.
the speech triggered a cyclone of protest from isolationists and other foes of involvement they feared that a moral quarantine would lead to a shooting quarantine.
startled by this angry response roosevelt retreated and sought less direct means to curb the dictators.
chapter 34 franklin d roosevelt and the shadow of war 1933 1941 americas isolationist mood intensied especially in regard to china.
in december 1937 japanese aviators bombed and sank an american gunboat the panay in chinese waters with a loss of two killed and thirty wounded.
in the days of 1898 when the maine went down this outrage might have provoked war.
but after tokyo hastened to make the necessary apologies and pay a proper indemnity americans breathed a deep sigh of relief.
japa nese militarists were thus encouraged to vent their anger against the superior white race by subjecting american civilians in china both male and female to humiliating slappings and strippings.
adolf hitler meanwhile grew louder and bolder in europe.
in 1935 he had openly outed the treaty of versailles by introducing compulsory military ser vice in germany.
the next year he brazenly marched into the demilitarized german rhineland likewise contrary to the detested treaty while france and britain looked on in an agony of indecision.
lashing his following to a frenzy hitler undertook to persecute and then exterminate the jewish population in the areas under his control.
in the end he wiped out about 6 million innocent victims mostly in gas chambers.
calling upon his people to sacrice butter for guns he whipped the new german air force and mechanized ground divisions into the most devastating military machine the world had yet seen.
suddenly in march 1938 hitler bloodlessly occupied german speaking austria his birthplace.
the democratic powers wringing their hands in despair prayed that this last grab would satisfy his passion for conquest.
but like a drunken reveler calling for madder music and stronger wine hitler could not stop.
intoxicated by his recent gains he began to make bullying demands for the german inhabited sudetenland of neighboring czechoslovakia.
the leaders of britain and france eager to appease hitler sought frantically to bring the dispute to the conference table.
president roosevelt also deeply alarmed kept the wires hot with personal messages to both hitler and mussolini urging a peaceful settlement.
a conference was nally held in munich germany in september 1938.
the western european democracies badly unprepared for war betrayed czechoslovakia to germany when they consented to the shearing away of the sudetenland.
they hoped and these hopes were shared by the american people that the concessions at the conference table would slake hitlers thirst for power and bring peace in our time indeed hitler publicly promised that the sudetenland is the last territorial claim i have to make in europe what next.
1938 the western european democracies looked on helplessly as nazi germany swallowed up austria and part of czechoslovakia in 1938 and hitlers juggernaut seemed unstoppable.
appeasement of the dictators symbolized by the ugly word munich turned out to be merely surrender on the installment plan.
it was like giving a cannibal a nger in the hope of saving an arm.
in march 1939 scarcely six months later hitler suddenly erased the rest of czechoslovakia from the map contrary to his solemn vows.
the democratic world was again stunned.
hitlers belligerency and u s neutrality joseph stalin the sphinx of the kremlin was a key to the peace puzzle.
in the summer of 1939 the british and french were busily negotiating with moscow hopeful of securing a mutual defense treaty that would halt hitler.
but mutual suspicions proved insuperable.
then the soviet union astounded the world by signing on august 23 1939 a nonaggression treaty with the german dictator.
the notorious hitler stalin pact meant that the nazi german leader now had a green light to make war hitler launches his war on poland and the western democracies without fearing a stab in the back from the soviet union his communist arch foe.
consternation struck those wishful thinkers in western europe who had fondly hoped that hitler might be sicced upon stalin so that the twin menaces would bleed each other to death.
it was as plain as the mustache on stalins face that the wily soviet dictator was plotting to turn his german accomplice against the western democracies.
the two warring camps would then kill each other off and leave stalin bestriding europe like a colossus.
with the signing of the nazi soviet pact world war ii was only hours away.
hitler now demanded from neighboring poland a return of the areas wrested from germany after world war i.
failing to secure satisfaction he sent his mechanized divisions crashing into poland at dawn on september 1 1939.
britain and france honoring their commitments to poland promptly declared war.
at long last they perceived the folly of continued appeasement.
but they were powerless to aid poland which succumbed in three weeks to hitlers smashing strategy of terror.
stalin as prearranged secretly in his fateful pact with hitler came in on the kill for his share of old russian poland.
long dreaded world war ii was now fully launched and the long truce of 1919 1939 had come to an end.
president roosevelt speedily issued the routine proclamations of neutrality.
americans were overwhelmingly anti nazi and anti hitler they fervently hoped that the democracies would win they fondly believed that the forces of righteousness would triumph as in 1918.
but they were desperately determined to stay out they were not going to be suckers again.
neutrality promptly became a heated issue in the united states.
ill prepared britain and france urgently needed american airplanes and other weapons but the neutrality act of 1937 raised a sternly forbidding president roosevelt was roused at 3 a m on september 1 1939 by a telephone call from ambassador william bullitt 1891 1967 in paris mr president several german divisions are deep in polish territory.
there are reports of bombers over the city of warsaw.
fdr replied well bill it has come at last.
god help us all.
roosevelt summoned congress in special session shortly after the invasion of poland to consider lifting the arms embargo.
after six hectic weeks of debate a makeshift law emerged.
the neutrality act of 1939 provided that henceforth the european democracies might buy american war materials but only on a cash and carry basis this meant that they would have to transport the munitions in their own ships after paying for them in cash.
america would thus avoid loans war debts and the torpedoing of american arms carriers.
while congress thus loosened former restrictions in response to interventionist cries it added others in response to isolationist fears.
roosevelt was now also authorized to proclaim danger zones into which american merchant ships would be forbidden to enter.
this unneutral neutrality law unfortunately hurt china which was effectively blockaded by the imperial japa nese navy.
but despite its defects it clearly favored the european democracies against the dictators.
as the british and french navies controlled the atlantic the european aggressors could not send their ships to buy americas munitions.
the united states not only improved its moral position but simultaneously helped its economic position.
overseas demand for war goods brought a sharp upswing from the recession of 1937 1938 and ultimately solved the decadelong unemployment crisis see figure 33 4 on p 847.
the fall of france the months following the collapse of poland while france and britain marked time were known as the phony war an ominous silence fell on europe as hitler shifted his victorious divisions from poland for a knockout blow at france.
inaction during this anxious period was relieved by the soviets who wantonly attacked neighboring finland in an effort to secure strategic buffer territory.
the debt paying finns who had a host of admirers in america were speedily granted 30 million by an isolationist congress for nonmilitary supplies.
but despite heroic resistance finland was nally attened by the soviet steamroller.
an abrupt end to the phony war came in april 1940 when hitler again without warning overran his weaker neighbors denmark and norway.
hardly pausing for breath the next month he attacked the netherlands and belgium followed by a paralyzing blow at france.
by late june france was forced to surrender but not until mussolini had pounced on its rear for a jackals share of the loot.
in a pell mell but successful chapter 34 franklin d roosevelt and the shadow of war 1933 1941 adolf hitler 1889 1945 promised to win his fellow germans lebensraum or living space and to win it by war if necessary.
in his eyes his nationalist and racist crusade justied every violent means at hand.
as he told his commanders when you start a war what matters is not who is right but who wins.
close your hearts to pity.
act with brutality.
eighty million germans must get what is their due.
their existence must be made secure.
the stronger man is in the right.
hitler swaggers into paris 1940 the fall of france to german forces in june 1940 was a galling blow to french pride and convinced many americans that their country must mobilize to defeat the nazi menace.
evacuation from the french port of dunkirk the british managed to salvage the bulk of their shattered and partially disarmed army.
the crisis providentially brought forth an inspired leader in prime minister winston churchill the bulldog jawed orator who nerved his people to ght off the fearful air bombings of their cities.
frances sudden collapse shocked americans out of their daydreams.
stouthearted britons singing therell always be an eng land were all that stood between hitler and the death of constitutional government in europe.
if britain went under hitler would have at his disposal the workshops shipyards and slave labor of western europe.
he might even have the powerful british eet as well.
this frightening possibility which seemed to pose a dire threat to american security steeled the american people to a tremendous effort.
roosevelt moved with electrifying energy and dispatch.
he called upon an already debt burdened nation to build huge aireets and a two ocean navy which could also check japan.
congress jarred out of its apathy toward preparedness within a year appropriated the astounding sum of 37 billion.
this gure was more than the total cost of ghting world war i and about ve times larger than any new deal annual budget.
congress also passed a conscription law approved september 6 1940.
under this mea sure americas rst peacetime draft provision was made for training each year 1 2 million troops and 800 000 reserves.
president roosevelt made a compelling case against the isolationists in a speech at the university of virginia on june 10 1940 some indeed still hold to the now somewhat obvious delusion that we of the united states can safely permit the united states to become a lone island a lone island in a world dominated by the philosophy of force.
such an island may be the dream of those who still talk and vote as isolationists.
such an island represents to me and to the overwhelming majority of americans today a helpless nightmare of a people without freedom the nightmare of a people lodged in prison handcuffed hungry and fed through the bars from day to day by the contemptuous unpitying masters of other continents.
public opinion polling in the 1930s n 1936 the prominent news publication literary digest made a monumental gaffe when it relied on public opinion polling data to forecast a victory for the republican candidate alf landon over the incumbent franklin d roosevelt.
as it happened roosevelt racked up a monstrous majority winning the electoral votes of all but two states.
the digests error had been to compile its polling lists from records of automobile registration and telephone directories unwittingly skewing its sample toward relatively well off voters in an era when fewer than half of american families owned either a car or a telephone.
the digests embarrassing mistake ended an era of informal polling techniques as new scientically sophisticated polling orga ni zations founded by george gallup and elmo roper forged to the fore.
from this date forward polling became a standard tool for marketers and advertisers as well as for political strategists and historians.
yet controversy has long clouded the relationship between pollsters and politicians who are often accused of abdicating their roles as leaders and slavishly deferring to public opinion rather than trying to shape it.
franklin roosevelt confronted this issue in the 1930s as polls seemed to con rm the stubborn isolationism of the american people even as the president grew increasingly convinced that the united states must play a more active international role.
what do the poll results below suggest about roosevelts handling of this issue.
about the reliability of polling data.
what are the legitimate political uses of publicopinion polls.
how valuable are they to the historian.
u s oct 3 39 do you think the united states should do everything possible to help england and france win the war except go to war ourselves.
u s may 29 40 if the question of the united states going to war against germany came up for a national vote to go to war go into the war or stay out of the war.
aipo i yes 62 no 38 2.
u s oct 3 39 if it appears that germany is defeating england and france should the united states declare war on germany and send our army and navy to europe to fight.
aipo national total.
yes 29 no 71 yes 16 no 84 june 11 40.
go in 19 stay out 81 4.
u s aug 5 41 should the united states go to war now against japan.
aipo oct 22 41.
yes 22 no no opinion 78 100 11 by geographical section new england.
middle atlantic east central.
west central.
33 67 jan 30 40 national total.
u s sept 17 41 should the united states go into the war now and send an army to europe to fight.
aipo yes 9 no 87 no opinion 4 6.
u s nov 5 41 if in trying to defeat germany it becomes necessary to send a large american army to europe would you favor this step.
aipo yes 47 no 46 no opinion 7 source from hadley cantril ed public opinion 1935 1946 princeton n j princeton university press 1951.
chapter 34 franklin d roosevelt and the shadow of war 1933 1941 the act was later adapted to the requirements of a global war.
the latin american bulwark likewise needed bracing.
the netherlands denmark and france all crushed under the german jackboot had orphaned colonies in the new world.
would these fall into german hands.
at the havana conference of 1940 the united states agreed to share with its twenty new world neighbors the responsibility of upholding the monroe doctrine.
this ancient dictum hitherto unilateral had been a bludgeon brandished only in the hated yankee st.
now multilateral it was to be wielded by twentyone pairs of american hands at least in theory.
refugees from the holocaust aroused by adolf hitler the ancient demon of antisemitism brutally bared its fangs.
during the late nineteenth century jewish communities in eastern europe were frequent victims of pogroms mob attacks approved or condoned by local authorities.
in modern germany primeval violence reappeared with shocking efciency on the night of november 9 1938.
instigated by a speech by nazi propagandist joseph goebbels mobs ransacked more than seven thousand jewish shops and almost all of the countrys synagogues.
at least ninety one jews lost their lives and about thirty thousand were sent to concentration camps in the turbulent wake of kristallnacht the night of broken glass many jews attempted to escape from hitlers racist juggernaut.
to take one poignant case in may 1939 937 passengers almost all of them jewish refugees boarded the ship st louis in hamburg and departed for havana.
when they reached cuba however most were denied entry for lack of a valid cuban visa.
the st louis then sailed to miami which proved no more hospitable.
president roosevelt brie y showed some interest in accepting the beleaguered passengers but restrictive immigration laws together with opposition from southern democrats and secretary of state cordell hull convinced him otherwise.
after being turned away one last time in canada the st louis eventually deposited its passengers in eng land france belgium and the netherlands where many of them subsequently perished under the nazi heel.
shattered jewish storefronts in berlin.
this photo was taken after the attacks of kristallnacht on november 9 1938.
aid for britain albert einstein arriving in america 1933 sadly the united states admitted only a trickle of jewish refugees while the holocaust engulfed european jewry.
roosevelt faced a historic decision whether to hunker down in the western hemisphere assume a fortress america defensive posture and let the rest of the world go it alone or to bolster beleaguered britain by all means short of war itself.
both sides had their advocates.
supporters of aid to britain formed propaganda groups the most potent of which was the committee to defend america by aiding the allies.
its argument was double barreled.
to interventionists it could appeal for direct succor to the british by such slogans as britain is fighting our fight to isolationists it could appeal for assistance to the democracies by all methods short of war so that the terrible con ict would be kept in faraway europe.
the isolationists both numerous and sincere were by no means silent.
determined to avoid american after reports of the nazi genocide began to be veried in 1942 roosevelt created the war refugee board which saved thousands of hungarian jews from deportation to the notorious death camp at auschwitz.
but all told only 150 000 jews mostly germans and austrians found refuge in the united states.
by the end of the war some 6 million jews had been murdered in the holocaust.
bolstering britain before the fall of france in june 1940 washington had generally observed a technical neutrality.
but now as britain alone stood between hitler and his dream of world domination the wisdom of neutrality seemed increasingly questionable.
hitler launched air attacks against britain in august 1940 preparatory to an invasion scheduled for september.
for months the battle of britain raged in the air over the british isles.
the royal air forces tenacious defense of its native islands eventually led hitler to postpone his planned invasion inde nitely.
during the precarious months of the battle of britain debate intensied in the united states over what foreign policy to embrace.
radio broadcasts from london brought the drama of the nightly german air raids directly into millions of american homes.
sympathy for britain grew but it was not yet sufcient to push the united states into war.
pro british propaganda this patriotic poster was put out by the committee to defend america by aiding the allies.
chapter 34 franklin d roosevelt and the shadow of war 1933 1941 bloodshed at all costs they orga nized the america first committee and proclaimed eng land will fight to the last american they contended that america should concentrate what strength it had to defend its own shores lest a victorious hitler after crushing britain plot a transoceanic assault.
their basic philosophy was the yanks are not coming and their most effective speechmaker was the famed aviator colonel charles a lindbergh who ironically had narrowed the atlantic in 1927.
britain was in critical need of destroyers for german submarines were again threatening to starve it out with attacks on shipping.
roosevelt moved boldly when on september 2 1940 he agreed to transfer to great britain fty old model four funnel destroyers left over from world war i.
in return the british promised to hand over to the united states eight valuable defensive base sites stretching from newfoundland to south america.
these strategically located outposts were to remain under the stars and stripes for ninetynine years.
transferring fty destroyers to a foreign navy was a highly questionable disposal of government property despite a strained interpretation of existing legislation.
the exchange was achieved by a simple presidential agreement without so much as a by your leave to congress.
applause burst from the aid to britain advocates many of whom had been urging such a step.
but condemnation arose from america firsters and other isolationists as well as from antiadministration republicans.
some of them approved the transfer but decried roosevelts secretive and arbitrary methods.
yet so grave was the crisis that the president was unwilling to submit the scheme to the uncertainties and delays of a full dress debate in the congress.
shifting warships from a neutral united states to a belligerent britain was beyond question a agrant violation of neutral obligations at least neutral obligations that had existed before hitlers barefaced aggressions rendered foolish such old fashioned concepts of fair play.
public opinion polls demonstrated that a majority of americans were determined even at the risk of armed hostilities to provide the battered british with all aid short of war shattering the two term tradition a distracting presidential election as fate decreed came in the midst of this crisis.
the two leading repub lican aspirants were round faced and at voiced senator robert a taft of ohio son of the ex president and the energetic boy wonder lawyer prosecutor thomas e dewey of new york.
but in one of the miracles of american political history the philadelphia convention was swept off its feet by a colorful latecomer wendell l willkie a german descended son of hoosier indiana.
this dynamic lawyer tousled headed longlipped broad faced and large framed had until recently been a democrat and the head of a huge public utility corporation.
a complete novice in politics he had rocketed from political nothingness in a few short weeks.
his great appeal lay in his personality for he was magnetic transparently trustful and honest in a homespun lincolnesque way.
with the galleries in philadelphia wildly chanting we want willkie the delegates nally accepted this political upstart as the only candidate who could possibly beat roosevelt.
the republican platform condemned fdrs alleged dictatorship as well as the costly and confusing zigzags of the new deal.
willkie an outspoken liberal was opposed not so much to the new deal as to its extravagances and inefciencies.
democratic critics branded him the rich mans roosevelt and the simple barefoot wall street lawyer while the rumor pot boiled roosevelt delayed to the last minute the announcement of his decision to challenge the sacred two term tradition.
despite what he described as his personal yearning for retirement he avowed that in so grave a crisis he owed his experienced hand to the ser vice of his country and humanity.
the democratic delegates in chicago realizing that only with the champ could they defeat willkie drafted him by a technically unanimous vote.
better a third term than a third rater was the war cry of many democrats.
burning with sincerity and energy willkie launched out upon a whirlwind bryanesque campaign in which he delivered over ve hundred speeches.
at times his voice became a hoarse croak.
the country was already badly split between interventionists and isolationists and willkie might have widened the breach dangerously by a violent attack on roosevelts aid to britain policies.
but seeing eye to eye with fdr on the necessity of bolstering the beleaguered democracies he refrained from assailing the presidents interventionism though objecting to his methods.
in the realm of foreign affairs there was not much to choose between the two candidates.
both promised to stay out of the war both promised to strengthen the nations defenses.
yet willkie with a mop of black the election of 1940 a campaign poster from the election of 1940 roosevelt emerged as the only president ever to break the two term tradition.
hair in his eyes hit hard at rooseveltian dictatorship and the third term.
his enthusiastic followers cried win with willkie no fourth term either and theres no indispensable man roosevelt busy at his desk with mounting problems made only a few speeches.
stung by taunts that he was leading the nation by the back door into the european slaughterhouse he repeatedly denied any such intention.
his most specic statement was at boston where he emphatically declared your boys are not going to be sent into any foreign wars a pledge that later came back to plague him.
he and his supporters vigorously defended the new deal as well as all out preparations for the defense of america and aid to the allies.
roosevelt triumphed although willkie ran a strong race.
the popular total was 27 307 819 to 22 321 018 and the electoral count was 449 to 82 see map 34 1.
this contest was much less of a walkaway than in 1932 or 1936 democratic majorities in congress remained about the same.
jubilant democrats hailed their triumph as a mandate to abolish the two term tradition.
but the truth is that roosevelt won in spite of the third term handicap.
voters generally felt that should war come the experienced hand of the tried leader was needed at the helm.
less appealing was the completely inexperienced hand of the well intentioned willkie who had never held public ofce.
the time honored argument that one should not change horses in the middle of a stream was strong especially in an era of war pumped prosperity.
roosevelt might not have won if there had not been a war crisis.
on the other hand he probably would not have run if foreign perils had not loomed so ominously.
in a sense his opponent was adolf hitler not willkie.
wa mt or id nv ca nd wy sd co wi ia ne ut az mn ks ok nm tx il mi in mo la oh ky ms al wv va nc tn ar me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 17 ri pa nj ct 4 16 8 ga de md sc fl candidate party electoral vote popular vote roosevelt democrat 85 27 307 819 54 8 15 22 321 018 44 8 willkie republican map 34 1 presidential election of 1940 with electoral vote by state willkie referred to roosevelt only as the third term candidate on election eve fdr hinted that communists and fascists were among willkies supporters.
despite these campaign conicts the two men respected each other.
fdr later asked willkie to serve as his emissary abroad and even suggested that they run together on a coalition ticket in 1944.
interactive map chapter 34 franklin d roosevelt and the shadow of war 1933 1941 a landmark lend lease law by late 1940 embattled britain was nearing the end of its nancial tether its credits in america were being rapidly consumed by insatiable war orders.
but roosevelt who had bitter memories of the wrangling over the allied debts of world war i was determined as he put it to eliminate the silly foolish old dollar sign he nally hit on the scheme of lending or leasing american arms to the reeling democracies.
when the shooting was over to use his comparison the guns and tanks could be returned just as ones next door neighbor would return a garden hose when a threatening re was put out.
but isolationist senator taft who was reputed to have the nest mind in washington until he made it up retorted that lending arms was like lending chewing gum you dont want it back who wants a chewed up tank.
the lend lease bill patriotically numbered 1776 was entitled an act further to promote the defense of the united states sprung on the country after the election was safely over it was praised by the administration as a device that would keep the nation out of the war rather than drag it in.
the underlying concept was send guns not sons or billions not bodies america so president roosevelt promised would be no to lend lease members of the massachusetts womans political club presented president roosevelt with a petition protesting adoption of the lend lease bill and picketed the white house.
they feared that americas increasing involvement with the allied cause would eventually draw their sons into battle as it did despite the presidents assurances to the contrary.
the arsenal of democracy it would send a limitless supply of arms to the victims of aggression who in turn would nish the job and keep the war on their side of the atlantic.
accounts would be settled by returning the used weapons or their equivalents to the united states when the war was ended.
lend lease was heatedly debated throughout the land and in congress.
most of the opposition came as might be expected from isolationists and antiroosevelt republicans.
the scheme was assailed as the blank check bill and in the words of isolationist senator burton wheeler as the new triple a agricultural adjustment act bill a mea sure designed to plow under every fourth american boy nevertheless lend lease was nally approved in march 1941 by sweeping majorities in both houses of congress.
lend lease was one of the most momentous laws ever to pass congress it was a challenge hurled squarely into the teeth of the axis dictators.
america pledged itself to the extent of its vast resources to bolster those nations that were indirectly defending it by ghting aggression.
when the gigantic operation ended in 1945 america had sent about 50 billion worth of arms and equipment much more than the cost to the country of world war i to those nations ghting aggressors see map 34 2.
the passing of lend lease was in effect an economic declaration of war now a shooting declaration could not be very far around the corner.
america s lend lease policy soviet union europe united states china britain africa south america australia new zealand soviet union map 34 2 main flow of lendlease aid width of arrows indicates relative amount the proud but desperate british prime minister winston churchill declared in early 1941 give us the tools and we will nish the job lend lease eventually provided the british and other allies with 50 billion worth of tools interactive map by its very nature the lend lease bill marked the abandonment of any pretense of neutrality.
it was no destroyer deal arranged privately by president roosevelt.
the bill was universally debated over drugstore counters and cracker barrels from cal i fornia all the way to maine and the sovereign citizen at last spoke through convincing majorities in congress.
most people probably realized that they were tossing the old concepts of neutrality out the window.
but they also recognized that they would play a suicidal game if they bound themselves by the oxcart rules of the nineteenth century especially while the axis aggressors themselves openly spurned international obligations.
lend lease would admittedly involve a grave risk of war but most americans were prepared to take that chance rather than see britain collapse and then face the diabolical dictators alone.
lend lease had the somewhat incidental result of gearing u s factories for all out war production.
the enormously increased capacity thus achieved helped save americas own skin when at long last the shooting war burst around its head.
hitler evidently recognized lend lease as an unofcial declaration of war.
until then germany had avoided attacking u s ships memories of americas decisive intervention in 1917 1918 were still fresh in german minds.
but after the passing of lend lease there was less point in trying to curry favor with the united states.
on may 21 1941 the robin moor an unarmed american merchantman was torpedoed and destroyed by a german submarine in the south atlantic outside a war zone.
the sinkings had started but on a limited scale.
charting a new world two globe shaking events marked the course of world war ii before the assault on pearl harbor in december 1941.
one was the fall of france in june 1940 the other was hitlers invasion of the soviet union almost exactly one year later in june 1941.
the scheming dictators hitler and stalin had been uneasy yoke fellows under the ill begotten nazi soviet pact of 1939.
as masters of the double cross neither trusted the other.
they engaged in prolonged dickering in a secret attempt to divide potential territorial spoils between them but stalin balked at dominant german control of the balkans.
hitler thereupon decided to crush his co conspirator seize the oil and other resources of the soviet union and then have two free hands to snuff out britain.
he assumed that his invincible armies would subdue stalins mongol halfwits in a few short weeks.
out of a clear sky on june 22 1941 hitler launched a devastating attack on his soviet neighbor.
this timely assault was an incredible stroke of good fortune for the democratic world or so it seemed at the time.
the two ends could now slit each others throats on the icy steppes of russia.
or they would if the soviets did not quickly collapse as many military experts predicted.
sound american strategy seemed to dictate speedy aid to moscow while it was still aoat.
roosevelt immediately promised assistance and backed up his words by making some military supplies available.
several chapter 34 franklin d roosevelt and the shadow of war 1933 1941 months later interpreting the lend lease law to mean that the defense of the ussr was now essential for the defense of the united states he extended 1 billion in lend lease the rst installment on an ultimate total of 11 billion.
meanwhile the valor of the red army combined with the white paralysis of an early russian winter had halted hitlers invaders at the gates of moscow.
with the surrender of the soviet union still a dread possibility the drama charged atlantic conference was held in august 1941.
british prime minister winston churchill with cigar embedded in his cherubic face secretly met with roosevelt on a warship off the foggy coast of newfoundland.
this was the rst of a series of history making conferences between the two statesmen for the discussion of common problems including the menace of japan in the far east.
the most memorable offspring of this get together was the eight point atlantic charter.
it was formally accepted by roosevelt and churchill and endorsed by the soviet union later that year.
suggestive of wilsons fourteen points the new covenant outlined the aspirations of the democracies for a better world at wars end.
arguing for the rights of individuals rather than nations the atlantic charter laid the groundwork for later advocacy on behalf of universal human rights.
many were surprised by how specic the document was.
opposing imperialistic annexations the charter promised that there would be no territorial changes contrary to the wishes of the inhabitants selfdetermination.
it further afrmed the right of a people to choose their own form of government and in particular to regain the governments abolished by the dictators.
among various other goals the charter declared for disarmament and a peace of security pending a permanent system of general security a new league of nations.
liberals the world over took heart from the atlantic charter as they had taken heart from wilsons compa senator later president harry s truman 1884 1972 expressed a common reaction to hitlers invasion of the soviet union in 1941 if we see that germany is winning we ought to help russia and if we see russia is winning we ought to help germany and that way let them kill as many as possible.
unexpected guest 1941 britain and america.
stalin joins the democracies rable fourteen points.
it was especially gratifying to subject populations like the poles who were then ground under the iron heel of a conqueror.
but the agreement was roundly condemned in the united states by isolationists and others hostile to roosevelt.
what right they charged had neutral america to confer with belligerent britain on common policies.
such critics missed the point the nation was in fact no longer neutral.
u s destroyers and hitlers u boats clash lend lease shipments of arms to britain on british ships were bound to be sunk by german wolf pack submarines.
if the intent was to get the munitions to eng land not to dump them into the ocean the freighters would have to be escorted by u s warships.
britain simply did not have enough destroyers.
the dangerous possibility of being convoyed into war had been mentioned in congress during the lengthy debate on lendlease but administration spokespeople had brushed america enters the war the idea aside.
their strategy was to make only one commitment at a time.
roosevelt made the fateful decision to convoy in july 1941.
by virtue of his authority as commander in chief of the armed forces the president issued orders to the navy to escort lend lease shipments as far as iceland.
the british would then shepherd them the rest of the way.
inevitable clashes with submarines ensued on the iceland run even though hitlers orders were to strike at american warships only in self defense.
in september 1941 the u s destroyer greer provocatively trailing a german u boat was attacked by the undersea craft without damage to either side.
roosevelt then proclaimed a shoot on sight policy.
on october 17 the escorting destroyer kearny while engaged in a battle with u boats lost eleven men when it was crippled but not sent to the bottom.
two weeks later the destroyer reuben james was torpedoed and sunk off southwestern iceland with the loss of more than a hundred ofcers and enlisted men.
neutrality was still inscribed on the statute books but not in american hearts.
congress responding to public pressures and confronted with a shooting war voted in mid november 1941 to pull the teeth from the now useless neutrality act of 1939.
merchant ships could henceforth be legally armed and they could enter the combat zones with munitions for britain.
americans braced themselves for wholesale attacks by hitlers submarines.
surprise assault on pearl harbor the blowup came not in the atlantic but in the faraway pacic.
this explosion should have surprised no close observer for japan since september 1940 had been a formal military ally of nazi germany americas shooting foe in the north atlantic.
japans position in the far east had grown more perilous by the hour.
it was still mired down in the costly and exhausting china incident from which it could extract neither honor nor victory.
its war machine was fatally dependent on immense shipments of steel scrap iron oil and aviation gasoline from the united states.
such assistance to the japa nese aggressor was highly unpopular in america.
but roosevelt had resolutely held off an embargo lest he goad the tokyo warlords into a descent upon the oil rich but defense poor dutch east indies.
washington late in 1940 nally imposed the rst of its embargoes on japan bound supplies.
this blow was followed in mid 1941 by a freezing of japa nese assets in the united states and a cessation of all shipments of gasoline and other sinews of war.
as the oil gauge dropped the squeeze on japan grew steadily more nerve racking.
japa nese leaders were faced with two painful alternatives.
they could either knuckle under to the americans or break out of the embargo ring by a desperate attack on the oil supplies and other riches of southeast asia.
final tense negotiations with japan took place in washington during november and early december of 1941.
the state department insisted that the japa nese clear out of china but to sweeten the pill offered to renew trade relations on a limited basis.
japa nese imperialists after waging a bitter war against the chinese for more than four years were unwilling to lose face by withdrawing at the behest of the united states.
faced with capitulation or continued conquest they chose the sword.
ofcials in washington having cracked the topsecret code of the japa nese knew that tokyos decision was for war.
but the united states as a democracy committed to public debate and action by congress could not shoot rst.
roosevelt misled by japa nese ship movements in the far east evidently expected the blow to fall on british malaya or on the philippines.
no one in high authority in washington seems to have believed that the japa nese were either strong enough or foolhardy enough to strike hawaii.
but the paralyzing blow struck pearl harbor while tokyo was deliberately prolonging negotiations in washington.
japa nese bombers winging in from distant aircraft carriers attacked without warning on the black sunday morning of december 7 1941.
it was a date as roosevelt told congress which will live in infamy about three thousand casualties were inicted on american personnel many aircraft were destroyed roosevelts war message to congress began with these famous words yesterday december 7 1941 a date which will live in infamy the united states of america was suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and air forces of the empire of japan.
chapter 34 franklin d roosevelt and the shadow of war 1933 1941 the battleship west virginia the shocking japanese attack on pearl harbor on december 7 1941 propelled the united states into world war ii.
one of the rst ships to be hit the uss west virginia quickly sank at its mooring taking at least seventy sailors down with it.
by september 1944 the west virginia had been repaired and was back in service.
the battleship eet was virtually wiped out when all eight of the craft were sunk or otherwise immobilized and numerous small vessels were damaged or destroyed.
fortunately for america the three priceless aircraft carriers happened to be outside the harbor.
an angered congress the next day ofcially recognized the war that had been thrust upon the united states.
the roll call in the senate and house fell only one vote short of unanimity.
germany and italy allies of japan spared congress the indecision of debate by declaring war on december 11 1941.
this challenge was formally accepted on the same day by a unanimous vote of both senate and house.
the unofcial war already of many months duration was now ofcial.
americas transformation from bystander to belligerent japans hara kiri gamble in hawaii paid off only in the short run.
true the pacic eet was largely destroyed or immobilized but the sneak attack aroused and united america as almost nothing else could have done.
to the very day of the blowup a strong majority of americans still wanted to keep out of war.
but the bombs that pulverized pearl harbor blasted the isolationists into silence.
the only thing left to do growled isolationist senator wheeler was to lick hell out of them but pearl harbor was not the full answer to the question of why the united states went to war.
this treacherous attack was but the last explosion in a long chain reaction.
following the fall of france americans were confronted with a devils dilemma.
they desired above all to stay out of the con ict yet they did not want britain to be knocked out.
they wished to halt japans conquests in the far east conquests that menaced not only american trade and security but international peace as well.
to keep britain from collapsing the roosevelt administration felt compelled to extend the unneutral aid that invited attacks from german submarines.
to keep japan from expanding washington undertook to cut off vital japa nese supplies with embargoes that invited possible retaliation.
rather than let democracy die and dictatorship rule supreme most citizens were evidently determined to support a policy that might lead to war.
people to know chronology fdr torpedoes london economic conference united states recognizes soviet union fdr declares good neighbor policy toward latin america hitler becomes german chancellor germany quits league of nations tydings mcdufe act provides for philippine independence on july 4 1946 reciprocal trade agreements act u s marines vacate haiti maos long march into northern china begins nuremberg laws implemented against german jews mussolini invades ethiopia u s neutrality act of 1935 japan quits league of nations u s neutrality act of 1936 mussolini and hitler form rome berlin axis stalin begins great purge german troops invade rhineland 1936 spanish civil war u s neutrality act of 1937 panay incident japan invades china key terms london economic conference 853 good neighbor policy 855 reciprocal trade agreements act 855 rome berlin axis 856 johnson debt default act 857 neutrality acts of 1935 1936 and 1937 858 abraham lincoln brigade 858 hitler seizes austria munich conference kristallnacht in germany hitler seizes all of czechoslovakia nazi soviet pact world war ii begins in europe with hitlers invasion of poland u s neutrality act of 1939 fall of france hitler invades denmark norway netherlands and belgium united states invokes rst peacetime draft havana conference battle of britain bases for destroyers deal with britain fdr defeats willkie for presidency lend lease act hitler attacks soviet union atlantic charter japan attacks pearl harbor people to know quarantine speech 859 appeasement 860 hitler stalin pact 860 neutrality act of 1939 861 kristallnacht 864 war refugee board 865 lend lease bill 868 atlantic charter 870 pearl harbor 871 benito mussolini adolf hitler francisco franco cordell hull wendell l willkie chapter 34 franklin d roosevelt and the shadow of war 1933 1941 to learn more peter n carroll the odyssey of the abraham lincoln brigade americans in the spanish civil war 1994 robert dallek franklin d roosevelt and american foreign policy 1932 1945 1995 justus d doenecke storm on the horizon the challenge to american intervention 1939 1941 2000 irwin f gellman good neighbor diplomacy united states policies in latin america 1933 1945 1979 akira iriye the globalizing of america 1913 1945 1993 manfred jonas isolationism in america 1935 1941 1966 primo levi survival in auschwitz the nazi assault on humanity 1961 b j c mckercher transition of power britains loss of global pre eminence to the united states 1930 1945 1999 gordon w prange at dawn we slept the untold story of pearl harbor 1981 david reynolds from munich to pearl harbor roosevelts america and the origins of the second world war 2001 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at america in world war ii 1941 1945 never before have we had so little time in which to do so much.
franklin d roosevelt 1942 t he united states was plunged into the inferno of world war ii with the most stupefying and humiliating military defeat in its history.
in the dismal months that ensued the democratic world teetered on the edge of disaster.
japans fanatics forgot that whoever stabs a king must stab to kill.
a wounded but still potent american giant pulled itself out of the mud of pearl harbor grimly determined to avenge the bloody treachery.
get japan rst was the cry that rose from millions of infuriated americans especially on the pacic coast.
these outraged souls regarded americas share in the global con ict as a private war of vengeance in the pacic with the european front a kind of holding operation.
but washington in the so called abc 1 agreement with the british had earlier and wisely adopted the grand strategy of getting germany rst if america diverted its main strength to the pacic hitler might crush both the soviet union and britain and then emerge unconquerable in fortress europe.
but if germany was knocked out rst the combined allied forces could be concentrated on japan and its daring game of conquest would be up.
meanwhile just enough american strength would be sent to the pacic to prevent japan from digging in too deeply.
the get germany rst strategy was the solid foundation on which all american military strategy was built.
but it encountered much ignorant criticism from two sted americans who thirsted for revenge against japan.
aggrieved protests were also registered by shorthanded american commanders in the pacic and by chinese and australian allies.
but president roosevelt a competent strategist in his own right wisely resisted these pressures.
the allies trade space for time given time the allies seemed bound to triumph.
but would they be given time.
true they had on their side the great mass of the worlds population but the wolf is this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 never intimidated by the number of the sheep.
the united states was the mightiest military power on earth potentially.
but wars are won with bullets not blueprints.
indeed america came perilously close to losing the war to the well armed aggressors before it could begin to throw its full weight onto the scales.
time in a sense was the most needed munition.
expense was no limitation.
the overpowering problem confronting america was to retool itself for all out war production while praying that the dictators would not meanwhile crush their adversaries who still remained in the eld notably britain and the soviet union.
haste was all the more imperative because the highly skilled german scientists might turn up with unbeatable secret weapons including rocket bombs and perhaps even atomic arms.
americas task was far more complex and backbreaking than during world war i.
it had to feed clothe and arm itself as well as transport its forces to regions as far separated as britain and burma.
more than that it had to send a vast amount of food and munitions to its hard pressed allies who stretched all the way from the ussr to australia.
could the american people reputedly gone soft measure up to this herculean task.
was democracy rotten and decadent as the dictators sneeringly proclaimed.
the shock of war national unity was no worry thanks to the electrifying blow by the japa nese at pearl harbor.
american communists had denounced the anglo french imperialist war before hitler attacked stalin in 1941 but they now clamored for an unmitigated assault on the axis powers.
the handful of strutting pro hitlerites in the united states melted away while millions of italian americans and german americans loyally supported the nations war program.
in contrast to world war i when the patriotism of millions of immigrants was hotly questioned world war ii actually speeded the assimilation of many ethnic groups into american society.
immigration had been choked off for almost two decades before 1941 and americas ethnic communities were now composed of well settled members whose votes were crucial to franklin roosevelts democratic party.
consequently there was virtually no government witch hunting of minority groups as had happened in world war i.
a painful exception was the plight of some 110 000 japanese americans concentrated on the pacic coast enemy aliens when the united states suddenly found itself at war with germany italy and japan in december 1941 noncitizen german italian and japanese immigrants became enemy aliens and were required to register with the authorities.
several hundred resident germans and italians were detained in internment camps but the harshest treatment was meted out to the japanese some 110 000 of whom noncitizens and citizens alike were eventually interned.
ironically the two japanese american boy scouts posting this notice in los angeles would soon be on their way to a government detention camp.
see makers of america the japanese pp.
the washington top command fearing that they might act as saboteurs for japan in case of invasion forcibly herded them together in concentration camps though about two thirds of them were american born u s citizens.
this brutal precaution authorized under executive order no.
9066 was both unnecessary and unfair as the loyalty and combat record of japa nese americans proved to be admirable.
but a wave of post pearl harbor hysteria backed by the long historical swell of anti japa nese prejudice on the west coast temporarily robbed many americans of their good sense and their sense of justice.
the internment camps deprived these uprooted americans of dignity and basic rights the internees also lost hundreds of millions of dollars in property and foregone earnings.
the wartime supreme court in 1944 upheld the constitutionality of the japa nese relocation in korematsu v u s.
but more than four decades later in 1988 the u s.
the internment of japanese americans american song titles after pearl harbor combined nationalism with unabashed racism we are the sons of the rising guns oh you little son of an oriental to be specic its our pacic the sun will soon be setting on the land of the rising sun the japs dont stand a chinamans chance and were gonna find a fellow who is yellow and beat him red white and blue monica sone b.
1919 a college age japanese american woman in seattle recorded the shock she and her brother felt when they learned of executive order no.
9066 which authorized the war department to remove japanese aliens and citizens alike from their homes anti japanese poster world war ii government propaganda during the war exploited racial stereotypes often depicting japanese people with big teeth and poor vision.
government ofcially apologized for its actions and approved the payment of reparations of 20 000 to each camp survivor.
the war prompted other changes in the american mood.
many programs of the once popular new deal including the civilian conservation corps the works progress administration and the national youth administration were wiped out by the conser vative congress elected in 1942.
roosevelt declared in 1943 that dr.
new deal was going into retirement to be replaced by dr.
win the war his announcement acknowledged not only the urgency of the war effort but the power of the revitalized conser vative forces in the country.
the era of new deal reform was over.
world war ii was no idealistic crusade as world war i had been.
the washington government did make in anger henry and i read and reread the executive order.
henry crumbled the newspaper in his hand and threw it against the wall.
doesnt my citizenship mean a single blessed thing to anyone.
why doesnt somebody make up my mind for me.
first they want me in the army.
now theyre going to slap an alien 4 c on me because of my ancestry.
once more i felt like a despised pathetic two headed freak a japanese and an american neither of which seemed to be doing me any good.
some effort to propagandize at home and abroad with the atlantic charter but the accent was on action.
opinion polls in 1942 revealed that nine out of ten americans could cite no provisions of the atlantic charter.
a majority then and a near majority two years later confessed to having no clear idea what the war is about all americans knew was that they had a dirty job on their hands and that the only way out was forward.
they went about their bloody task with astonishing efciency.
building the war machine the war crisis caused the drooping american economy to snap to attention.
massive military orders over 100 billion in 1942 alone almost instantly soaked up the idle industrial capacity of the still lingering great depression.
orchestrated by the war production board wpb american factories poured forth an avalanche makers of america theafricanthe great japanese american migration i n 1853 the american commodore matthew perry like many chinese and european immigrants sailed four gunboats into japans uraga bay and demost japa nese who came to america expected to stay only temporarily.
they planned to work hard for wages manded that the nation open itself to diplomatic and that were high by japa nese standards and then to recommercial exchange with the united states.
perrys turn home and buy land.
in hawaii most japa nese arrival ended two centuries of japans self imposed labored on the vast sugar cane plantations.
on the isolation and eventually led to the overthrow of the mainland they initially found migratory work on the last japa nese shogun military ruler and the restorarailroads or in sh fruit or vegetable canneries.
a seption of the emperor.
within two decades of perrys ararate japa nese economy of restaurants stores and rival japans new meiji government had launched boardinghouses soon sprang up in cities to serve the the nation on an ambitious program of industrializaimmigrants needs.
tion and militarization designed to make it the ecofrom such humble beginnings many japa nese nomic and political equal of the western powers.
particularly those on the pacic coast quickly moved as japan rapidly modernized its citizens increasinto farming.
in the late nineteenth century the spread ingly took ship for america.
a steep land tax imposed of irrigation shifted cal i fornia agriculture from grain by the meiji government to pay for its reforms drove to fruits and vegetables and the invention of the remore than 300 000 japa nese farmers off their land.
in frigerated railcar opened hungry new markets in the 1884 the meiji government permitted hawaiian planteast.
the japa nese with centuries of experience in iners to recruit contract laborers from among this distensive farming arrived just in time to take advantage placed population.
by the 1890s many japa nese were of these developments.
as early as 1910 japanese farmsailing beyond hawaii to the ports of long beach san ers produced 70 percent of cal i fornias strawberries francisco and seattle.
and by 1940 they grew 95 percent of the states snap between 1885 and 1924 roughly 200 000 japa nese beans and more than half of its tomatoes.
one japanese migrated to hawaii and around 180 000 more ventured to the u s mainland.
they were a select group because the meiji government saw overseas japa nese as representatives of their homeland it strictly regulated emigration.
thus japa nese immigrants to america arrived with more money than their european counterparts.
also because of japans system of compulsory education japa nese immigrants on average were better educated and more literate than european immigrants.
women as well as men migrated.
the japanese government wanting to avoid the problems of an itinerant bachelor society that it observed among the chinese in the united states actively promoted womens migration.
although most japa nese immigrants were young men in their twenties and thirties thousands of women also ventured to hawaii and the mainland as contract laborers or picture campaign against the japanese hollywood california 1923 brides so called because their courtship had long before japanese americans were interned during world consisted exclusively of an exchange of photo war ii as a security risk they faced intense discrimination graphs with their prospective husbands.
throughout the united states.
japanese american evacuees 1942 after the u s armys western defense command ordered the forced evacuation of all japanese and japanese americans living on the pacic coast families had no choice but to pack up whatever they could carry and move to the relocation centers hastily erected farther inland.
farmer known as the potato king sent his children to harvard and stanford and died in 1926 with an estate valued at 15 million.
but the very success of the japa nese proved a lightning rod for trouble.
on the west coast japa nese immigrants had long endured racist barbs and social segregation.
increasingly white workers and farmers jealous of japa nese success pushed for immigration restrictions.
bowing to this pressure president theodore roosevelt in 1908 negotiated the gentlemens agreement under which the japa nese government voluntarily agreed to limit emigration.
in 1913 the cal ifornia legislature denied japa nese immigrants already living in the united states the right to own land.
legally barred from becoming citizens japa nese immigrants the issei from the japa nese word for rst became more determined than ever that their american born children the nissei from the japanese word for second would reap the full benets of their birthright.
japa nese parents encouraged their children to learn eng lish to excel in school and to get a college education.
many nissei grew up in two worlds a fact they often recognized by americanizing their japa nese names.
although education and acculturation did not protect the nissei from the hysteria of world war ii those assets did give them a springboard to success in the postwar era.
three boys at manzanar by toyo miyatake 1895 1979 miyatake was an acclaimed japanese american photographer with his own studio in los angeles before he and his family were evacuated to the manzanar internment camp.
he was determined to pursue his craft there at rst working secretly and then with the knowledge of the authorities.
his pictures are the only photographic records of daily camp life taken by an internee.
the guards allowed him to step outside the barbed wire fence to take this photograph.
chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 of weaponry 40 billion bullets 300 000 aircraft 76 000 ships 86 000 tanks and 2 6 million machine guns.
miracle man shipbuilder henry j kaiser was dubbed sir launchalot for his prodigies of ship construction one of his ships was fully assembled in fourteen days complete with life jackets and coat hangers.
the war production board halted the manufacture of nonessential items such as passenger cars.
it assigned priorities for transportation and access to raw materials.
when the japa nese invasion of british ma the four freedoms by norman rockwell in his january 6 1941 speech to congress requesting lend lease aid to the allies president roosevelt spoke eloquently of the four freedoms then threatened by nazi and japanese aggression.
they are here given pictorial representation by norman rockwell probably the most popular and best loved american artist of the time.
laya and the dutch east indies snapped americas lifeline of natural rubber the government imposed a national speed limit and gasoline rationing in order to conserve rubber and built fty one synthetic rubber plants.
by wars end they were far outproducing the prewar supply.
farmers too rolled up their sleeves and increased their output.
the armed forces drained the farms of workers but heavy new investment in agricultural machinery and improved fertilizers more than made up the difference.
in 1944 and 1945 blue jeaned farmers hauled in record breaking billion bushel wheat harvests.
these wonders of production also brought economic strains.
full employment and scarce consumer goods fueled a sharp inationary surge in 1942.
the ofce of price administration opa eventually brought ascending prices under control with extensive regulations.
rationing held down the consumption of critical goods such as meat and butter though some black marketeers and meatleggers cheated the system.
the national war labor board nwlb imposed ceilings on wage increases.
labor unions whose membership grew from about 10 million to more than 13 million workers during the war ercely resented the government dictated wage ceilings.
despite the no strike pledges of most of the major unions a rash of labor walkouts plagued the war effort.
prominent among the strikers were the united mine workers who several times were called off the job by their crusty and iron willed chieftain john l lewis.
threats of lost production through strikes became so worrisome that congress in june 1943 passed the smith connally anti strike act.
this act authorized the federal government to seize and operate tied up industries.
strikes against any government operated industry were made a criminal offense.
under the act washington took over the coal mines and for a brief period the railroads.
yet work stoppages although dangerous actually accounted for less than 1 percent of the total working hours of the united states wartime laboring force a record better than blockaded britains.
american workers on the whole were commendably committed to the war effort.
manpower and womanpower the armed ser vices enlisted nearly 15 million men in world war ii and some 216 000 women who were em mobilizing the economy poster appeals and slogans urging women to enlist in the waacs womens army auxiliary corps were speed them back join the waac id rather be with them than waiting for them back the attack be a waac.
for america is calling and a song throwback to world war i the waacs and waves will win the war parlez vous ployed for noncombat duties.
best known of these women in arms were the waacs army waves navy and spars coast guard.
as the draft net was tightened after pearl harbor millions of young men were plucked from their homes and clothed in gi government issue outts.
as the arsenal of democracy the united states exempted certain key catego ries of industrial and agricultural workers from the draft in order to keep its mighty industrial and foodproducing machines humming.
but even with these exemptions the draft left the nations farms and factories so short of personnel that new workers had to be found.
an agreement with mexico in 1942 brought thousands of mexican agricultural workers called braceros across the border to harvest the fruit and grain crops of the west.
the bracero program outlived the war by some twenty years becoming a xed feature of the agricultural economy in many western states.
even more dramatic was the march of women onto the factory oor.
more than 6 million women took up jobs outside the home over half of them had never before worked for wages.
many of them were mothers and the government was obliged to set up some 3 000 daycare centers to care for rosie the riveters children war workers more than 6 million women more than 3 million of them homemakers who had never before worked for wages entered the work force during world war ii.
in contrast to the experience of women workers in world war i many of these newly employed women continued as wage workers after the war ended.
chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 while she drilled the fuselage of a heavy bomber or joined the links of a tank track.
when the war ended rosie and many of her sisters were in no hurry to put down their tools.
they wanted to keep on working and often did.
the war thus foreshadowed an eventual revolution in the roles of women in american society.
yet the wars immediate impact on womens lives has frequently been exaggerated.
the great majority of american women especially those with husbands present in the home or with small children to care for did not work for wages in the wartime economy but continued in their traditional roles.
in both britain and the soviet union a far greater percentage of women including mothers were pressed into industrial employment as the gods of war laid a much heavier hand on those societies than they did on the united states.
a poll in 1943 revealed that a majority of american women would not take a job in a war plant if it were offered.
at wars end two thirds of women war workers left the labor force.
many of them were forced out of their jobs by employers and unions eager to reemploy returning ser vicemen.
but half of them told census takers that they quit their jobs voluntarily because of family obligations.
the immediate postwar period witnessed not a permanent widening of womens employment opportunities but a widespread rush into suburban domesticity and the mothering of the baby boomers who were born by the tens of millions in the decade and a half after 1945.
america was destined to experience a thoroughgoing revolution in womens status later in the postwar period but that epochal change was only beginning to gather momentum in the war years.
6 billion of federally nanced industrial facilities.
here were the seeds of the postwar blossoming of the sunbelt see map 35 1.
despite this economic stimulus in the south some 1 6 million blacks left the land of their ancient enslavement to seek jobs in the war plants of the west and north.
forever after race relations constituted a national not a regional issue.
explosive tensions developed over employment housing and segregated facilities.
black leader a philip randolph head of the brotherhood of sleeping car porters threatened a massive negro march on washington in 1941 to demand wartime migrations the war also proved to be a demographic cauldron churning and shifting the american population.
many of the 15 million men and women in uniform having seen new sights and glimpsed new horizons chose not to go home again at wars end.
war industries sucked people into boomtowns like los angeles detroit seattle and baton rouge.
cal i fornias population grew by nearly 2 million.
the south experienced especially dramatic changes.
franklin roosevelt had called the south the nations number one economic problem in 1938 when war came he seized the opportunity to accelerate the regions economic development.
the states of the old confederacy received a disproportionate share of defense contracts including nearly segregation in the military a white ofcer reviews the 99th pursuit squadron the famed tuskegee airmen they ew more than sixteen hundred ghtersupport missions in north africa and compiled an outstanding record never losing a bomber to enemy aircraft.
but these iers were among the few african americans who saw combat duty in world war ii when a still strictly segregated military assigned most blacks to construction longshoreman and mess hall service.
population shifts equal opportunities for blacks in war jobs and in the armed forces.
roosevelts response was to issue an executive order forbidding discrimination in defense industries.
in addition the president established the fair employment practices commission fepc to monitor compliance with his edict.
blacks were also drafted into the armed forces though they were still generally assigned to ser vice branches rather than combat units and subjected to petty degradations such as segregated blood banks for the wounded.
but in general the war helped to embolden blacks in their long struggle for equality.
they rallied behind the slogan double v victory over the dictators abroad and over racism at home.
membership in the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp shot up almost to the half million mark and a new 0 north west why is it we negro soldiers who are as much a part of uncle sams great military machine as any cannot be treated with equality and the respect due us.
the same respect which white soldiers expect and demand from us.
there is great need for drastic change in this mans army.
how can we be trained to protect america which is called a free nation when all around us rears the ugly head of segregation.
detroit new york washington d c denver 64 0 0 0 san francisco an african american soldier angrily complained about segregation in the armed forces during world war ii 910 000 000 los angeles san diego 0 memphis 00 south fort worth dallas average population increase of fast growing cities 1940 1950 baton rouge mobile houston over 400 000 200 000 400 000 100 000 200 000 50 000 100 000 map 35 1 internal migration in the united states during world war ii few events in american history have moved the american people about so massively as world war ii.
the west and the south boomed and several warindustry cities grew explosively.
a majority of migrants from the south were blacks 1 6 million african americans left the region in the 1940s.
source united states department of labor bureau of labor statistics.
interactive map chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 arms.
more than 90 percent of indians resided on reservations in 1940 six decades later more than half lived in cities with a large concentration in southern cal i fornia.
some twenty ve thousand native american men served in the armed forces.
comanches in europe and navajos in the pacic made especially valuable contributions as code talkers they transmitted radio messages in their native languages which were incomprehensible to the germans and the japa nese.
the sudden rubbing against one another of unfamiliar peoples produced some distressingly violent friction.
in 1943 young zoot suit clad mexicans and mexican americans in los angeles were viciously attacked by anglo sailors who cruised the streets in taxicabs searching for victims.
order was restored only navajo code talkers 1943 one of the best kept secrets of world war ii was the use of the navajo language in a marine corps code designed to confuse the japanese.
two marines in the leatherneck unit made up of native americans from arizona and new mexico transmitted in code during the battle for bougainville island in the south pacic in 1943 militant organization committed to nonviolent direct action the congress of racial equality core was founded in 1942.
the northward migration of african americans accelerated after the war thanks to the advent of the mechanical cotton picker an invention whose impact rivaled that of eli whitneys cotton gin.
introduced in 1944 this new mechanical marvel did the work of fty people at about one eighth the cost.
overnight the cotton souths historic need for cheap labor disappeared.
their muscle no longer required in dixie some 5 million black tenant farmers and sharecroppers headed north in the three decades after the war.
theirs was one of the great migrations in american history comparable in size to the immigrant oods from ireland italy and poland.
within a single generation a near majority of african americans gave up their historic homeland and their rural way of life.
by 1970 half of all blacks lived outside the south and urban had become almost a synonym for black.
the speed and scale of these changes jolted the migrants and sometimes convulsed the communities that received them.
the war also prompted an exodus of native americans from the reservations.
thousands of indian men and women found war work in the major cities and thousands more answered uncle sams call to let john henry go this image from the cover of the national urban leagues publication opportunity reects the rising militancy of african americans in the world war ii era.
that militancy helped to energize the civil rights movement in the postwar years.
economics on the home front after the mexican ambassador made an emotional plea pointing out that such outbreaks were grist for nazi propaganda mills.
at almost the same time an even more brutal race riot that killed twenty ve blacks and nine whites erupted in detroit.
holding the home front despite these ugly episodes americans on the home front suffered little from the war compared to the peoples of the other ghting nations.
by wars end much of the planet was a smoking ruin.
but in america the war invigorated the economy and lifted the country out of a decade long depression.
the gross national product vaulted from less than 100 billion in 1940 to more than 200 billion in 1945.
corporate prots rose from about 6 billion in 1940 to almost twice that amount four years later.
if you are going to try to go to war in a capitalist country said secretary of war henry stimson you have to let business make money out of the process or business wont work despite wage ceilings overtime pay fattened pay envelopes.
disposable personal income even after payment of wartime taxes more than doubled.
on december 7 1944 the third anniversary of pearl harbor macys department store rang up the biggest sales day in its history.
americans had never had it so good and they wanted it a lot better.
when price controls were nally lifted in 1946 americas pent up lust to consume pushed prices up 33 percent in less than two years.
the rest of the world meanwhile was still clawing its way out from under the rubble of war.
the hand of government touched more american lives more intimately during the war than ever before.
the war perhaps even more than the new deal pointed the way to the post 1945 era of big government interventionism.
every household felt the constraints of the rationing system.
millions of men and women worked for uncle sam in the armed forces.
millions more worked for him in the defense industries where their employers and unions were monitored by the fepc and the nwlb and their personal needs were cared for by government sponsored housing projects day care facilities and health plans.
the ofce of scientic research and development channeled hundreds of millions of dollars into university based scientic research establishing the partnership between the government and universities that underwrote americas technological and economic leadership in the postwar era.
the ood of war dollars not the relatively modest rivulet of new deal spending at last swept the plague of unemployment from the land.
war not enlightened social policy cured the depression.
as the postwar economy continued to depend dangerously on military spending for its health many observers looked back to the years 1941 1945 as the origins of a warfare welfare state the con ict was phenomenally expensive.
the wartime bill amounted to more than 330 billion ten times the direct cost of world war i and twice as much as all previous federal spending since 1776.
roosevelt would have preferred to follow a pay as you go policy to nance the war but the costs were simply too gigantic.
the income tax net was expanded to catch about billions of dollars 269b 252b 257b 201b 72b 16b 19b 27b 33b 37b 42b figure 35 1 the national debt 1930 1950 contrary to much popular mythology it was world war ii not the new deal that rst ballooned the national debt.
the debt accumulated to still greater amounts in the 1980s and 1990s see figure 40 1 on p 1042.
source historical statistics of the united states.
chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 four times as many people as before and maximum tax rates rose as high as 90 percent.
but despite such drastic mea sures only about two fths of the war costs were paid from current revenues.
the remainder was borrowed.
the national debt skyrocketed from 49 billion in 1941 to 259 billion in 1945 see figure 35 1.
when production nally slipped into high gear the war was costing about 10 million an hour.
this was the price of victory over such implacable enemies.
april 1942 route of bataan death march luzon bataan 119e peninsula n mariveles manila manila bay lamon bay corregidor island the rising sun in the pacic early successes of the efcient japa nese militarists were breathtaking they realized that they would have to win quickly or lose slowly.
seldom if ever has so much territory been conquered so rapidly with so little loss.
simultaneously with the assault on pearl harbor the japa nese launched widespread and uniformly successful attacks on various far eastern bastions.
these included the american outposts of guam wake and the philippines.
in a dismayingly short time the japanese invader seized not only the british chinese port of hong kong but also british malaya with its critically important supplies of rubber and tin.
nor did the japa nese tide stop there.
the overambitious soldiers of the emperor plunging into the snakeinfested jungles of burma cut the famed burma road.
this was the route over which the united states had been trucking a trickle of munitions to the armies of the chinese generalissimo jiang jieshi chiang kaishek who was still resisting the japa nese invader in china.
thereafter intrepid american aviators were forced to y a handful of war supplies to jiang over the hump of the towering himalaya mountains from the india burma theater.
meanwhile the japa nese had lunged southward against the oil rich dutch east indies.
the jungle matted islands speedily fell to the assailants after the combined british australian dutch and american naval and air forces had been smashed at an early date by their numerically superior foe.
better news came from the philippines which succeeded dramatically in slowing down the mikados warriors for ve months.
the japa nese promptly landed a small but effective army and general douglas macarthur the eloquent and egotistical american commander withdrew to a strong defensive position at bataan not far from manila.
there about twenty thousand american troops supported by a much larger force of ill trained filipinos held off violent japa nese 15n san fernando 30 km.
14n philippine is.
mindoro 120e map 35 2 corregidor and bataan interactive map attacks until april 9 1942.
the defenders reduced to eating mules and monkeys heroically traded their lives for time in the face of hopeless odds.
they grimly joked while vainly hoping for reinforcements were the battling bastards of bataan no mamma no papa no uncle sam.
before the inevitable american surrender general macarthur was ordered by washington to depart secretly for australia there to head the resistance against the japa nese.
leaving by motorboat and airplane he proclaimed i shall return after the battered remnants of his army had hoisted the white ag they were treated with vicious cruelty in the infamous eightymile bataan death march to prisoner of war camps the rst in a series of atrocities committed by both sides in the unusually savage pacic war.
the island fortress of corregidor in manila harbor held out until may 6 1942 when it too surrendered and left japa nese forces in complete control of the philippine archipelago see map 35 2.
japans high tide at midway the aggressive warriors from japan making hay while the rising sun shone pushed relentlessly southward.
the pacic theater they invaded the turtle shaped island of new guinea north of australia and landed on the solomon islands from which they threatened australia itself.
their onrush was nally checked by a crucial naval battle fought in the coral sea in may 1942.
an american carrier task force with australian support inicted heavy losses on the victory ushed japa nese.
for the rst time in history the ghting was all done by carrierbased aircraft and neither eet saw or red a shot directly at the other.
japan next undertook to seize midway island more than a thousand miles northwest of honolulu.
from this strategic base it could launch devastating assaults on pearl harbor and perhaps force the weakened american pacic eet into destructive combat possibly even compel the united states to negotiate a cease re in the pacic.
the epochal battle of midway was fought on june 3 6 1942.
admiral chester w nimitz a high grade naval strategist directed a smaller but skillfully maneuvered carrier force under admiral raymond a spruance against the powerful invading eet.
the ghting was all done by aircraft and the japa nese broke off action after losing four vitally important carriers.
midway was a pivotal victory.
combined with the battle of the coral sea the u s success at midway halted japans juggernaut.
but the thrust of the japanese into the eastern pacic did net them americas fog girt islands of kiska and attu in the aleutian archipelago off alaska.
this easy conquest aroused fear of an invasion of the united states from the northwest.
much american strength was consequently diverted to the defense of alaska including the construction of the alcan highway through canada.
yet the japanese imperialists overextended in 1942 suffered from victory disease their appetites were bigger than their stomachs.
if they had only dug in and consolidated their gains they would have been much more difcult to dislodge once the tide turned.
american leapfrogging toward tokyo hell in the pacic assaulting japanese island fortresses in the pacic was a bloody costly business.
these american soldiers perished as they stepped ashore at buna beach in new guinea in 1942.
their damaged landing craft wallows in the surf behind them.
appearing in life magazine on september 20 1943 nearly two years after pearl harbor this was the rst photograph of dead gis that the war department allowed to be published.
following the heartening victory at midway the united states for the rst time was able to seize the initiative in the pacic.
in august 1942 american ground forces gained a toehold on guadalcanal island in the solomons in an effort to protect the lifeline from america to australia through the southwest pacic.
an early naval defeat in icted by the japa nese shortened american supplies dangerously and for weeks the u s troops held on to the malarial island by their ngernails.
after several desperate sea battles for naval control the japa nese troops evacuated guadalcanal in february 1943.
japa nese losses were 20 000 compared to 1 700 for the americans.
that casualty ratio of more than ten to one japa nese to american persisted throughout the pacic war.
american and australian forces under general macarthur meanwhile had been hanging on courageously chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 to the southeastern tip of new guinea the last buffer protecting australia.
the scales of war gradually began to tip as the american navy including submarines in icted lethal losses on japa nese supply ships and troop carriers.
conquest of the north coast of new guinea was completed by august 1944 after general macarthur had fought his way westward through tropical jungle hells.
this hard won victory was the rst leg of his long return journey to the philippines.
the u s navy with marines and army divisions doing the meat grinder ghting had meanwhile been leapfrogging the japa nese held islands in the pacic.
old fashioned strategy dictated that the american forces as they drove toward tokyo should reduce the fortied japa nese outposts on their ank.
this course would have taken many bloodstained months for the holed in defenders were prepared to die to the last man in their caves.
the new strategy of island hopping called for bypassing some of the most heavily fortied japa nese posts capturing nearby islands setting up airelds on them and then neutralizing the enemy bases through heavy bombing.
deprived of essential supplies from the homeland japans outposts would slowly wither on the vine as they did.
brilliant success crowned the american attacks on the japa nese island strongholds in the pacic where admiral nimitz skillfully coordinated the efforts of naval air and ground units.
in may and august of 1943 attu and kiska in the aleutians were easily retaken.
in november 1943 bloody tarawa and makin both in the gilbert islands fell after suicidal resistance.
in january and february 1944 the key outposts of the marshall islands group succumbed after savage ghting.
especially prized were the marianas including americas conquered guam.
from bases in the marianas the united states new b 29 superbombers could carry out round trip bombing raids on japans home islands.
the assault on the marianas opened on june 19 1944 with what american pilots called the 1.
defeating the japanese in china by funneling supplies over the himalayan hump from india.
carrying the war into southeast asia a proposal much favored by the british who could thus regain singapore.
heavy bombing of japan from chinese air bases.
island hopping from the south pacic to within striking distance of the japanese home islands.
this strategy favored by general douglas macarthur was the one nally emphasized.
interactive map tia kiska i.
u a l e u is.
s map 35 3 united states thrusts in the pacic 1942 1945 american strategists had to choose among four proposed plans for waging the war against japan 60n si b er ia n alaska sovi et u n io n mongolia ma attu i ia n 40 hiroshima aug 6 1945 ch i na india nc r hu gr.
hong kong thailand gr.
indochina vichy fr.
singapore pac i f i c u s n 20 saipan june 1944 philippine sea june 1944 u s marshall is.
caroline is.
tarawa nov 1943 new guinea major battle limit of japanese conquest japanese held areas 1942 u s advance solomon is.
160w australia 140e 600 1 200 km.
guadalcanal 0s aug 1942 feb.
1943 2 coral sea may 1942 80e 120e tor equa gilbert is.
netherlands east indies indian ocean pearl harbor dec 7 1941 wake i guam july 1944 leyte oct 1944 o c e a n iwo jima march 1945 philippine is.
100e hawaiian is.
u s okinawa june burma midway is.
june 1942 japan tokyo nagasaki aug 9 1945 180 160e 40s 0 battles above and below the sea great marianas turkey shoot a combination of the combat superiority of the recently developed american hellcat ghter plane and the new technology of the antiaircraft proximity fuse destroyed nearly 250 japa nese aircraft with a loss of only 29 american planes.
the following day in the battle of the philippine sea u s naval forces sank several japa nese carriers.
the japa nese navy never recovered from these massive losses of planes pilots and ships.
after fanatical resistance including a mass suicide leap of surviving japa nese soldiers and civilians from suicide cliff on saipan the major islands of the marianas fell to the u s attackers in july and august 1944.
with these unsinkable aircraft carriers now available virtual round the clock bombing of japan began in november 1944 see map 35 3.
the allied halting of hitler early setbacks for america in the pacic were paralleled in the atlantic.
hitler had entered the war with a formidable eet of ultramodern submarines which ultimately operated in wolf packs with frightful effect especially in the north atlantic the caribbean and the gulf of mexico.
during ten months of 1942 more than 500 merchant ships were reported lost 111 in june alone as ship destruction far outran construction.
the tide of subsea battle turned with agonizing slowness.
old techniques such as escorting convoys of merchant vessels and dropping depth bombs from destroyers were strengthened by air patrol the newly invented technology of radar and the bombing of submarine bases.
keep em sailing was the motto of oil begrimed merchant seamen hundreds of whom perished as unsung heroes in icy seas.
eventually allied antisubmarine tactics improved substantially thanks especially to british code breakers who had cracked the germans enigma codes and could therefore pinpoint the locations of the u boats lurking in the north atlantic.
not until the spring of 1943 did the allies clearly have the upper hand against the u boat.
if they had not won the battle of the atlantic britain would have been forced under and a second front could not have been launched from its island springboard.
victory over the undersea raiders was nerve rackingly narrow.
when the war ended hitler was about to massproduce a fearsome new submarine one that could remain underwater inde nitely and cruise at seventeen knots when submerged.
british prime minister winston churchill 1874 1965 observed in a speech in may 1943 the proud german army has by its sudden collapse sudden crumbling and breaking up.
once again proved the truth of the saying the hun german is always either at your throat or at your feet meanwhile the turning point of the land air war against hitler had come late in 1942.
the british had launched a thousand plane raid on cologne in may.
in august 1942 they were joined by the american air force and were cascading bombs on german cities.
the germans under marshal erwin rommel the desert fox had driven eastward across the hot sands of north africa into egypt perilously close to the suez canal.
a breakthrough would have spelled disaster for the allies.
but late in october 1942 british general bernard montgomery delivered a withering attack at el alamein west of cairo.
with the aid of several hundred hastily shipped american sherman tanks he speedily drove the enemy back to tunisia more than a thousand miles away.
on the soviet front the unexpected successes of the red army gave a new lift to the allied cause.
in september 1942 the russians stalled the german steamroller at rubble strewn stalingrad graveyard of hitlers hopes.
more than a score of invading divisions caught in an icy noose later surrendered or were mopped up in november 1942 the resilient russians unleashed a crushing counteroffensive which was never seriously reversed.
a year later stalin had regained about twothirds of the blood soaked soviet motherland wrested from him by the german invader.
a second front from north africa to rome soviet losses were already staggering in 1942 millions of soldiers and civilians lay dead and hitlers armies had overrun most of the western ussr.
angloamerican losses at this time could be counted only in the thousands.
by wars end the grave had closed over some 20 million soviets and a great swath of their country equivalent in the united states to the area from chicago to the atlantic seaboard had been laid waste.
small wonder that kremlin leaders clamored chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 for a second front to divert the german strength westward.
many americans including fdr were eager to begin a diversionary invasion of france in 1942 or 1943.
they feared that the soviets unable to hold out forever against germany might make a separate peace as they had in 1918 and leave the western allies to face hitlers fury alone.
roosevelt rashly promised the soviets in early 1942 that he would open a second front on the european continent by the end of the year a promise that proved utterly impossible to keep.
british military planners remembering their appalling losses in 1914 1918 were not enthusiastic about a frontal assault on german held france.
it might end in disaster.
they preferred to attack hitlers fortress europe through the soft underbelly of the mediterranean.
faced with british boot dragging and a woeful lack of resources the americans reluctantly agreed to postpone a massive invasion of europe.
an assault on french held north africa was a compromise second front and a far cry from what the badly battered soviets were demanding.
the highly secret women at war members of the womens army corps disembark in north africa in 1944.
note auxillary was dropped from the name in 1943 attack launched in november 1942 was headed by a gifted and easy smiling american general dwight d ike eisenhower a master of orga ni zation and conciliation.
as a joint allied operation ultimately involving some 400 000 men british canadian french and chiey american and about 850 ships the invasion was the mightiest waterborne effort up to that time in history.
after savage ghting the remnants of the german italian army were nally trapped in tu nisia and surrendered in may 1943.
new blows were now planned by the allies.
at casablanca in newly occupied french morocco president roosevelt who had boldly own the atlantic met in a historic conference with winston churchill in january 1943.
the big two agreed to step up the pacic war invade sicily increase pressure on italy and insist upon an unconditional surrender of the enemy a phrase earlier popularized by general ulysses s grant during the civil war.
such an unyielding policy would presumably hearten the ultrasuspicious soviets who professed to fear separate allied peace negotiations.
it would also forestall charges of broken armistice terms such as had come after 1918.
paradoxically the tough sounding unconditional surrender declaration was an admission of the weakness of the western allies.
still unable in 1943 to mount the kind of second front their soviet partner desperately demanded the british and the americans had little but words to offer stalin.
unconditional surrender proved to be one of the most controversial moves of the war.
the main criticism was that it steeled the enemy to ght to a lastbunker resistance while discouraging antiwar groups in germany from revolting.
although there was some truth in these charges no one can prove that unconditional surrender either shortened or lengthened the war.
but this is known by helping to destroy the german government utterly the harsh policy forced a thorough postwar reconstruction.
the allied forces victorious in africa now turned against the not so soft underbelly of europe.
sicily fell in august 1943 after sporadic but sometimes bitter resistance.
shortly before the conquest of the island mussolini was deposed and italy surrendered unconditionally soon thereafter in september 1943.
president roosevelt referring to the three original axis countries germany italy and japan joked grimly that it was now one down and two to go.
but if italy dropped out of the war the germans did not drop out of italy.
hitlers well trained troops stubbornly resisted the allied invaders now pouring the road to d day sand axis troops in italy laid down their arms and became prisoners of war.
while the italian second front opened the mediterranean and diverted some german divisions from the blazing soviet and french battle lines it also may have delayed the main allied invasion of europe from eng land across the eng lish channel to france by many months allowing more time for the soviet army to advance into eastern europe.
d day june 6 1944 the big two british prime minister winston churchill and u s president franklin d roosevelt meet at the casablanca conference in morocco january 1943 into the toe of the italian boot.
they also unleashed their fury against the italians who had turned their coats and declared war on germany in october 1943.
sunny italy proceeded to belie its name for in the snow covered and mud caked mountains of its elongated peninsula occurred some of the lthiest bloodiest and most frustrating ghting of the war.
for many months italy appeared to be a dead end as the allied advance was halted by a seemingly impregnable german defense centered on the ancient monastery of monte cassino.
after a touch and go assault on the anzio beachhead rome was nally taken on june 4 1944.
the tremendous cross channel invasion of france begun two days later turned italy into a kind of sideshow but the allies limited in manpower continued to ght their way slowly and painfully into northern italy.
on may 2 1945 only ve days before germanys ofcial surrender several hundred thou the soviets had never ceased their clamor for an allout second front and the time rapidly approached for churchill roosevelt and stalin to meet in person to coordinate the promised effort.
marshal joseph stalin with a careful eye on soviet military operations balked at leaving moscow.
president roosevelt who jauntily remarked in private i can handle that old buzzard was eager to confer with him.
the president seemed condent that rooseveltian charm could woo the hardened conspirator of the kremlin from his nasty communist ways.
tehran the capital of iran persia was nally chosen as the meeting place.
to this ancient city roosevelt riskily ew after a stopover conference in cairo with britains churchill and chinas jiang jieshi regarding the war against japan.
at tehran the discussions among stalin roosevelt and churchill from november 28 to december 1 1943 progressed smoothly.
perhaps the most important achievement was agreement on broad plans especially those for launching soviet attacks on germany from the east simultaneously with the prospective allied assault from the west.
preparations for the cross channel invasion of france were gigantic.
britains fast anchored isle virtually groaned with munitions supplies and troops as nearly 3 million ghting men were readied.
because the united states was to provide most of the allied warriors the overall command was entrusted to an american general eisenhower.
he had already distinguished himself in the north african and mediterranean campaigns not only for his military capacity but also for his gifts as a conciliator of clashing allied interests.
french normandy less heavily defended than other parts of the european coast was pinpointed for the invasion assault.
on d day june 6 1944 the enormous operation which involved some forty six hundred vessels unwound.
stiff resistance was encountered from chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 allies landing in normandy june 6 1944 nine foot ocean swells on invasion day made loading the assault landing craft such as the one pictured here treacherous business.
many men were injured or tossed into the sea as the bathtublike amphibious vessels bobbed wildly up and down alongside the troop transports.
as the vulnerable boats churned toward the beach some ofcers led their tense grim faced troops in prayer.
one major recalling the remarkable battle of agincourt in 1415 quoted from shakespeares henry v he that outlives this day and comes safe home will stand a tip toe when this day is named the germans who had been misled by a feint into expecting the blow to fall farther north.
the allies had already achieved mastery of the air over france.
they were thus able to block reinforcements by crippling the railroads while worsening german fuel shortages by bombing gasoline producing plants.
the allied beachhead at rst clung to with ngertips was gradually enlarged consolidated and reinforced.
after desperate ghting the invaders nally broke out of the german iron ring that enclosed the normandy landing zone.
most spectacular were the lunges across france by american armored divisions brilliantly commanded by blustery and profane general george s blood n guts patton.
the retreat of the german defenders was hastened when an american french force landed in august 1944 on the southern coast of france and swept northward.
with the assistance of the french underground paris was liberated in august 1944 amid exuberant manifestations of joy and gratitude.
allied forces rolled irresistibly toward germany and many of the americans encountered places like chteau thierry familiar to their fathers in 1918.
lafayette we are here again quipped some of the american soldiers.
the rst important german city liberating france a gi from des moines iowa receives a kiss of welcome from an elderly french couple after american troops liberated their town of st sauveur in august 1944.
40e 20e 0 60e 60n n o r w ay leningrad besieged sept 1941 jan 19 1944 sweden n ireland denmark battle of the bulge dec 16 1944 united kingdom jan 31 1945 elb e neth.
d day june 6 1944 belg.
r r ine stalingrad aug 21 1942 jan 31 1943 ukraine c sea us s ea balearic is.
monte cassino salerno bla c k danube r n n rome liberated june 4 1944 cas ia aug p serbia italy cau romania croatia corsica vo lga r don s vichy france spai n g march 1944 slovakia hungary dec 19 alps occupied nov 1942 au moscow germans repulsed dec 1941 a switz.
j uly 19 od er warsaw r germany surrendered may 7 1945 rh f r ance v poland 945 germany ril 1 ap lux.
normandy portugal o v i e t.
19 prussia ger.
berlin dunkirk paris liberated aug 23 1944 sept lithuania.
london latvia r at l a n t i c ocean b altic sea a r volg.
19 ireland n estonia north sea bulgaria albania it.
t u r k e y sardinia greece spanish morocco casablanca sicily tunis french morocco kasserine pass feb 14 17 1943 vichy france french north africa july 1943 tunisia vichy france joined allies nov 1942 m gr.
ed ite rran ean fr.
palestine s ea gr.
l l i b ya 500 km.
d se a map 35 4 world war ii in europe and north africa 1939 1945 the presidential campaign of 1944 which was bound to divert energy from the war program came most awkwardly as the awful con ict roared to its climax.
but the normal electoral processes continued to function despite some loose talk of suspending them for the duration sau di a r a b ia re gr.
r egypt e nil italy fdr the fourthtermite of 1944 transjordan gr.
el alamein oct 23 nov.
5 1942 allied advances aachen fell to the americans in october 1944 and the days of hitlers thousand year reich were numbered see map 35 4.
suez canal ll ll nov iraq lebanon alexandria neutral nations major battle syr ia cyprus ll ll ll axis powers and their allies axis held early nov 1942 allied powers and their allies malta gr.
rhodes crete it.
interactive map victory starved republicans met in chicago with hopeful enthusiasm.
they quickly nominated the short mustachioed and dapper thomas e dewey popular vote getting governor of new york.
regarded as a liberal he had already made a national reputation as a prosecutor of grafters and racketeers in new york city.
his shortness and youth he was only forty two had caused one veteran new dealer to sneer that the candidate had cast his diaper into the ring.
to offset deweys mild internationalism the convention nominated for the vice presidency a strong isolationist handsome and white maned senator john w bricker of ohio.
yet the platform called for an unstinted prosecution of the war and for the creation of a new international orga ni zation to maintain peace.
chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 fdr aging under the strain was the indispensable man of the democrats.
no other major gure was available and the war was apparently grinding to its nale.
he was nominated at chicago on the rst ballot by acclamation.
but in a sense he was the forgotten man of the convention for in view of his age an unusual amount of attention was focused on the vice presidency.
the scramble for the vice presidential plum turned into something of a free for all.
henry a wallace onetime plow em under secretary of agriculture had served four years as vice president and desired a renomination.
but conser vative democrats distrusted him as an ill balanced and unpredictable liberal.
a ditch wallace move developed tremendous momentum despite the popularity of wallace with large numbers of voters and many of the delegates.
with roosevelts blessing the vice presidential nomination nally went to smiling and self assured senator harry s truman of missouri the new missouri compromise.
hitherto inconspicuous he had recently attained national visibility as the efcient chairman of a senate committee conducting an investigation of wasteful war expenditures.
nobody had much against him or on him.
roosevelt defeats dewey a dynamic dewey took the offensive for roosevelt was too consumed with directing the war to spare much time for speechmaking.
the vigorous young crime buster with his beautiful baritone voice and polished diction denounced the tired and quarrelsome old men in washington.
he proclaimed repeatedly that after twelve long years of new dealism it was time for a change as for the war dewey would not alter the basic strategy but would ght it better a type of metooism ridiculed by the democrats.
the fourth term issue did not gure prominently now that the ice had been broken by roosevelts third term.
but deweyeyed republicans half humorously professed to fear fth and sixth terms by the lifer in the white house.
in the closing weeks of the campaign roosevelt left his desk for the stump.
he was stung by certain republican charges including criticism that he had sent a u s navy destroyer to retrieve his pet scottie dog fala.
he was also eager to show himself even in chilling rains to spike well founded rumors of failing health.
substantial assistance came from the new political action committee of the cio which was orga nized to get around the law banning the direct use of union funds for political purposes.
zealous cio members branded as communists by the republicans rang countless doorbells and asked with pointed reference to the recent depression what were you doing in 1932 at times roosevelt seemed to be running again against hoover.
as in every one of his previous three campaigns fdr was opposed by a majority of the newspapers which were owned chiey by republicans.
roosevelt as customary won a sweeping victory 432 to 99 in the electoral college 25 606 585 to 22 014 745 in the popular vote.
elated he quipped that the rst twelve years are the hardest roosevelt won primarily because the war was going well.
a winning pitcher is not ordinarily pulled from the game.
foreign policy was a decisive factor with untold thousands of voters who concluded that roosevelts experienced hand was needed in fashioning a future orga ni zation for world peace.
the dapper dewey cruelly dubbed the little man on top of the wedding cake had spoken smoothly of international cooperation but his isolationist running mate bricker had implanted serious doubts.
the republican party was still suffering from the taint of isolationism fastened on it by the hardingites.
the last days of hitler by mid december 1944 the month after roosevelts fourth term victory germany seemed to be wobbling on its last legs.
the soviet surge had penetrated eastern germany.
allied aerial blockbuster bombs making the rubble bounce with around the clock attacks were falling like giant explosive hailstones on cities factories and transportation arteries.
the german western front seemed about to buckle under the sledgehammer blows of the united states and its allies.
hitler then staked every thing on one last throw of his reserves.
secretly concentrating a powerful force he hurled it on december 16 1944 against the thinly held american lines in the heavily befogged and snowshrouded ardennes forest.
his objective was the belgian port of antwerp key to the allied supply operation.
caught off guard the outmanned americans were driven back creating a deep bulge in the allied line.
the ten day penetration was nally halted after the 101st airborne division had stood rm at the vital bastion of bastogne.
the commander brigadier general a c mcauliffe deantly answered the german demand for surrender with one word nuts rein franklin roosevelt at tehran 1943 n late 1943 the big three wartime leaders british prime minister winston churchill american president franklin roosevelt and soviet leader joseph stalin gathered together for the rst time.
they met amid growing soviet frustration with the british and americans for their failure thus far to open a second front against germany in western europe while the soviets continued to suffer horrendous losses in the savage ghting in eastern europe.
american military planners were eager to open a second front as soon as possible but the british who would necessarily have to supply most of the troops until america was fully mobilized balked.
tension among the three leaders over the second front plan code named overlord the operation that resulted in the anglo american invasion of normandy on d day june 6 1944 is evident in this report of their discussions in the iranian city of tehran on i first plenary meeting november 28 1943 4 p m conference room soviet embassy bohlen minutes secret the president said as the youngest of the three present he ventured to welcome his elders.
he said he wished to welcome the new members to the family circle and tell them that meetings of this character were conducted as between friends with complete frankness on all sides with nothing that was said to be made public.
chief of staff minutes marshal stalin asked who will be the commander in this operation overlord.
the president and prime minister interpolated this was not yet decided.
marshal stalin continued then nothing will come out of these operations.
the president said we again come back to the problem of the timing for overlord.
it was believed that it would be good for overlord to take place about 1 may or certainly not later than 15 may or 20 may if possible.
the prime minister said that he could not agree to that.
he said he the prime minister was going to do everything in the power of his majestys government to begin overlord at the earliest possible moment.
however he did not think that the november 28 1943.
the excerpts printed here are actually taken from two separate accounts one composed by the american diplomat and roosevelts ofcial translator charles bohlen the other written by a military ofcer on behalf of the united states joint chiefs of staff.
both versions were published in foreign relations of the united states a compilation of american diplomatic records since 1861.
the soviets and the british also kept their own records of the tehran meetings giving historians remarkably rich sources with which to reconstruct the crucial negotiations and decisions that shaped wartime diplomacy.
why might the history of diplomacy be so lavishly documented.
at this meeting what were the principal objectives that each leader pursued.
how did each man address his task.
in what ways was the future of the war and the postwar world here foreshadowed.
many great possibilities in the mediterranean should be ruthlessly cast aside as valueless merely on the question of a months delay in overlord.
marshal stalin said all the mediterranean operations are diversions.
the president said he found that his staff places emphasis on overlord.
while on the other hand the prime minister and his staff also emphasize overlord nevertheless the united states does not feel that overlord should be put off.
the president questioned whether it would not be possible for the ad hoc committee to go ahead with their deliberations without any further directive and to produce an answer by tomorrow morning.
marshal stalin questioned what can such a committee do he said we chiefs of state have more power and more authority than a committee.
general brooke cannot force our opinions and there are many questions which can be decided only by us he said he would like to ask if the british are thinking seriously of overlord only in order to satisfy the u s s r.
the prime minister replied that if the conditions specified at moscow regarding overlord should exist he firmly believed it would be englands duty to hurl every ounce of strength she had across the channel at the germans.
the president observed that in an hour a very good dinner would be awaiting all and people would be very hungry.
he suggested that the staffs should meet tomorrow morning and discuss the matter.
chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 forcements were rushed up and the last gasp hitlerian offensive was at length bloodily stemmed in the battle of the bulge see map 35 5.
in march 1945 forward driv ing american troops reached germanys rhine river where by incredibly good luck they found one strategic bridge undemolished.
pressing their advantage general eisenhowers troops reached the elbe river in april 1945.
there a short distance south of berlin american and soviet advance guards dramatically clasped hands amid cries of amerikanskie tovarishchi american comrades.
the conquering americans were horried to nd blood spattered and still stinking concentration camps where the german nazis had engaged in the scientic mass murder of undesirables including an estimated 6 million jews.
the washington government had long been informed about hitlers campaign of genocide against the jews and had been reprehensibly slow to take steps against it.
roosevelts administra 52n north sea 4e american and soviet soldiers meet in germany 1945 such friendly sights soon became rare as mutual suspicion deepened.
6e 5e n eth er l an d s antwerp 7e 51n brussels aachen b elg i u m rh e in n s meu r lige.
er germany bastogne 50n f r an c e th e b u l ge lux.
initial german line area of maximum german advance allied counteradvances 40 km.
map 35 5 battle of the bulge december 1944 january 1945 interactive map tion had bolted the door against large numbers of jewish refugees and his military commanders declined even to bomb the rail lines that carried the victims to the camps.
but until the wars end the full dimensions of the holocaust had not been known.
when the details were revealed the whole world was aghast.
the vengeful soviets clawing their way forward from the east reached berlin in april 1945.
after desperate house to house ghting followed by an orgy of pillage and rape they captured the bomb shattered city.
adolf hitler after a hasty marriage to his mistress committed suicide in an underground bunker on april 30 1945.
tragedy had meanwhile struck the united states.
president roosevelt while relaxing at warm springs georgia suddenly died from a massive cerebral hemorrhage on april 12 1945.
the crushing burden of twelve depression and war years in the white house had nally taken its toll.
knots of confused leaderless citizens gathered to discuss the future anxiously as a bewildered unbriefed vice president truman took the helm.
on may 7 1945 what was left of the german government surrendered unconditionally.
may 8 was german defeat the horror of the holocaust although the outside world had some knowledge of the nazi death camps before the wars end the full revelation of hitlers atrocities as the allies overran germany in the spring of 1945 stunned and sickened the invading troops.
at general eisenhowers orders german civilians were compelled to view the evidence of the nazi regimes genocidal crimes though these witnesses at buchenwald tried to look the other way as many had done during the war itself.
ofcially proclaimed v e victory in europe day and was greeted with frenzied rejoicing in the allied countries.
japan dies hard japans rickety bamboo empire meanwhile was tottering to its fall.
american submarines the silent service were sending the japa nese merchant marine to the bottom so fast they were running out of prey.
all told these undersea craft destroyed 1 042 ships or about 50 percent of japans entire life sustaining merchant eet.
giant bomber attacks were more spectacular.
launched from saipan and other captured mariana islands they were reducing the enemys fragile cities to cinders.
the massive rebomb raid on tokyo march 9 10 1945 was annihilating.
it destroyed over 250 000 buildings gutted a quarter of the city and killed an estimated 83 000 people a loss comparable to that later in icted by the atomic bombs.
general macarthur was also on the move.
completing the conquest of jungle draped new guinea he headed northwest for the philippines en route to japan with 600 ships and 250 000 men.
in a scene well staged for the photographers he splashed ashore at leyte island on october 20 1944 with the sum mons people of the philippines i have returned.
rally to me japans navy still menacing now made one lastchance effort to destroy macarthur by wiping out his transports and supply ships.
a gigantic clash at leyte gulf fought on the sea and in the air was actually three battles october 23 26 1944.
the americans won all of them though the crucial engagement was almost lost when admiral william f bull halsey was decoyed away by a feint.
japan was through as a sea power it had lost about sixty ships in the greatest naval battle of all time.
chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 the flag raising at iwo jima atop mount suribachi press photographer joe rosenthal snapped this dramatic picture probably the most famous of the war.
american eets numbering more than four thousand vessels now commanded the western pacic.
several battleships raised from the mud of pearl harbor were exacting belated but sweet revenge.
overrunning leyte macarthur next landed on the main philippine island of luzon in january 1945.
manila was his major objective the ravaged city fell in march but the philippines were not conquered until july.
victory was purchased only after bitter ghting against holed in japa nese who took a toll of over sixty thousand american casualties.
americas steel vise was tightening mercilessly around japan.
the tiny island of iwo jima needed as a haven for damaged american bombers returning from japan was captured in march 1945.
this desperate twenty ve day assault cost over four thousand american dead.
okinawa a well defended japa nese island was next on the list it was needed for closer bases from which to blast and burn enemy cities and industries.
fighting dragged on from april to june of 1945.
japanese soldiers ghting with incredible courage from their caves nally sold okinawa for fty thousand american casualties while suffering far heavier losses themselves.
the u s navy which covered the invasion of okinawa sustained severe damage.
japa nese suicide pilots kamikazes in an exhibition of mass hara kiri for their god emperor crashed their bomb laden planes onto the decks of the invading eet.
all told the death squads sank over thirty ships and badly damaged scores more.
the atomic bombs strategists in washington were meanwhile planning an all out invasion of the main islands of japan an the atomic age invasion that presumably would cost hundreds of thousands of american and even more japa nese casualties.
tokyo recognizing imminent defeat had secretly sent peace feelers to moscow which had not yet entered the far eastern war.
the americans having broken the secret japa nese radio codes knew of these feelers.
but bomb scorched japan still showed no outward willingness to surrender unconditionally to the allies.
the potsdam conference held near berlin in july 1945 sounded the death knell of the japa nese.
there president truman still new on his job met in a seventeen day parley with joseph stalin and the british leaders.
the conferees issued a stern ultimatum to japan surrender or be destroyed.
american bombers showered the dire warning on japan in tens of thousands of leaets but no encouraging response was forthcoming.
america had a fantastic ace up its sleeve.
early in 1940 after hitlers wanton assault on poland roosevelt was persuaded by american and exiled scientists notably german born albert einstein to push the scientic director of the manhattan project j robert oppenheimer 1904 1967 recalled his reaction as he witnessed the detonation of the rst atomic bomb at the trinity test site in alamogordo new mexico in july 1945.
he was not only awed by the extraordinary force of this new weapon.
he also feared the power to do harm that it gave to humans i remembered the line from the hindu scripture the bhagavad gita now i am become death the destroyer of worlds ahead with preparations for unlocking the secret of an atomic bomb.
congress at roosevelts blank check request blindly made available nearly 2 billion.
many military minds were skeptical of this damned professors nonsense but fears that the germans might rst acquire such an awesome weapon provided a hiroshima japan august 1945 two stunned survivors walk through the unbelievable destruction.
the single atomic blast at hiroshima killed an estimated 130 000 japanese.
chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 powerful spur to action.
ironically germany eventually abandoned its own atomic project as too costly.
and as it happened the war against germany ended before the american weapon was ready.
in a cruel twist of fate japan not germany the original target suffered the fate of being the rst nation subjected to atomic bombardment.
what was called the manhattan project pushed feverishly forward as american know how and industrial power were combined with the most advanced scientic knowledge.
much technical skill was provided by british and refugee scientists who had ed to america to escape the torture chambers of the dictators.
finally in the desert near alamogordo new mexico on july 16 1945 the experts detonated the rst awesome and devastating atomic device.
with japan still refusing to surrender the potsdam threat was ful lled.
on august 6 1945 a lone american bomber dropped one atomic bomb on the city of hiroshima japan.
in a blinding ash of death followed by a funnel shaped cloud about 180 000 people were left killed wounded or missing.
some 70 000 of them died instantaneously.
sixty thousand more soon perished from burns and radiation disease.
the japanese surrender representatives of the japanese government arrived to sign the surrender document on the deck of the battleship missouri in tokyo harbor september 2 1945.
general douglas macarthur then made a conciliatory address expressing hope that from this solemn occasion a better world shall emerge.
a world founded on faith and understanding a japanese diplomat attending wondered whether it would have been possible for us had we been victorious to embrace the vanquished with a similar magnanimity soon thereafter general macarthur took up his duties as director of the u s occupation of japan.
the end of the war two days later on august 8 stalin entered the war against japan exactly on the deadline date previously agreed upon with his allies.
soviet armies speedily overran the depleted japa nese defenses in manchuria and korea in a six day victory parade that involved several thousand russian casualties.
stalin was evidently determined to be in on the kill lest he lose a voice in the nal division of japans holdings.
fanatically resisting japa nese though facing atomization still did not surrender.
american aviators on august 9 dropped a second atomic bomb on the city of nagasaki.
the explosion took a horrible toll of about eighty thousand people killed or missing.
see varying viewpoints the japa nese nation could endure no more.
on august 10 1945 tokyo sued for peace on one condition that hirohito the bespectacled son of heaven be allowed to remain on his ancestral throne v j day crowds cheering at times square by edward dancig 1947 russian born american artist edward dancig captured the feelings of triumph and relief that americans felt at the end of world war ii.
his painting shows the v j victory in japan day celebration of august 15 1945 in new yorks times square.
as nominal emperor.
despite their unconditional surrender policy the allies accepted this condition on august 14 1945.
the japa nese though losing face were able to save both their exalted ruler and what was left of their native land.
the formal end came with dramatic force on september 2 1945.
ofcial surrender ceremonies were conducted by general macarthur on the battleship missouri in tokyo bay.
at the same time americans at home hysterically celebrated v j victory in japan day after the most horrible war in history had ended in mushrooming atomic clouds.
the allies triumphant world war ii proved to be terribly costly.
american forces suffered some 1 million casualties more than one third of which were deaths.
compared with other wars the proportion killed by wounds and disease was sharply reduced owing in part to the use of blood plasma and miracle drugs notably penicillin.
yet heavy though american losses were the soviet allies suffered casualties many times greater more than 25 million people killed.
in grim testimony to the nature of modern warfare world war ii was the rst war that killed more civilians than armed combatants see thinking globally america and the world in depression and war a study in contrasts.
america was fortunate in emerging with its mainland virtually unscathed.
two japa nese submarines using shells and bombers had rather harmlessly attacked the cal i fornia and oregon coast and a few japa nese re bomb balloons had drifted across the pacic kill ing six civilians in oregon.
but that was about all.
much of the rest of the world was utterly destroyed and destitute.
america alone was untouched and healthy oiled and muscled like a prize bull standing astride the worlds ruined landscape.
this complex con ict was the best fought war in americas history.
though unprepared for it at the outset the nation was better prepared than for the others partly because it had begun to buckle on its armor about a year and a half before the war ofcially began.
it was actually ghting german submarines in the atlantic months before the explosion in the pacic at pearl harbor.
in the end the united states showed itself to be resourceful tough adaptable able to accommodate itself to the tactics of an enemy who was relentless and ruthless.
thinking globally america and the world in depression and war a study in contrasts t he great depression of the 1930s was a monstrous planetary scale economic hurricane that wreaked havoc around the globe.
all nations were walloped by its destructive force but two were especially hard hit the united states and germany.
in both countries production of goods declined by nearly 50 percent and unemployment approached 25 percent.
also in both countries the depression discredited existing political regimes and created opportunities for new leadership to emerge.
fatefully germany got adolf hitler while the united states got franklin d roosevelt.
roosevelt and hitler were of the same generation both born in the 1880s.
they came to power within weeks of each other hitler as germanys chancellor on january 30 1933 and roosevelt as u s president on march 4 1933.
both achieved ofce through democratic elections though democracy soon withered under ones hand and ourished under the others.
roosevelts entire presidency unfolded under the looming threat and eventually the armed challenge of hitlers nazi regime.
fdrs record as well as the very character of american democracy in the mid twentieth century can only be properly understood in that larger context.
consider in the spring of 1933 roosevelt was coaxing legislation out of the hundred days congress forging labor unions and sundry ethnic and racial minorities into a long lasting democratic party coalition and making innovative use of the radio to outank the hostile media magnates who controlled the nations newspapers.
in those same months hitler was dissolving german labor unions and ruthlessly censoring the german press.
soon he declared the nazis the only legal political party in germany and proceeded to impose on the german people a reign of terror cruelly enforced by the gestapo the nazis grimly efcient secret police.
a year later while roosevelt worried about a possible political challenge from the swashbuckling louisiana senator huey p long hitler dispatched with his main nazi rival ernst rhm by ordering his execution.
the following year 1935 roosevelt shepherded his sweeping reform program through congress notably including the social security act which helped to usher millions of americans into the mainstream of american life especially members of the great immigrant communities that had arrived a generation or so earlier.
we are going to make a country roosevelt said in which no one is left out that same year hitler codied the nazis viciously anti semitic policies in the notorious nuremberg laws stripping german jews of their citizenship barring them from the professions and military ser vice and prohibiting marriage between jews and aryans dened by the nazis as a master race of non jewish caucasians especially those having nordic features all gruesome steps on the road to the genocidal war time holocaust which would eventually murder some six million jews.
meanwhile hitler was relentlessly building his war machine while fdrs america clung stubbornly to its traditional isolationism.
and when the great conict of world war ii nally erupted hitlers germany and roosevelts america fought decidedly different wars.
indeed the united states experience in the war stands in vivid contrast to the experience of all other combatants including not only germany but also americas allies in the grand alliance hitlers vaunted thousand year reich lay in smoldering ruins at wars end his people dazed demoralized and starving.
the strutting fhrer had brewed a catastrophe franklin delano roosevelt thirty second president of the united states table 35 1 the comparative costs of world war ii country china france poland ussr united kingdom united states germany including austria italy japan military deaths civilian deaths 2 000 000 250 000 123 000 10 000 000 300 000 405 399 7 750 000 350 000 6 000 000 17 000 000 60 600 6 3 500 000 242 000 2 000 000 1 600 000 60 000 650 000 government expenditures damage to civilian property 192 billion 120 billion 317 billion 128 billion 5 billion 272 billion 94 billion 50 75 billion in the forty eight states additional civilian deaths occurred in hawaii alaska and the philippines.
sources world war ii casualty estimates vary widely.
the gures here are largely taken from david m kennedy ed the library of congress world war ii companion i c b dear ed the oxford companion to the second world war louis l snyder historical guide to world war ii and john ellis world war ii a statistical survey.
so vast that its conclusion seemed to sunder the web of time itself.
germans remember the moment of their surrender on may 7 1945 as the stunde null or zero hour when historys clock came to a fearful halt.
elsewhere even americas main wartime partners great britain and the soviet union had paid a far greater price in blood and treasure than the united states.
uniquely among all the belligerents in world war ii perhaps uniquely in the history of warfare the united states had managed to grow its civilian economy even while waging a hugely costly war.
in germany britain and the soviet union the civilian standard of living had gone down by approximately one third.
in the united states the civilian economy had actually expanded by 15 percent preparing the way for phenomenal prosperity in the postwar decades.
and though 405 399 brave american ser vice members died in world war ii proportionate to population american losses were about one third those of britain and about one sixtieth those of the soviet union where some 10 million soldiers and a staggering 17 million civilians perished see table 35 1.
by glaring contrast in the forty eight continental american states that had a star on the ag in 1945 the u s civilian death toll due to enemy action was just six persons all of them the victims of a crude japanese balloon borne rebomb that exploded in their faces near the hamlet of bly oregon on may 5 1945.
for all the misery that depression and war visited upon the united states americans could count their blessings that fortune had spared them the enormous deprivations and horrors that were all too common elsewhere.
yet some observers worried that america was now assuming leadership in a world where the depths of other peoples wounds and woes could scarcely be imagined.
german chancellor adolf hitler chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 american military leadership proved to be of the highest order.
a new crop of war heroes emerged in brilliant generals like eisenhower macarthur and marshall chief of staff and in imaginative admirals like nimitz and spruance.
president roosevelt and prime minister churchill as kindred spirits collaborated closely in planning strategy.
it is fun to be in the same decade with you fdr once cabled churchill.
industrial leaders were no less skilled for marvels of production were performed almost daily.
assembly lines proved as important as battle lines and victory went again to the side with the most smokestacks.
the enemy was almost literally smothered by bayonets bullets bazookas and bombs.
hitler and his axis coconspirators had chosen to make war with machines and the ingenious yankees could ask for nothing bet ter.
they demonstrated again as they had in world war i that the american way of war was simply more more men more weapons more machines more technology and more money than any enemy could hope to match.
from 1940 to 1945 the output of american factories was simply phenomenal.
as winston churchill remarked nothing succeeds like excess hermann goering a nazi leader had sneered the americans cant build planes only electric iceboxes and razor blades democracy had given its answer as the dictators despite long preparation were overthrown and discredited.
it is true that an unusual amount of direct control was exercised over the individual by the washington authorities during the war emergency.
but the american people preserved their precious liberties without serious impairment.
chronology united states declares war on japan germany declares war on united states randolph plans black march on washington fair employment practices commission fepc established roosevelt delivers four freedoms speech japa nese americans sent to internment camps japan conquers the philippines battle of the coral sea battle of midway united states invades north africa congress of racial equality core founded allies hold casablanca conference allies invade italy smith connally anti strike act zoot suit riots in los angeles race riot in detroit japa nese driven from guadalcanal tehran conference korematsu v u s d day invasion of france battle of the marianas roosevelt defeats dewey for presidency 1944 battle of the bulge roosevelt dies truman assumes presidency germany surrenders battles of iwo jima and okinawa potsdam conference atomic bombs dropped on hiroshima and nagasaki yalta conference japan surrenders varying viewpoints key terms abc 1 agreement 875 executive order no.
9066 876 war production board wpb 877 ofce of price administration opa 880 national war labor board nwlb 880 smith connally antistrike act 880 waacs womens army auxiliary corps 881 waves women accepted for volunteer emergency service 881 spars u s coast guard womens reserve 881 people to know bracero program 881 fair employment practices commission fepc 883 congress of racial equality core 884 navajo code talkers 884 midway battle of 887 d day 891 v e victory in europe day 897 potsdam conference 899 manhattan project 900 v j victory in japan day 901 douglas macarthur chester nimitz dwight d ike eisenhower harry s truman albert einstein the atomic bombs were they justied.
n o episode of the world war ii era has provoked sharper controversy than the atomic bombings of japan in august 1945.
lingering moral misgivings about the nuclear incineration of hiroshima and nagasaki have long threatened to tarnish americas crown of military victory.
some critics have accused the united states of racist motives because the bombs were dropped on a nonwhite people.
other commentators note that the japa nese were already reeling on the verge of collapse by 1945 and therefore historys most awful weapons especially the second bomb on nagasaki were unnecessary to bring the war to a conclusion.
still other scholars notably gar alperovitz have further charged that the atomic attacks on hiroshima and nagasaki were not the last shots of world war ii but the rst salvos in the emerging cold war.
alperovitz argues that president truman willfully ignored tokyos attempts to negotiate a surrender in the summer of 1945 and rejected all alternatives to dropping the bomb because he wanted to intimidate and isolate the soviet union.
he unleashed his horrible new weapons so this argument goes not simply to defeat japan but to end the far eastern con ict before the soviets could enter it and thereby freeze them out of any role in formulating postwar reconstruction policy in asia.
each of these accusations has been vigorously rebutted.
richard rhodess exhaustive history of the chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 making of the atomic bomb emphasizes that the anglo american atomic project began as a race against the germans who were known to be actively pursuing a nuclear weapons program.
unknown to the americans germany effectively terminated its effort in 1942 just as the anglo american project went into high gear.
from the outset both british and american planners believed that the bomb if successful would be not just another weapon but the ultimate instrument of destruction that would decisively deliver victory into the hands of whoever possessed it.
they consequently assumed that it would be used at the earliest possible moment.
there is therefore no credible reason to conclude that german cities would not have suffered the fate of hiroshima and nagasaki if nuclear weapons had become available sooner or if the european phase of the war had lasted longer.
it is true that american intelligence sources in the early summer of 1945 reported that some japanese statesmen were trying to enlist the still neutral russians good ofces to negotiate a surrender.
but as r j c butows ne grained study of japans decision to surrender demonstrates it was unclear whether those initiatives had the full backing of the japa nese government.
moreover the japa nese clung to several unacceptable conditions including protection for their imperial system of government the right to disarm and repatriate their own troops no military occupation of the home islands no international trials of alleged war criminals and possible retention of some of their conquered territories.
all this ew squarely in the face of americas repeatedly declared intention to settle for nothing less than unconditional surrender.
as for the nagasaki bomb dropped on august 9 butow also notes that it conclusively dispelled the japa nese governments original assessment that the hiroshima attack on aug ust 6 was a one time only stunt with little likelihood of further nuclear strikes to follow.
even then some diehard military ofcers refusing to ac knowledge defeat tried on the night of august 14 to storm the imperial palace to seize the recording of the emperors surrender announcement before it could be broadcast the following day.
could the use of the atomic bombs have been avoided.
studies by martin j sherwin barton j bernstein and mcgeorge bundy have shown that few policymakers at the time seriously asked that question.
as winston churchill later wrote the decision whether or not to use the atomic bomb to compel the surrender of japan was never even an issue.
there was unanimous automatic unquestioned agreement around our table nor did i ever hear the slightest suggestion that we should do otherwise in fact the decision to use the bomb was not made in 1945 but in 1942 when the united states committed itself to a crash program to build and use a nuclear weapon as swiftly as possible.
intimidating the soviets might have been a bonus to using the bomb against japan but inuencing soviet behavior was never the primary reason for the fateful decision.
american leaders wanted to end the war as soon as possible.
to that end they had always assumed the atomic bomb would be dropped as soon as it was available.
that moment came on august 6 1945.
doubt and remorse about the atomic conclusion of world war ii have plagued the american conscience ever since.
less often remarked on are the deaths of four times more japa nese noncombatants than died at hiroshima and nagasaki in the so called conventional rebombing of some ve dozen japa nese cities in 1945.
those deaths suggest that the deeper moral question should perhaps be addressed not to the particular technology of nuclear weaponry and the fate of those two unfortunate japa nese cit ies but to the quite deliberate decision made by several combatants including the germans the british the americans and the japanese themselves to designate civilian populations as legitimate military targets.
to learn more to learn more kai bird and martin j sherwin american prometheus the triumph and tragedy of j robert oppenheimer 2005 john m blum v was for victory politics and american culture during world war ii 1976 roger daniels prisoners without trial japanese americans in world war ii 1993 norman davies no simple victory world war ii in europe 1939 1945 2007 john w dower war without mercy race and power in the pacic war 1986 sherna gluck rosie the riveter revisited women the war and social change 1988 nelson lichtenstein labors war at home the cio in world war ii 1982 richard rhodes the making of the atomic bomb 1986 ronald h spector eagle against the sun the american war with japan 1985 ronald t takaki double victory a multicultural history of america in world war ii 2000 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at part six making modern america 1945 to the present w orld war ii broke the back of the great depression in the united states and also ended the century and a half old amer ican tradition of isolationism in foreign affairs.
alone among the warring powers the united states managed to emerge from the great con ict physically unscarred economically healthy and diplomatically strengthened.
yet if americans faced a world full of promise at the wars end it was also a world full of dangers none more disconcerting than soviet communism.
these two themes of promise and menace mingled uneasily throughout the nearly ve decades of the cold war era from the end of world war ii in 1945 to the collapse of the soviet union in 1991.
at home unprecedented prosperity in the post war quarter century nourished a robust sense of national self condence and fed a revolution of rising expectations.
invigorated by the prospect of endlessly spread ing afuence americans in the 1940s 1950s and 1960s had record numbers of babies aspired to everhigher standards of liv ing generously expanded the welfare state especially for the elderly widened opportunities for women welcomed immigrants and even found the will to grapple at long last with the nations grossest legacy of injustice its treatment of african amer icans.
with the exception of dwight eisenhowers presidency in the 1950s americans elected liberal democratic presidents harry truman in 1948 john f kennedy in 1960 and lyndon johnson in 1964.
the democratic party the party of the liberal new deal at home and of an activist foreign policy abroad comfortably remained the nations majority party.
americans trusted their government and had faith in the american dream that their children would lead a richer life than their parents had done.
anything and every thing seemed possible.
the suburban society in the phenomenally afuent post world war ii years newly prosperous americans ocked to the freshly built suburbs.
making modern america the rising curve of ascending expectations propelled by exploding economic growth bounded upward throughout the 1950s.
it peaked in the 1960s an exceptionally stormy decade during which faith in government in the wisdom of american foreign policy and in the american dream itself began to sour.
lyndon johnsons great society reforms billed as the completion of the un nished work of the new deal foundered on the rocks of scal limitations and stubborn racial resentments.
johnson the most ambitious reformer in the white house since franklin roosevelt eventually saw his presidency destroyed by the furies unleashed over the vietnam war.
when economic growth attened in the 1970s the horizon of hopes for the future seemed to sink as well.
the nation entered a frustrating period of stalled expectations increasingly rancorous racial tensions disillusion with government and political stalemate although in one important arena idealism survived.
as second wave feminism gathered steam women burst through barriers that had long excluded them from male domains operating every where from the factory oor to the u s army to the ivy league.
not content with private victories they also called on the government for help to ensure women equal opportunity as workers fair treatment as consumers and the right to choose an abortion.
beginning in 1968 americans stopped sending new deal style liberals to the white house electing moderate republicans richard nixon in 1968 and 1972 succeeded by the unelected gerald ford after watergate moderate southern democrats jimmy carter in 1976 and bill clinton in 1992 and 1996 and conser vative republicans ronald reagan in 1980 and 1984 george h w bush in 1992 and george w bush in 2000 and 2004.
throughout most of these years congress remained mostly under the democrats control until the republican revolution of 1994 put a new generation of conser vative legislators in power.
only with popular discontent over the iraq war did the democrats narrowly regain control of both houses in 2006.
as the twenty rst century dawned the democratic party teetered on a tightrope between liberal policies and conser vative demands for tax cuts reduced government regulation and welfare reform.
the end of an era.
as surely as victory in world war ii restored condence and prosperity to a people demoralized by the great depression the terrorist attacks of september 11 2001 struck electric fear into the american people and menaced their historical commitment to an open society and individual liberties.
and by the 2008 election a republican party that had seemed to be solidly unied around a conser vative agenda started to fracture into defense hawks social conservatives and scal moderates.
abroad the erce competition with the soviet union and after 1949 with communist china as well colored almost every aspect of americas foreign relations and shaped domestic life too.
unreasoning fear of communists at home unleashed the destructive force of mccarthyism in the 1950s a modern day witch hunt in which careers were capsized and lives ruined by reckless accusations of communist sympathizing.
the fbi encroached on sacred american liberties in its zeal to uncover communist subversives the cold war remained cold in the sense that no shooting con ict broke out between the great power rivals.
but the united states did ght two shooting wars in korea in the 1950s and vietnam in the 1960s.
vietnam the only foreign war in which the united states has ever been defeated cruelly convulsed american society ending not only lyndon johnsons presidency but the thirty ve year era of the democratic partys political dominance as well.
vietnam also touched off the most vicious inationary cycle in american history and embittered and disillusioned an entire generation.
uncle sam in the cold war era built a fearsome and expensive arsenal of nuclear weapons great air and missile eets to deliver them a two ocean navy and for a time a large army raised by conscription.
when the cold war ended americans turned to the promise of an information age in a global economy.
but terrorist attacks on american soil in 2001 shifted the countrys attention back to national defense and international military strategy launching two wars and fundamentally transforming both foreign and domestic politics.
the cold war begins 1945 1952 the united states stand at this moment at the summit of the world.
winston churchill 1945 t he american people 140 million strong cheered their nations victories in europe and asia at the conclusion of world war ii.
but before the shouting had even faded many americans began to worry about their future.
four ery years of global war had not entirely driven from their minds the painful memories of twelve desperate years of the great depression.
still more ominously victory celebrations had barely ended before americas crumbling relations with its wartime ally the soviet union threatened a new and even more terrible international con ict.
postwar economic anxieties the decade of the 1930s had left deep scars.
joblessness and insecurity had pushed up the suicide rate and dampened the marriage rate.
babies went unborn as pinched budgets and sagging self esteem wrought a sexual depression in american bedrooms.
the war had banished the blight of depression but would the respite last.
grim faced observers were warning that the war had only temporarily lifted the pall of economic stagnation and that peace would bring the return of hard times.
homeward bound gis so the gloomy predictions ran would step out of the armys chow lines and back into the breadlines of the unemployed.
the faltering economy in the initial postwar years threatened to con rm the worst predictions of the doomsayers who foresaw another great depression.
real gross national product gnp slumped sickeningly in 1946 and 1947 from its wartime peak.
with the removal of wartime price controls prices giddily levitated by 33 percent in 1946 1947.
an epidemic of strikes swept the country.
during 1946 alone some 4 6 million laborers laid down their tools fearful that soon they could barely afford the autos and other goods they were manufacturing.
the growing muscle of orga nized labor deeply annoyed many conser vatives.
they had their revenge against labors new deal gains in 1947 when a republican controlled congress the rst in fourteen years passed the taft hartley act over president trumans vigorous veto.
labor leaders condemned the this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website economic uncertainty going to college on the gi bill financed by the federal government thousands of world war ii veterans crowded into college classrooms in the late 1940s.
universities struggled to house these older students many of whom already had families.
pennsylvania state college resorted to setting up hundreds of trailers.
taft hartley act as a slave labor law it outlawed the closed all union shop made unions liable for damages that resulted from jurisdictional disputes among themselves and required union leaders to take a noncommunist oath.
taft hartley was only one of several obstacles that slowed the growth of orga nized labor in the years after world war ii.
in the heady days of the new deal unions had spread swiftly in the industrialized northeast especially in huge manufacturing industries like steel and automobiles.
but labors postwar efforts to organize in the historically antiunion regions of the south and west proved frustrating.
the cios operation dixie aimed at unionizing southern textile workers and steelworkers failed miserably in 1948 to overcome lingering fears of racial mixing.
and workers in the rapidly growing ser vice sector of the economy many of them middle aged women often working only part time in small shops widely separated from one another proved much more difcult to organize than the thousands of assembly line workers who in the 1930s had poured into the auto and steel unions.
union membership would peak in the 1950s and then begin a long unremitting decline.
the democratic administration meanwhile took some steps of its own to forestall an economic downturn.
it sold war factories and other government installations to private businesses at re sale prices.
it secured passage of the employment act of 1946 making it government policy to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power the act created a three member council of economic advisers to provide the president with the data and the recommendations to make that policy a reality.
most dramatic was the passage of the servicemens readjustment act of 1944 better known as the gi bill of rights or the gi bill.
enacted partly out of fear that the employment markets would never be able to absorb 15 million returning veterans at wars end the gi bill made generous provisions for sending the former soldiers to school.
in the postwar decade some 8 million veterans advanced their education at uncle sams expense.
the majority attended technical and vocational schools but colleges and universities were crowded to the blackboards as more than 2 million ex gis stormed the halls of higher learning.
the total eventually spent for education was some 14 5 billion in taxpayer dollars.
the act also enabled the veterans administration va to guarantee about 16 billion in loans for veterans to buy homes farms and small businesses.
by raising educational levels and stimulating the construction industry the gi bill powerfully nurtured the robust and long lived economic expansion that eventually took hold in the late 1940s and that profoundly shaped the entire history of the postwar era.
