chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 planted them with new protestant landlords from scotland and eng land.
this policy also planted the seeds of the centuries old religious con icts that persist in ireland to the present day.
many eng lish soldiers developed in ireland a sneering contempt for the savage natives an attitude that they brought with them to the new world.
elizabeth energizes england elizabeth i 1533 1603 by marcus gheeraets the younger ca.
1592 although accused of being vain ckle prejudiced and miserly she proved to be an unusually successful ruler.
she never married hence the virgin queen although various royal matches were projected.
the protestant elizabeth ascended to the eng lish throne in 1558 protestantism became dominant in eng land and rivalry with catholic spain intensied.
ireland which nominally had been under eng lish rule since the twelfth century became an early scene of that rivalry.
the catholic irish sought help from catholic spain to throw off the yoke of the new protestant eng lish queen.
but spanish aid never amounted to much in the 1570s and 1580s elizabeths troops crushed the irish uprising with terrible ferocity in icting unspeakable atrocities upon the native irish people.
the eng lish crown conscated catholic irish lands and encouraged by the ambitious elizabeth i see table 2 1 hardy eng lish buccaneers now swarmed out upon the shipping lanes.
they sought to promote the twin goals of protestantism and plunder by seizing spanish trea sure ships and raiding spanish settlements even though eng land and spain were technically at peace.
the most famous of these semipiratical sea dogs was the courtly sir francis drake.
he swashbuckled and looted his way around the planet returning in 1580 with his ship heavily ballasted with spanish booty.
the venture netted prots of about 4 600 percent to his nancial backers among whom in secret was queen elizabeth.
defying spanish protest she brazenly knighted drake on the deck of his barnacled ship.
the bleak coast of newfoundland was the scene of the rst eng lish attempt at colonization.
this effort collapsed when its promoter sir humphrey gilbert lost his life at sea in 1583.
gilberts ill starred dream inspired his gallant half brother sir walter raleigh to try again in warmer climes.
raleigh orga nized an expedition that rst landed in 1585 on north carolinas roanoke island off the coast of virginia a vaguely de ned region named in honor of elizabeth the virgin queen after several false starts the hapless roanoke colony mysteriously vanished swallowed up by the wilderness.
these pathetic eng lish failures at colonization contrasted embarrassingly with the glories of the spanish empire whose prots were fabulously enriching spain.
philip ii of spain self anointed foe of the protestant reformation used part of his imperial gains to amass an invincible armada of ships for an invasion of eng land.
the showdown came in 1588 when the lumbering spanish otilla 130 strong hove into the eng lish channel.
the eng lish sea dogs fought back.
using craft that were swifter more maneuverable and more ably manned they in icted heavy damage on the cumbersome overladen spanish ships.
then a devastating storm arose the protestant wind scattering the crippled spanish eet.
england prepares for colonization in the years immediately following the defeat of the spanish armada the english writer richard hakluyt 1552 1616 extravagantly exhorted his countrymen to cast off their sluggish security and undertake the colonization of the new world there is under our noses the great and ample country of virginia the inland whereof is found of late to be so sweet and wholesome a climate so rich and abundant in silver mines a better and richer country than mexico itself.
if it shall please the almighty to stir up her majestys heart to continue with transporting one or two thousand of her people she shall by gods assistance in short space increase her dominions enrich her coffers and reduce many pagans to the faith of christ.
the rout of the spanish armada marked the beginning of the end of spanish imperial dreams though spains new world empire would not fully collapse for three more centuries.
within a few decades the spansir walter ralegh raleigh c 1552 1618 ish netherlands holland would secure its indepen1588 a dashing courtier who was one of queen dence and much of the spanish caribbean would slip elizabeths favorites for his wit good looks and courtly from spains grasp.
bloated by peruvian and mexican manners he launched important colonizing failures in silver and cockily convinced of its own invincibility the new world.
for this portrait raleigh presented spain had overreached itself sowing the seeds of its himself as the queens devoted servant wearing her own decline.
colors of black and white and her emblem of a pearl in eng lands victory over the spanish armada also his left ear.
after seducing and secretly marrying one marked a red letter day in american history.
it dampof queen elizabeths maids of honor he fell out of favor ened spains ghting spirit and helped ensure engbut continued his colonial ventures in the hopes of challenging catholic spains dominance in the lands naval dominance in the north atlantic.
it started americas.
he was ultimately beheaded for treason.
eng land on its way to becoming master of the world oceans a fact of enormous importance to the american people.
indeed eng land now had table 2 1 the tudor rulers of england many of the characteristics that spain displayed on the eve of its colonizing name reign relation to america adventure a century earlier a strong cabot voyages 1497 1498 unied national state under a pop henry vii 1485 1509 henry viii 1509 1547 eng lish reformation began ular monarch a mea sure of religious edward vi 1547 1553 strong protestant tendencies unity after a protracted struggle be bloody mary 1553 1558 catholic reaction tween protestants and catholics and elizabeth i 1558 1603 break with roman catholic church nal a vibrant sense of nationalism and drake spanish armada defeated national destiny.
a wondrous owering of the eng see table 3 1 p 55 for a continuation of the table.
lish national spirit bloomed in the chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 wake of the spanish armadas defeat.
a golden age of literature dawned in this exhilarating at mosphere with william shakespeare at its forefront making occasional poetical references to englands american colonies.
the english were seized with restlessness with thirst for adventure and with curiosity about the unknown.
everywhere there blossomed a new spirit of self condence of vibrant patriotism and of boundless faith in the future of the eng lish nation.
when england and spain nally signed a treaty of peace in 1604 the eng lish people were poised to plunge headlong into the planting of their own colonial empire in the new world.
england on the eve of empire eng lands scepterd isle as shakespeare called it throbbed with social and economic change as the seventeenth century opened.
its population was mushrooming from some 3 million people in 1550 to about 4 million in 1600.
in the ever green eng lish countryside landlords were enclosing croplands for sheep grazing forcing many small farmers into precarious tenancy or off the land altogether.
it was no accident that the woolen districts of eastern and western eng land where puritanism had taken strong root supplied many of the earliest immigrants to america.
when economic depression hit the woolen trade in the late 1500s thousands of footloose farmers took to the roads.
they drifted about eng land chronically unemployed often ending up as beggars and paupers in cities like bristol and london.
this remarkably mobile population alarmed many contemporaries.
they concluded that eng land was burdened with a surplus population though present day london holds twice as many people as did all of england in 1600.
at the same time laws of primogeniture decreed that only eldest sons were eligible to inherit landed estates.
landholders ambitious younger sons among them gilbert raleigh and drake were forced to seek their fortunes elsewhere.
bad luck plagued their early lone wolf enterprises.
but by the early 1600s the jointstock company forerunner of the modern corporation was perfected.
it enabled a considerable number of investors called adventurers to pool their capital.
peace with a chastened spain provided the opportunity for eng lish colonization.
population growth provided the workers.
unemployment as well as a thirst for adventure for markets and for religious freedom provided the motives.
joint stock companies provided the nancial means.
the stage was now set for a historic effort to establish an eng lish beachhead in the still uncharted north american wilderness.
england plants the jamestown seedling in 1606 two years after peace with spain the hand of destiny beckoned toward virginia.
a joint stock company known as the virginia company of london received a charter from king james i of eng land for a settlement in the new world.
the main attraction was the promise of gold combined with a strong desire to nd a passage through america to the indies.
like most joint stock companies of the day the virginia company was intended to endure for only a few years after which its stockholders hoped to liquidate it for a prot.
this arrangement put severe pressure on the luckless colonists who were threatened with abandonment in the wilderness if they did not quickly strike it rich on the companys behalf.
few of the investors thought in terms of long term colonization.
apparently no one even faintly suspected that the seeds of a mighty nation were being planted.
the charter of the virginia company is a signicant document in american history.
it guaranteed to the overseas settlers the same rights of eng lishmen that they would have enjoyed if they had stayed at home.
this precious boon was gradually extended to subsequent eng lish colonies helping to reinforce the colonists sense that even on the far shores of the atlantic they remained comfortably within the embrace of traditional eng lish institutions.
but ironically a century and a half later their insistence on the rights of eng lishmen fed the hot resentment of the colonists against an increasingly meddlesome mother country and nourished their appetite for independence.
setting sail in late 1606 the virginia companys three ships landed near the mouth of chesapeake bay where indians attacked them.
pushing on up the bay the tiny band of colonists eventually chose a location on the wooded and malarial banks of the james river named in honor of king james i.
the site was easy to defend but it was mosquito infested and devastatingly unhealthful.
there on may 24 1607 about a hundred eng lish settlers all of them men disembarked.
they called the place jamestown see map 2 1.
virginia s beginnings to eating dogges catts ratts and myce and even to digging up corpses for food.
one hungry man killed salted and ate his wife for which misbehavior he was executed.
of the four hundred settlers who managed to make it to virginia by 1609 only sixty survived the starving time winter of 1609 1610.
diseased and despairing the remaining colonists dragged themselves aboard homeward bound ships in the spring of 1610 only to be met at the mouth of the james river by a long awaited relief party headed by a new governor lord de la warr.
he ordered the settlers back to jamestown imposed a harsh military regime on the colony and soon undertook aggressive military action against the indians.
sq ue ha areas settled by 1675 50 km.
nn a areas settled by 1700 y li n e le va l fa annapolis ba ll do ah e an ar en d law sh 40n r de ac r e ar del a w r ma ry la n tom y ra n pp ah an st marys 1634 capital to 1694 r fort henry petersburg yorktown an oce hampton 1691 norfolk tic williamsburg jamestown 1607 capital to 1699 an henrico 1611 es r 38n b ay v i r g i n i a at l ck chesapeake no jam 76w n e piedmont fa our men were destroyed with cruel diseases as swellings burning fevers and by wars and some departed suddenly but for the most part they died of mere famine.
there were never englishmen left in a foreign country in such misery as we were in this new discovered virginia.
ll li george percy 1580 1631 accompanied captain john smith on his expedition to virginia in 1606 1607.
he served as deputy governor of the colony in 1609 1610 and returned to england in 1612 where he wrote a discourse of the plantation of virginia about his experiences su areas settled by 1650 po the early years of jamestown proved a nightmare for all concerned except the buzzards.
forty wouldbe colonists perished during the initial voyage in 1606 1607.
another expedition in 1609 lost its leaders and many of its precious supplies in a shipwreck off bermuda.
once ashore in virginia the settlers died by the dozens from disease malnutrition and starvation.
ironically the woods rustled with game and the rivers opped with sh but the greenhorn settlers many of them self styled gentlemen unaccustomed to fending for themselves wasted valuable time grubbing for nonexistent gold when they should have been gathering provisions.
virginia was saved from utter collapse at the start largely by the leadership and resourcefulness of an intrepid young adventurer captain john smith.
taking over in 1608 he whipped the gold hungry colonists into line with the rule he who shall not work shall not eat he had been kidnapped in december 1607 and subjected to a mock execution by the indian chieftain powhatan whose daughter pocahontas had saved smith by dramatically interposing her head between his and the war clubs of his captors.
the symbolism of this ritual was apparently intended to impress smith with powhatans power and with the indians desire for peaceful relations with the virginians.
pocahontas became an intermediary between the indians and the settlers helping to preserve a shaky peace and to provide needed foodstuffs.
still the colonists died in droves and living skeletons were driven to desperate acts.
they were reduced 36n t i d e wat e r 78w map 2 1 early maryland and virginia interactive map chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 the wife of a virginia governor wrote to her sister in england in 1623 of her voyage for our shippe was so pestered with people and goods that we were so full of infection that after a while we saw little but throwing folkes over board it pleased god to send me my helth till i came to shoare and 3 dayes after i fell sick but i thank god i am well recovered.
few else are left alive that came in that shippe.
cultural clashes in the chesapeake pocahontas ca.
1595 1617 taken to england by her husband she was received as a princess.
she died when preparing to return but her infant son ultimately reached virginia where hundreds of his descendants have lived including the second mrs woodrow wilson.
disease continued to reap a gruesome harvest among the virginians.
by 1625 virginia contained only some twelve hundred hard bitten survivors of the nearly eight thousand adventurers who had tried to start life anew in the ill fated colony.
the authorities meted out harsh discipline in the young virginia colony.
one jamestown settler who publicly criticized the governor was sentenced to be disarmed and have his arms broken and his tongue bored through with an awl and shall pass through a guard of 40 men and shall be butted with muskets by every one of them and at the head of the troop kicked down and footed out of the fort.
when the eng lish landed in 1607 the chieftain powhatan dominated the native peoples living in the james river area.
he had asserted supremacy over a few dozen small tribes loosely af liated in what somewhat grandly came to be called powhatans confederacy.
the english colonists dubbed all the local indians somewhat inaccurately the powhatans.
powhatan at rst may have considered the eng lish potential allies in his struggle to extend his power still further over his indian rivals and he tried to be conciliatory.
but relations between the indians and the eng lish remained tense especially as the starving colonists took to raiding indian food supplies.
the at mosphere grew even more strained after lord de la warr arrived in 1610.
he carried orders from the virginia company that amounted to a declaration of war against the indians in the jamestown region.
a veteran of the vicious campaigns against the irish de la warr now introduced irish tactics against the indians.
his troops raided indian villages burned houses conscated provisions and torched cornelds.
a peace settlement ended this first anglo powhatan war in 1614 sealed by the marriage of pocahontas to the colonist john rolfe the rst known interracial union in virginia.
a fragile respite followed which endured eight years.
but the indians pressed by the land hungry whites and ravaged by european diseases struck back in 1622.
a series of indian attacks left 347 settlers dead including john rolfe.
in response the virginia company issued new orders calling for a perpetual war without peace or truce one that would prevent the in virginians and native americans remained in virginia perhaps 10 percent of the population the original eng lish settlers had encountered in 1607.
by 1685 the eng lish considered the powhatan peoples extinct.
it had been the powhatans calamitous misfortune to fall victim to three ds disease disorga ni zation and disposability.
like native peoples throughout the new world they were extremely susceptible to europeanborne maladies.
epidemics of smallpox and measles raced mercilessly through their villages.
the powhatans also despite the apparent cohesiveness of powhatans confederacy lacked the unity with which to make effective opposition to the comparatively wellorga nized and militarily disciplined whites.
finally unlike the indians whom the spaniards had encountered to the south who could be put to work in the mines and had gold and silver to trade the powhatans served no economic function for the virginia colonists.
they provided no reliable labor source and after the virginians began growing their own food crops had no valuable commodities to offer in commerce.
the natives as far as the virginians were concerned could be disposed of without harm to the colonial economy.
indeed the indian presence frustrated the colonists desire for a local commodity the europeans desperately wanted land.
the indians new world a carolina indian woman and child by john white the artist was a member of the raleigh expedition of 1585.
notice that the indian girl carries a european doll illustrating the mingling of cultures that had already begun.
dians from being any longer a people periodic punitive raids systematically reduced the native population and drove the survivors ever farther westward.
in the second anglo powhatan war in 1644 the indians made one last effort to dislodge the virginians.
they were again defeated.
the peace treaty of 1646 repudiated any thought of assimilating the native peoples into virginia society or of peacefully coexisting with them.
instead it effectively banished the chesapeake indians from their ancestral lands and formally separated indian from white areas of settlement the origins of the later reservation system.
by 1669 an ofcial census revealed that only about two thousand indians the fate of the powhatans foreshadowed the destinies of indigenous peoples throughout the continent as the process of european settlement went forward.
native americans of course had a history well before columbuss arrival.
they were no strangers to change adaptation and even catastrophe as the rise and decline of civilizations such as the mississippians and the anasazis demonstrated.
but the shock of large scale european colonization disrupted native american life on a vast scale inducing unprecedented demographic and cultural transformations.
some changes were fairly benign.
horses stolen strayed or purchased from spanish invaders catalyzed a substantial indian migration onto the great plains in the eighteenth century.
peoples such as the lakotas sioux who had previously been sedentary forest dwellers now moved onto the wide open plains.
there they thrived impressively adopting an entirely new way of life as mounted nomadic hunters.
but the effects of contact with europeans proved less salutary for most other native peoples.
chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 disease was by far the biggest disrupter as old world pathogens licked lethally through biologically defenseless indian populations.
disease took more than human life it extinguished entire cultures and occasionally helped shape new ones.
epidemics often robbed native peoples of the elders who preserved the oral traditions that held clans together.
devastated indian bands then faced the daunting task of literally reinventing themselves without benet of accumulated wisdom or kin networks.
the decimation and forced migration of native peoples sometimes scrambled them together in wholly new ways.
the catawba nation of the southern piedmont region for example was formed from splintered remnants of several different groups uprooted by the shock of the europeans arrival.
trade also transformed indian life as traditional barter and exchange networks gave way to the temptations of european commerce.
firearms for example conferred enormous advantages on those who could purchase them from europeans.
the desire for rearms thus intensied competition among the tribes for access to prime hunting grounds that could supply the skins and pelts that the european arms traders wanted.
benjamin franklin 1706 1790 in a 1753 letter to peter collinson commented on the attractiveness of indian life to europeans when an indian child has been brought up among us taught our language and habituated to our customs yet if he goes to see his relations and make one indian ramble with them there is no persuading him ever to return.
but when white persons of either sex have been taken prisoners by the indians and lived awhile among them though ransomed by their friends and treated with all imaginable tenderness to prevail with them to stay among the english yet in a short time they become disgusted with our manner of life and the care and pains that are necessary to support it and take the rst good opportunity of escaping again into the woods from whence there is no reclaiming them.
carolina indians german painter philip georg friedrich von reck drew these yuchi indians in the 1730s.
the blanket and rie show that trade with the english settlers had already begun to transform native american culture.
slavery and democracy in early virginia the result was an escalating cycle of indian on indian violence fueled by the lure and demands of european trade goods.
native americans were swept up in the expanding atlantic economy but they usually struggled in vain to control their own place in it.
one desperate band of virginia indians resentful at the prices offered by british traders for their deerskins loaded a eet of canoes with hides and tried to paddle to eng land to sell their goods directly.
not far from the virginia shore a storm swamped their frail craft.
their cargo lost the few survivors were picked up by an eng lish ship and sold into slavery in the west indies.
indians along the atlantic seaboard felt the most ferocious effects of european contact.
farther inland native peoples had the advantages of time space and numbers as they sought to adapt to the european incursion.
the algonquins in the great lakes area for instance became a substantial regional power.
they bolstered their population by absorbing various surrounding bands and dealt from a position of strength with the few europeans who managed to penetrate the interior.
as a result a british or french trader wanting to do business with the inland tribes had little choice but to conform to indian ways often taking an indian wife.
thus was created a middle ground a zone where both europeans and native americans were compelled to accommodate to one another at least until the europeans began to arrive in large numbers.
virginia child of tobacco john rolfe the husband of pocahontas became father of the tobacco industry and an economic savior of the virginia colony.
by 1612 he had perfected methods of raising and curing the pungent weed eliminating much of the bitter tang.
soon the european demand for tobacco was nearly insatiable.
a tobacco rush swept over virginia as crops were planted in the streets of jamestown and even between the numerous graves.
so exclusively did the colonists concentrate on planting the yellow leaf that at rst they had to import some of their foodstuffs.
colonists who had once hungered for food now hungered for land ever more land on which to plant ever more tobacco.
relentlessly they pressed the frontier of settlement up the river valleys to the west abrasively edging against the indians.
virginias prosperity was nally built on tobacco smoke.
this bewitching weed played a vital role in putting the colony on rm economic foundations.
but tobacco king nicotine was something of a tyrant.
it was ruinous to the soil when greedily planted in successive years and it enchained the fortunes of virginia to the uctuating price of a single crop.
fatefully tobacco also promoted the broad acred plantation system and with it a brisk demand for fresh labor.
in 1619 the year before the plymouth pilgrims landed in new eng land what was described as a dutch warship appeared off jamestown and sold some twenty africans.
the scanty record does not reveal whether they were purchased as lifelong slaves or as servants committed to limited years of servitude.
however it transpired this simple commercial transaction planted advertisement for a voyage to america 1609 chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 the seeds of the north american slave system.
yet blacks were too costly for most of the hard pinched white colonists to acquire and for decades few were brought to virginia.
in 1650 virginia counted but three hundred blacks although by the end of the century blacks most of them enslaved made up approximately 14 percent of the colonys population.
representative self government was also born in primitive virginia in the same cradle with slavery and in the same year 1619.
the virginia company authorized the settlers to summon an assembly known as the house of burgesses.
a momentous precedent was thus feebly established for this assemblage was the rst of many miniature parliaments to ourish in the soil of america.
as time passed james i grew increasingly hostile to virginia.
he detested tobacco and he distrusted the representative house of burgesses which he branded a seminary of sedition in 1624 he revoked the charter of the bankrupt and beleaguered virginia company thus making virginia a royal colony directly under his control.
maryland catholic haven maryland the second plantation colony but the fourth eng lish colony to be planted was founded in 1634 by lord baltimore of a prominent eng lish catholic family.
he embarked upon the venture partly to reap nancial prots and partly to create a refuge for his fellow catholics.
protestant eng land was still persecuting roman catholics among numerous discriminations a couple seeking wedlock could not be legally married by a catholic priest.
absentee proprietor lord baltimore hoped that the two hundred settlers who founded maryland at st marys on chesapeake bay would be the vanguard of a vast new feudal domain.
huge estates were to be awarded to his largely catholic relatives and gracious manor houses modeled on those of eng lands aristocracy were intended to arise amidst the fertile forests.
as in virginia colonists proved willing to come only if offered the opportunity to acquire land of their own.
soon they were dispersed around the chesapeake region on modest farms and the haughty land barons mostly catholic were surrounded by resentful backcountry planters mostly protestant.
resentment ared into open rebellion near the end of the century and the baltimore family for a time lost its proprietary rights.
despite these tensions maryland prospered.
like virginia it blossomed forth in acres of tobacco.
also like virginia it depended for labor in its early years mainly on white indentured servants penniless persons who bound themselves to work for a number of years to pay their passage.
in both colonies it was only in the later years of the seventeenth century that black slaves began to be imported in large numbers.
lord baltimore a canny soul permitted unusual freedom of worship at the outset.
he hoped that he would thus purchase toleration for his own fellow worshipers.
but the heavy tide of protestants threatened to submerge the catholics and place severe restrictions on them as in eng land.
faced with disaster the catholics of maryland threw their support behind the famed act of toleration which was passed in 1649 by the local representative assembly.
marylands new religious statute guaranteed toleration to all christians.
but less liberally it decreed the death penalty for those like jews and atheists who denied the divinity of jesus.
the law thus sanctioned less toleration than had previously existed in the settlement but it did extend a temporary cloak of protection to the uneasy catholic minority.
one result was that when the colonial era ended maryland probably sheltered more roman catholics than any other eng lishspeaking colony in the new world.
the west indies way station to mainland america while the eng lish were planting the rst frail colonial shoots in the chesapeake they also were busily colonizing the islands of the west indies.
spain weakened by military overextension and distracted by its rebellious dutch provinces relaxed its grip on much of the caribbean in the early 1600s.
by the mid seventeenth century eng land had secured its claim to several west indian islands including the large prize of jamaica in 1655.
sugar formed the foundation of the west indian economy.
what tobacco was to the chesapeake sugar cane was to the caribbean with one crucial difference.
tobacco was a poor mans crop.
it could be planted easily it produced commercially marketable leaves within a year and it required only simple processing.
sugar cane in contrast was a rich mans crop.
it had to be planted extensively to yield commercially viable quantities of sugar.
extensive planting in turn required extensive and arduous land clearing.
and the english colonization in the caribbean above sugar mill in brazil by frans post ca.
1640 left saccharum ofcinarum sugar cane african peoples throughout the new world in the three and a half centuries following columbuss discovery.
to control this large and potentially restive slave population eng lish authorities devised formal codes that de ned the slaves legal status and their masters prerogatives.
the notorious barbados slave code of 1661 denied even the most fundamental rights to slaves and gave masters virtually complete control over their laborers including the right to in ict vicious punishments for even slight infractions.
cane stalks yielded their sugar only after an elaborate process of re ning in a sugar mill.
the need for land and for the labor to clear it and to run the mills made sugar cultivation a capital intensive business.
only wealthy growers with abundant capital to invest could succeed in sugar.
the sugar lords extended their dominion over the west indies in the seventeenth century.
to work their sprawling plantations they imported enormous numbers of enslaved africans more than a quarter of a million in the ve decades after 1640.
by about 1700 black slaves outnumbered white settlers in the eng lish west indies by nearly four to one and the regions population has remained predominantly black ever since.
west indians thus take their place among the numerous children of the african diaspora the vast scattering of african slaves destined for the west indian sugar plantations were bound and branded on west african beaches and ferried out in canoes to the waiting slave ships.
an english sailor described the scene the negroes are so wilful and loth to leave their own country that have often leapd out of the canoes boat and ship into the sea and kept under water till they were drowned to avoid being taken up and saved by our boats which pursued them they having a more dreadful apprehension of barbadoes than we can have of hell.
chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 the barbados slave code 1661 declared if any negro or slave whatsoever shall offer any violence to any christian by striking or the like such negro or slave shall for his or her rst offence be severely whipped by the constable.
for his second offence of that nature he shall be severely whipped his nose slit and be burned in some part of his face with a hot iron.
and being brutish slaves they deserve not for the baseness of their condition to be tried by the legal trial of twelve men of their peers as the subjects of england are.
and it is further enacted and ordained that if any negro or other slave under punishment by his master unfortunately shall suffer in life or member which seldom happens no person whatsoever shall be liable to any ne therefore.
the protable sugar plantation system soon crowded out almost all other forms of caribbean agriculture.
the west indies increasingly depended on the north american mainland for foodstuffs and other basic supplies.
and smaller eng lish farmers squeezed out by the greedy sugar barons began to migrate to the newly founded southern mainland colonies.
a group of displaced eng lish settlers from barbados arrived in carolina in 1670.
they brought with them a few enslaved africans as well as the model of the barbados slave code which eventually inspired statutes governing slavery throughout the mainland colonies.
carolina ofcially adopted a version of the barbados slave code in 1696.
just as the west indies had been a testing ground for the encomienda system that the spanish had brought to mexico and south america so the caribbean islands now served as a staging area for the slave system that would take root elsewhere in eng lish north america.
colonizing the carolinas civil war convulsed eng land in the 1640s.
king charles i had dismissed parliament in 1629 and when he eventually recalled it in 1640 the members were mutinous.
finding their great champion in the puritan soldier oliver cromwell they ultimately beheaded charles in 1649 and cromwell ruled eng land for nearly a decade.
finally charles ii son of the decapitated king was restored to the throne in 1660.
colonization had been interrupted during this period of bloody unrest.
now in the so called restoration period empire building resumed with even greater intensity and royal involvement see table 2 2.
carolina named for charles ii was formally created in 1670 after the king granted to eight of his court favorites the lords proprietors an expanse of wilderness ribboning across the continent to the pacic.
these aristocratic founders hoped to grow foodstuffs to provision the sugar plantations in barbados and to export noneng lish products like wine silk and olive oil.
carolina prospered by developing close economic ties with the ourishing sugar islands of the eng lish west indies.
in a broad sense the mainland colony was but the most northerly of those outposts.
many original carolina settlers in fact had emigrated from barbados bringing that islands slave system with them.
they also established a vigorous slave trade in carolina itself.
enlisting the aid of the coastal savannah indians they forayed into the interior in search of captives.
the lords proprietors in london protested against indian slave trading in their colony but to no avail.
manacled indians soon were among the young colonys major exports.
as many as ten thousand indians were dispatched to lifelong labor in the west indian caneelds and sugar mills.
others were sent to new eng land.
one rhode island town in 1730 counted more than two hundred indian slaves from carolina in its midst.
early carolina coins these copper halfpennies bore the image of an elephant an unofcial symbol of the colony and a prayer for the lords proprietors.
the restoration colonies in 1707 the savannah indians decided to end their alliance with the carolinians and to migrate to the backcountry of maryland and pennsylvania where a new colony founded by quakers under william penn promised better relations between whites and indians.
but the carolinians determined to thin the savannahs before they could depart.
a series of bloody raids all but annihilated the indian tribes of coastal carolina by 1710.
after much experimentation rice emerged as the principal export crop in carolina.
rice was then an exotic food in eng land no rice seeds were sent out from london in the rst supply ships to carolina.
but rice was grown in africa and the carolinians were soon paying premium prices for west african slaves experienced in rice cultivation.
the africans agricultural skill and their relative immunity to malaria thanks to a genetic trait that also unfortunately made them and their descendants susceptible to sickle cell anemia made them ideal laborers on the hot and swampy rice plantations.
by 1710 they constituted a majority of carolinians.
moss festooned charles town also named for the king rapidly became the busiest seaport in the south.
many high spirited sons of eng lish landed families deprived of an inheritance came to the charleston area and gave it a rich aristocratic avor.
the village became a colorfully diverse community to which french table 2 2 the thirteen original colonies name founded by year 1.
virginia london co 2.
new hampshire 3.
massachusetts plymouth maine 4.
maryland john mason and others puritans separatists f gorges lord baltimore 5.
connecticut mass.
emigrants charter royal under the crown mass.
emigrants none 6.
rhode island r williams 7.
delaware swedes n carolina virginians 9.
new york dutch duke of york berkeley and carteret eight nobles 11.
carolina 12.
pennsylvania 13.
georgia william penn oglethorpe and others 1775 status 10.
new jersey ca.
1628 made royal none new haven royal absorbed by mass 1641 1679 royal merged with mass 1691 bought by mass 1677 proprietary controlled by proprietor self governing under local control merged with conn 1662 self governing none none royal royal royal separated formally from n c 1712 proprietary royal ca.
1613 proprietary merged with pa 1682 same governor but separate assembly granted 1703 royal separated informally from s c 1691 chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 fort and trading post virginia 200 km.
north carolina georgia n an ah south carolina.
fort moore savannah carolina grant 1 35n roanoke i n r fort augusta new spain ke r new bern campbelltown s grant to trustees of georgia 1732 the emergence of north carolina the wild northern expanse of the huge carolina grant bordered on virginia.
from the older colony there drifted down a ragtag group of poverty stricken outcasts and religious dissenters.
many of them had been repelled by the rareed at mosphere of virginia dominated as it was by big plantation gentry belonging to the church of eng land.
north carolinians as a result have been called the quintessence of virginias discontent the newcomers who frequently were squatters without legal right to the soil raised their tobacco and other crops on small farms with little need for slaves.
distinctive traits developed rapidly in north carolina.
the poor but sturdy inhabitants regarded as riffraff by their snobbish neighbors earned a reputation for being irreligious and hospitable to pirates.
isolated from neighbors by raw wilderness and stormy cape hatteras graveyard of the atlantic the north carolinians developed a strong spirit of resistance to authority.
their location between aristocratic virginia and aristocratic south carolina caused the area to be dubbed a vale of humility between two mountains of conceit following much friction with governors north carolina was ofcially separated from south carolina in 1712 and subsequently each segment became a royal colony see map 2 2.
north carolina shares with tiny rhode island several distinctions.
these two outposts were the most democratic the most independent minded and the least aristocratic of the original thirteen eng lish colonies.
although northern carolina unlike the colonys southern reaches did not at rst import large numbers of african slaves both regions shared in the ongoing tragedy of bloody relations between indians and europeans.
tuscarora indians fell upon the edgling settlement at new bern in 1711.
the north carolinians roa 200 mi.
no av protestant refugees jews and others were attracted by religious toleration.
nearby in florida the catholic spaniards abhorred the intrusion of these protestant heretics.
carolinas frontier was often aame.
spanish incited indians brandished their tomahawks and armor clad warriors of spain frequently unsheathed their swords during the successive anglo spanish wars.
but by 1700 carolina was too strong to be wiped out.
dorchester charles town charleston atlantic ocean fort king george fort st andrew fort william fort st george carolina grant 30n 80w map 2 2 early carolina and georgia settlements interactive map aided by their heavily armed brothers from the south retaliated by crushing the indians in the tuscarora war selling hundreds of them into slavery and leaving the survivors to wander northward to seek the protection of the iroquois.
the tuscaroras eventually became the sixth nation of the iroquois confederacy.
in another ferocious encounter four years later the south carolinians defeated and dispersed the yamasee indians.
with the conquest of the yamasees virtually all the coastal indian tribes in the southern colonies had been utterly devastated by about 1720.
yet in the interior in the hills and valleys of the appalachian mountains the powerful cherokees creeks and iroquois see makers of america the iroquois pp.
42 43 remained.
stronger and more numerous than their coastal cousins they managed for half a century more to contain british settlement to the coastal plain east of the mountains.
the colonial south late coming georgia the buffer colony pine forested georgia with the harbor of savannah nourishing its chief settlement was formally founded in 1733.
it proved to be the last of the thirteen colonies to be planted 126 years after the rst virginia and 52 years after the twelfth pennsylvania.
chronologically georgia belongs elsewhere but geographically it may be grouped with its southern neighbors.
the eng lish crown intended georgia to serve chiey as a buffer.
it would protect the more valuable carolinas against vengeful spaniards from florida and against the hostile french from louisiana.
georgia indeed suffered much buffeting especially when wars broke out between spain and eng land in the european arena.
as a vital link in imperial defense the exposed colony received monetary subsidies from the british government at the outset the only one of the original thirteen to enjoy this benet in its founding stage.
named in honor of king george ii of eng land georgia was launched by a high minded group of philanthropists.
in addition to protecting their neighboring northern colonies and producing silk and wine they were determined to carve out a haven for wretched souls imprisoned for debt.
they were also determined at least at rst to keep slavery out of georgia.
the ablest of the founders was the dynamic soldier statesman james oglethorpe who became keenly interested in prison reform after one of his friends died in a debtors jail.
as an able military leader oglethorpe repelled spanish attacks.
as an imperialist and a philanthropist he saved the charity colony by his energetic leadership and by heavily mortgaging his own personal fortune.
the hamlet of savannah like charleston was a melting pot community.
german lutherans and kilted scots highlanders among others added color to the pattern.
all christian worshipers except catholics enjoyed religious toleration.
many missionaries armed with bibles and hope arrived in savannah to work among debtors and indians.
prominent among them was young john wesley who later returned to eng land and founded the methodist church.
georgia grew with painful slowness and at the end of the colonial era was perhaps the least populous of the colonies.
the development of a plantation economy was thwarted by an unhealthy climate by early restrictions on black slavery and by demoralizing spanish attacks.
the plantation colonies certain distinctive features were shared by eng lands southern mainland colonies maryland virginia north carolina south carolina and georgia.
broad acred these outposts of empire were all in some degree devoted to exporting commercial agricultural products.
protable staple crops were the rule notably tobacco and rice though to a lesser extent in small farm north carolina.
slavery was found in all the plantation colonies though only after 1750 in reform minded georgia.
immense acreage in the hands of a favored few fostered a strong aristocratic at mosphere except in north carolina and to some extent in debtor tinged georgia.
the wide scattering of plantations and farms often along stately rivers retarded the growth of cities and made the establishment of churches and schools both difcult and expensive.
in 1671 the governor of virginia actually thanked god that no free schools or printing presses existed in his colony.
all the plantation colonies permitted some religious toleration.
the tax supported church of eng land became the dominant faith though weakest of all in nonconformist north carolina.
these colonies were in some degree expansionary.
soil butchery by excessive tobacco growing drove settlers westward and the long lazy rivers invited penetration of the continent and continuing confrontation with native americans.
makers of america theafricanthe great iroquois american migration w ell before the crowned heads of europe turned their eyes and their dreams of empire toward north america a great military power had emerged in the mohawk valley of what is now new york state.
the iroquois confederacy dubbed by whites the league 75w montagnais fort qubec n algonquin 45n w.
fort orange ue a nn ha delaware susq r ne n ew en g l a n d connecticut r herl mo hawk r a ga nda on e id cayuga ois iroqu nf co ono seneca rie l e mohawk ed lake ontario and y ac er huron aki lake champlain mahican 100 mi.
ce en net wr en hudson r 100 km.
montral r ab n e w fr an c e new amsterdam r.
of the iroquois bound together ve indian nations the mohawks the oneidas the onondagas the cayugas and the senecas see map 2 3.
according to iroquois legend it was founded in the late 1500s by two leaders deganawidah and hiawatha.
this proud and potent league vied initially with neighboring indians for territorial supremacy then with the french english and dutch for control of the fur trade.
ultimately infected by the white mans diseases intoxicated by his whiskey and intimidated by his muskets the iroquois struggled for their very survival as a people.
the building block of iroquois society was the longhouse.
this wooden structure deserved its descriptive name.
only twenty ve feet in breadth the longhouse stretched from eight to two hundred feet in length.
each building contained three to ve replaces around which gathered two nuclear families consisting of parents and children.
all families residing in the longhouse were related their connections of blood running exclusively through the maternal line.
a single longhouse might shelter a womans family and those of her mother sisters and daughters with the oldest woman being the honored matriarch.
when a man married he left his childhood hearth in the home of his mother to join the longhouse of his wife.
men dominated in iroquois society but they owed their positions of prominence to their mothers families.
40n 40n 72w map 2 3 iroquois lands and european trade centers ca.
1590 1650 interactive map an iroquois canoe in frail but artfully constructed craft like this the iroquois traversed the abundant waters of their confederacy and traded with their neighbors indians as well as whites.
the longhouse reconstruction the photo shows a modernday reconstruction of a delaware indian longhouse almost identical in design and building materials to the iroquois longhouses at historic waterloo village on winakung island in new jersey.
the iroquois conquered the delawares in the late 1600s.
bent saplings and sheets of elm bark made for sturdy weathertight shelters.
longhouses were typically furnished with deerskin covered bunks and shelves for storing baskets pots fur pelts and corn.
as if sharing one great longhouse the ve nations joined in the iroquois confederacy but kept their own separate res.
although they celebrated together and shared a common policy toward outsiders they remained essentially independent of one another.
on the eastern ank of the league the mohawks known as the keepers of the eastern fire specialized as middlemen with european traders whereas the outlying senecas the keepers of the western fire became fur suppliers.
after banding together to end generations of violent warfare among themselves the five nations vanquished their rivals the neighboring hurons eries and petuns.
some other tribes such as the tuscaroras from the carolina region sought peaceful absorption into the iroquois confederacy.
the iroquois further expanded their numbers by means of periodic mourning wars whose objective was the large scale adoption of captives and refugees.
but the arrival of gun toting europeans threatened iroquois supremacy and enmeshed the confederacy in a tangled web of diplomatic intrigues.
throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries they allied alternately with the eng lish against the french and vice versa for a time success fully working this perpetual rivalry to their own advantage.
but when the american revolution broke out the confederacy could reach no consensus on which side to support.
each tribe was left to decide independently most though not all sided with the british.
the ultimate british defeat left the confederacy in tatters.
many iroquois especially the mohawks moved to new lands in british canada others were relegated to reservations in western new york.
reservation life proved unbearable for a proud people accustomed to domination over a vast territory.
morale sank brawling feuding and alcoholism became rampant.
out of this morass arose a prophet an iroquois called handsome lake.
in 1799 angelic gures clothed in traditional iroquois garb appeared to handsome lake in a vision and warned him that the moral decline of his people must end if they were to endure.
he awoke from his vision to warn his tribespeople to mend their ways.
his socially oriented gospel inspired many iroquois to forsake alcohol to af rm family values and to revive old iroquois customs.
handsome lake died in 1815 but his teachings in the form of the longhouse religion survive to this day.
chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 chronology elizabeth i becomes queen of eng land ca.
1565 eng lish crush irish uprising drake circumnavigates the globe raleigh founds lost colony at roanoke island eng land defeats spanish armada james i becomes king of eng land spain and eng land sign peace treaty 1640s large scale slave labor system established in eng lish west indies second anglo powhatan war act of toleration in maryland charles i beheaded cromwell rules eng land charles ii restored to eng lish throne barbados slave code adopted carolina colony created 1711 tuscarora war in north carolina virginia colony founded at jamestown rolfe perfects tobacco culture in virginia north carolina formally separates from south carolina first anglo powhatan war ends 1715 yamasee war in south carolina first africans arrive in jamestown virginia house of burgesses established georgia colony founded virginia becomes royal colony maryland colony founded key terms protestant reformation 27 roanoke island 28 spanish armada 29 primogeniture 30 joint stock company 30 charter 30 jamestown 30 first anglo powhatan war 32 second anglo powhatan war 33 people to know act of toleration 36 barbados slave code 37 squatters 40 tuscarora war 40 yamasee indians 40 buffer 41 iroquois confederacy 42 henry viii elizabeth i sir francis drake sir walter raleigh james i captain john smith powhatan pocahontas lord de la warr john rolfe lord baltimore oliver cromwell james oglethorpe hiawatha to learn more to learn more ira berlin generations of captivity a history of african american slaves 2003 many thousands gone the first two centuries of slavery in north america 1998 kathleen brown good wives nasty wenches and anxious patriarchs gender race and power in colonial virginia 1996 colin g calloway new worlds for all indians europeans and the remaking of america 1997 ralph davis the rise of the atlantic economies 1973 jack p greene pursuits of happiness the social development of early modern british colonies and the formation of american culture 1988 peter laslett the world we have lost 1965 edmund s morgan american slavery american freedom 1975 david b quinn england and the discovery of america 1481 1620 1974 daniel k richter facing east from indian country a native history of early america 2003 nancy shoemaker a strange likeness becoming red and white in eighteenth century north america 2004 alan taylor american colonies the settling of north america 2001 camilla townsend pocahontas and the powhatan dilemma 2004 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 god hath sifted a nation that he might send choice grain into this wilderness.
a lthough colonists both north and south were bound together by a common language and a common allegiance to mother eng land they established different patterns of settlement different economies different political systems and even different sets of values de ning distinctive regional characteristics that would persist for generations.
the promise of riches especially from golden leaved tobacco drew the rst settlers to the southern colonies.
but to the north in the fertile valleys of the middle atlantic region and especially along the rocky shores of new eng land it was not worldly wealth but religious devotion that principally shaped the earliest settlements.
the protestant reformation produces puritanism little did the german friar martin luther suspect when he nailed his protests against catholic doctrines to the door of wittenbergs cathedral in 1517 that he was shaping the destiny of a yet unknown nation.
denounc ing the authority of priests and popes luther declared that the bible alone was the source of gods word.
he ignited a re of religious reform the protestant reformation that licked its way across europe for more than a century dividing peoples toppling sovereigns and kindling the spiritual fervor of millions of men and women some of whom helped to found america.
the reforming ame burned especially brightly in the bosom of john calvin of geneva.
this somber and severe religious leader elaborated martin luthers ideas in ways that profoundly affected the thought and character of generations of americans yet unborn.
calvinism became the dominant theological credo not only of the new eng land puritans but of other american settlers as well including the scottish presbyterians french huguenots and communicants of the dutch reformed church.
calvin spelled out his basic doctrine in a learned latin tome of 1536 entitled institutes of the christian religion.
god calvin argued was all powerful and allgood.
humans because of the corrupting effect of original sin were weak and wicked.
god was also all this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website plymouth plantation knowing and he knew who was going to heaven and who was going to hell.
since the rst moment of creation some souls the elect had been destined for eternal bliss and others for eternal torment.
good works could not save those whom predestination had marked for the infernal res.
but neither could the elect count on their predetermined salvation and lead lives of wild immoral abandon.
for one thing no one could be certain of his or her status in the heavenly ledger.
gnawing doubts about their eternal fate plagued calvinists.
they constantly sought in themselves and others signs of conversion or the receipt of gods free gift of saving grace.
conversion was thought to be an intense identiable personal experience in which god revealed to the elect their heavenly destiny.
thereafter they were expected to lead sanctied lives demonstrating by their holy behavior that they were among the visible saints these doctrines swept into eng land just as king henry viii was breaking his ties with the roman catholic church in the 1530s making himself the head of the church of eng land.
henry would have been content to retain roman rituals and creeds but his action powerfully stimulated some eng lish religious reformers to undertake a total purication of eng lish christianity.
many of these puritans as it happened came from the commercially depressed woolen districts see p 30.
calvinism with its message of stark but reassuring order in the divine plan fed on this social unrest and provided spiritual comfort to the economically disadvantaged.
as time went on puritans grew increasingly unhappy over the snail like progress of the protestant reformation in eng land.
they burned with pious zeal to see the church of eng land wholly decatholicized.
the most devout puritans including those who eventually settled new eng land believed that only visible saints that is persons who felt the stirrings of grace in their souls and could demonstrate its presence to their fellow puritans should be admitted to church membership.
but the church of eng land enrolled all the kings subjects which meant that the saints had to share pews and communion rails with the damned appalled by this unholy fraternizing a tiny group of dedicated puritans known as separatists vowed to break away entirely from the church of eng land.
king james i a shrewd scotsman was head of both the state and the church in eng land from 1603 to 1625.
he quickly perceived that if his subjects could defy him as their spiritual leader they might one day defy him as their political leader as in fact they would later defy and behead his son charles i.
he therefore threatened to harass the more bothersome separatists out of the land.
the pilgrims end their pilgrimage at plymouth the most famous congregation of separatists eeing royal wrath departed for holland in 1608.
during the ensuing twelve years of toil and poverty they were increasingly distressed by the dutchication of their children.
they longed to nd a haven where they could live and die as eng lish men and women and as puried protestants.
america was the logical refuge despite the early ordeals of jamestown and despite tales of new world cannibals roasting steaks from their white victims over open res.
a group of the separatists in holland after negotiating with the virginia company at length secured rights to settle under its jurisdiction.
but their crowded mayower sixty ve days at sea missed its destination and arrived off the stony coast of new eng land in 1620 with a total of 102 persons.
one had died en route an unusually short casualty list and one had been born and appropriately named oceanus.
fewer than half of the entire party were separatists.
prominent among the nonbelongers was a peppery and stocky soldier of fortune captain myles standish dubbed by one of his critics captain shrimp he later rendered indispensable ser vice as an indian ghter and negotiator.
the pilgrims did not make their initial landing at plymouth rock as commonly supposed but undertook a number of preliminary surveys.
they nally chose for their site the shore of inhospitable plymouth bay.
this area was outside the domain of the virginia company and consequently the settlers became squatters.
they were without legal right to the land and without specic authority to establish a government.
before disembarking the pilgrim leaders drew up and signed the brief mayower compact.
although setting an invaluable precedent for later written constitutions this document was not a constitution at all.
it was a simple agreement to form a crude government and to submit to the will of the majority under the regulations agreed upon.
the compact was signed by forty one adult males eleven of them with the exalted rank of mister though not by the servants and two seamen.
the pact was a promising step toward genuine.
chapter 4 american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 a hoe a few barrels of corn a suit of clothes and perhaps a small parcel of land.
both virginia and maryland employed the headright system to encourage the importation of servant workers.
under its terms whoever paid the passage of a laborer received the right to acquire fty acres of land.
masters not the servants themselves thus reaped the benets of landownership from the headright system.
some masters men who already had at least modest nancial means soon parlayed their investments in servants into vast holdings in real estate.
they became the great merchant planters lords of sprawling riverfront estates that came to dominate the agriculture and commerce of the southern colonies.
ravenous for both labor and land chesapeake planters brought some 100 000 indentured servants to the region by 1700.
these white slaves represented more than threequarters of all european immigrants to virginia and maryland in the seventeenth century.
indentured servants led a hard but hopeful life in the early days of the chesapeake settlements.
they looked forward to becoming free and acquiring land of their own after completing their term of servitude.
but as prime land became scarcer masters became increasingly resistant to including land grants in freedom dues the servants lot grew harsher as the seventeenth century wore on.
misbehaving servants such as a housemaid who became pregnant or a laborer who killed a hog might be punished with an extended term of ser vice.
even after formal freedom was granted penniless freed workers often had little choice but to hire themselves out for pitifully low wages to their former masters.
frustrated freemen and bacons rebellion an accumulating mass of footloose impoverished freemen drifted discontentedly about the chesapeake region by the late seventeenth century.
mostly single young men they were frustrated by their broken hopes of acquiring land as well as by their gnawing failure to nd single women to marry.
the swelling numbers of these wretched bachelors rattled the established planters.
the virginia assembly in 1670 disfranchised most of the landless knockabouts accusing them of having little interest in the country and causing tumults at the election to the disturbance of his majestys peace virginias governor william berkeley lamented his lot as ruler of this rabble how miserable that man is that governs a people where six parts of seven at least are poor endebted discontented and armed berkeleys misery soon increased.
about a thousand virginians broke out of control in 1676 led by a twenty nine year old planter nathaniel bacon.
many of the rebels were frontiersmen who had been forced into the untamed backcountry in search of arable land.
they ercely resented berkeleys friendly policies toward the indians whose thriving fur trade the governor monopolized.
when berkeley refused to retaliate against a series of brutal indian attacks on frontier settlements bacon and his followers took matters into their own hands.
they fell murderously upon the indians friendly and hostile alike chased berkeley from jamestown and put the torch to the capital.
chaos swept the raw colony as frustrated freemen and resentful servants described as a rabble of the basest sort of people went on a rampage of plundering and pilfering.
as this civil war in virginia ground on bacon suddenly died of disease like so many of his fellow colonists.
berkeley thereupon crushed the uprising with brutal cruelty hanging more than twenty rebels.
back in eng land charles ii complained that old fool has put to death more people in that naked country than i did here for the murder of my father nathaniel bacon ca.
1647 1676 assailed virginias governor william berkeley 1606 1677 in 1676 for having protected favored and emboldened the indians against his majestys loyal subjects never contriving requiring or appointing any due or proper means of satisfaction for their many invasions robberies and murders committed upon us.
for his part governor berkeley declared i have lived thirty four years amongst you virginians as uncorrupt and diligent as ever a governor was while bacon is a man of two years amongst you his person and qualities unknown to most of you and to all men else by any virtuous act that ever i heard of.
i will take counsel of wiser men than myself but mr bacon has none about him but the lowest of the people.
an indentured servants contract 1746 egal documents such as this contract signed in virginia in 1746 not only provide evidence about the ever changing rules by which societies have regulated their affairs but also furnish rich information about the conditions of life and the terms of human relationships in the past.
this agreement between thomas clayton and james grif n provides a reminder that not all indentured servants in early america came from abroad.
indentured servitude could be equivalent to an apprenticeship in which a young person traded several years of ser vice to a master in exchange for instruction in the masters craft.
here clayton pledges himself to ve years in grif ns employ in return for a promise to initiate the young man into the mystery of the masters craft.
why might the masters trade be described as a mystery.
from the evidence of this contract what are the principal objectives of each of the parties to it.
what problems does each anticipate.
what obligations does each assume.
what does the consent of claytons mother to the contract suggest about the young mans situation.
l thinking globally the atlantic slave trade 1500 1860 i n the three and a half centuries following columbuss discovery slave merchants crammed more than 11 million african men women and children into the holds of ships and carried them like common cargo to the new world.
roughly 2 million souls perished midvoyage before confronting the agonies and indignities of slavery in the americas.
as table 4 1 shows some 400 000 enslaved africans came ashore in north america while the overwhelming majority were destined for latin america and the caribbean see map 4 1.
european trading companies and new england merchants reaped enormous prots from this human trafcking and the slavers were not the only ones to benet.
slave trading fed off the insatiable appetite for sugar tobacco cotton and other new world products that europeans and americans craved.
it thrived too on the willingness of africans themselves to sell their fellow africans to european and american slavers.
marketing human beings on such a vast scale required the complicity of african warlords slave ship captains and crews stevedores planters tea drinkers tailors bakers smokers bankers and a host of middlemen on four continents.
only in the nineteenth century did nations in europe and the americas begin to outlaw the international slave trade see the struggle to abolish slavery p 388 beginning with britain in 1807.
after congress banned further slave importations to the united states in 1808 a ourishing internal market developed.
masters in the upper south bred slaves for sale on the rapidly expanding cotton frontier in the old southwest.
europeans as well as americans in the free states lent indirect support to that domestic slave trade as they continued to consume slave produced goods.
an african slave cofe yoked and bound these men women and children were on their way to a coastal slave market where they would be herded aboard ship for the americas.
liverpool bristol europe north america constantinople new york baltimore azores charleston 90w 30n st ind cape verde is.
ies 4 guiana zon r am a 0 arguin senegambia sierra leone windward coast gold coast bight of benin bight of biafra equator 0.
south america brazi brazil 00 l 3 9 co n go r loango indian ocean n benguela madagascar tropic of capricorn paran r.
rio de janeiro buenos aires 60w muscat africa angola luanda recife bahia arabia.
main sources of african slaves main slave trade routes from africa main areas of slave importation in the western hemisphere we r ocean o c ea n cartagena venezuela ecuador pacif ic asia baghdad r er nig haiti spanish mainland 430 000 euro 10 0 0 p e a tla n ti c puerto rico canary is.
nile jamaica erica am 0 0 mexico mexico city damascus sea cairo tropic of cancer rra nea n tripoli tangier madeira n new orleans cuba lisbon m algiers tunis e d i t e 1 000 2 000 km.
1 000 30w 30s 2 000 mi.
0 map 4 1 main sources and destinations of african slaves c 1500 1860 more than three centuries of the african diaspora scattered blacks throughout the new world.
britains north american colonies the future united states constituted the extreme northern periphery of this system receiving about 400 000 of the nearly ten million arrivals the great majority of whom ended up in the west indies and brazil.
30e 60e interactive map the middle passage the middle passage referred to the transatlantic sea voyage that brought slaves to the new world the long and hazardous middle segment of a journey that began with a forced march to the african coast and ended with a trek into the american interior.
chapter 4 american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 the distant eng lish king could scarcely imagine the depths of passion and fear that bacons rebellion excited in virginia.
bacon had ignited the smoldering resentments of landless former servants and he had pitted the hardscrabble backcountry frontiersmen against the haughty gentry of the tidewater plantations.
the rebellion was now suppressed but these tensions remained.
lordly planters surrounded by a still seething sea of malcontents anxiously looked about for less troublesome laborers to toil in the restless tobacco kingdom.
their eyes soon lit on africa.
colonial slavery more than 7 million africans were carried in chains to the new world in the three centuries or so following columbuss landing see thinking globally the atlantic slave trade 1500 1860 pp.
only about 400 000 of them ended up in north america the great majority arriving after 1700.
most of the early human cargoes were hauled to spanish and portuguese south america or to the sugar rich west indies.
africans had been brought to jamestown as early as 1619 but as late as 1670 they numbered only about 2 000 in virginia out of a total population of some 35 000 persons and about 7 percent of the 50 000 people in the southern plantation colonies as a whole.
hard pinched white colonists struggling to stay alive and to hack crude clearings out of the forests could not afford to pay high prices for slaves who might die soon after arrival.
white servants might die too but they were far less costly.
the mennonites of germantown pennsylvania recorded the earliest known protest against slavery in america in 1688 there is a saying that we should do to all men like as we will be done ourselves.
but to bring men hither or to rob and sell them against their will we stand against.
pray what thing in the world can be done worse towards us than if men should rob or steal us away and sell us for slaves to strange countries separating husbands from their wives and children.
drastic change came in the 1680s.
rising wages in eng land shrank the pool of penniless folk willing to gamble on a new life or an early death as indentured servants in america.
at the same time the large planters were growing increasingly fearful of the multitudes of potentially mutinous former servants in their midst.
by the mid 1680s for the rst time black slaves outnumbered white servants among the plantation colonies new arrivals.
in 1698 the royal african company rst chartered in 1672 lost its crown granted monopoly on carrying slaves to the colonies.
enterprising americans especially rhode islanders rushed to cash in on the lucrative slave trade and the supply of slaves rose steeply.
more than ten thousand africans were pushed ashore in america in the decade after 1700 and tens of thousands more in the next half century.
blacks accounted for nearly half the population of virginia by 1750.
in south carolina they outnumbered whites two to one.
most of the slaves who reached north america came from the west coast of africa especially the area stretching from present day senegal to angola.
they were originally captured by african coastal tribes who traded them in crude markets on the shimmering tropical beaches to itinerant european and american esh merchants.
usually branded and bound the captives were herded aboard sweltering ships for the gruesome middle passage on which death rates ran as high as 20 percent.
terried survivors were eventually shoved onto auction blocks in new world ports like newport rhode island or charleston south carolina where a giant slave market traded in human misery for more than a century.
a few of the earliest african immigrants gained their freedom and some even became slaveowners themselves.
but as the number of africans in their midst increased dramatically toward the end of the seventeenth century white colonists reacted remorselessly to this supposed racial threat.
earlier in the century the legal difference between a slave and a servant was unclear.
but now the law began to make sharp distinctions between the two largely on the basis of race.
beginning in virginia in 1662 statutes appeared that formally decreed the iron conditions of slavery for blacks.
these earliest slave codes made blacks and their children the property or chattels for life of their white masters.
some colonies made it a crime to teach a slave to read or write.
not even conversion to christianity could qualify a slave for freedom.
thus did the god fearing whites put the fear of god into their hapless black laborers.
slavery might have begun in america for economic reasons the origins of american slavery the slave ship albatross 1846 this eyewitness painting captures the dankness gloom and despair that reigned in the slavers cargo hold.
but by the end of the seventeenth century it was clear that racial discrimination also powerfully molded the american slave system.
africans in america in the deepest south slave life was especially severe.
the climate was hostile to health and the labor was life draining.
the widely scattered south carolina rice and indigo plantations were lonely hells on earth where gangs of mostly male africans toiled and perished.
only fresh imports could sustain the slave population under these loathsome conditions.
blacks in the tobacco growing chesapeake region had a somewhat easier lot.
tobacco was a less physically demanding crop than those of the deeper south.
tobacco plantations were larger and closer to one another than rice plantations.
the size and proximity of these plantations permitted the slaves more frequent contact with friends and relatives.
by about 1720 the proportion of females in the chesapeake slave population had begun to rise making family life possible.
the captive black population of the chesapeake area soon began to grow not only through new imports but also through its own fertility making it one of the few slave societies in history to perpetuate itself by its own natural reproduction.
native born african americans contributed to the growth of a stable and distinctive slave culture a mixture of african and american elements of speech religion and folkways see makers of america from african to african american pp.
on the sea islands off south carolinas coast blacks evolved a unique language gullah probably a corruption of angola the african region from which many of them had come.
it blended eng lish with several african languages including yoruba igbo and hausa.
through it many african words have passed into american speech such as goober peanut gumbo okra and voodoo witchcraft.
the ringshout a west african religious dance performed by shuf ing in a circle while answering a preachers shouts was brought to colonial america by slaves and eventually contributed to the development of jazz.
the banjo and the bongo drum were other african contributions to american culture.
slaves also helped mightily to build the country with their labor.
a few became skilled artisans carpenters bricklayers and tanners.
but chiey they performed the sweaty toil of clearing swamps grubbing chapter 4 american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 rice cultivation in the colonial south rice growing imported from africa along with african slaves to work the swampy rice elds made south carolina the rice basket of the british empire.
out trees and other menial tasks.
condemned to life under the lash slaves naturally pined for freedom.
the new york slave revolt that erupted in 1712 cost the lives of nine whites and caused the execution of twenty one blacks some of them burned at the stake over a slow re.
a south carolina slave revolt erupted in 1739 when more than fty resentful blacks along the stono river tried to march to spanish florida only to be stopped by the local militia.
but in the end enslaved africans in the south proved to be a more tightly controlled labor force than the white indentured servants they gradually replaced.
no slave uprising in american history matched the scale of bacons rebellion.
southern society as slavery spread the gaps in the souths social structure widened.
the rough equality of poverty and disease of the early days was giving way to a de ned hierarchy of wealth and status in the early eighteenth century.
at the top of this southern social ladder perched a small but powerful covey of great planters.
owning gangs of slaves and vast domains of land the planters ruled the regions economy and virtually monopolized political power.
a clutch of extended clans such as the fitzhughs the lees and the washingtons possessed among them horizonless tracts of virginia real estate and together they dominated the house of burgesses.
just before the revolu tionary war 70 percent of the leaders of the virginia legislature came from families established in virginia before 1690 the famed rst families of virginia or ffvs yet legend to the contrary these great seventeenthcentury merchant planters were not silk swathed cavaliers gallantly imitating the ways of eng lish country gentlemen.
they did eventually build stately riverfront manors occasionally rode to the hounds and some of them even cultivated the arts and accumulated distinguished libraries.
but for the most part they were a hard working businesslike lot laboring long hours over the problems of plantation management.
few problems were more vexatious than the unruly often surly servants.
one virginia governor had such difculty keeping his servants sober that he struck a deal allowing them to get drunk the next day if they would only lay off the liquor long enough to look after his guests at a celebration of the queens birthday in 1711.
beneath the planters far beneath them in wealth prestige and political power were the small farmers the largest social group.
they tilled their modest plots and might own one or two slaves but they lived a ragged hand to mouth existence.
still lower on the social scale were the landless whites most of them luckless former indentured servants.
beneath them were those persons still serving out the term of their indenture.
their numbers gradually diminished as black slaves increasingly replaced white indentured servants toward the end of the seventeenth century.
the op the colonial south a merchant planters home and its dining room simple by later standards this house was home to the family of a substantial planter in the early eighteenth century.
it stands on land in the virginia tidewater region rst acquired by adam thoroughgood who arrived in the virginia colony as an indentured servant in 1621.
by 1635 as a freeman he had recruited 105 settlers to the colony and was rewarded according to the practice of the headright system with the title to some 5 250 acres along the lynnhaven river.
there his great grandson erected this house in about 1720.
it was continuously occupied by the thoroughgood family for more than a century until the 1860s.
pressed black slaves of course remained enchained in societys basement.
few cities sprouted in the colonial south and consequently an urban professional class including lawyers and nanciers was slow to emerge.
southern life revolved around the great plantations distantly isolated from one another.
waterways provided the principal means of transportation.
roads were so wretched that in bad weather funeral parties could not reach church burial grounds an obstacle that accounts for the development of family burial plots in the south a practice unlike anything in old eng land or new eng land.
charleston south carolina founded in 1680 charleston grew to become the bustling seaport pictured in this drawing done in the 1730s.
charleston was by then the largest city in the mostly rural southern colonies.
it ourished as a seaport for the shipment to england of slave grown carolina rice.
makers of america from african to the great africanafrican american american migration d ragged in chains from west african shores the rst african americans struggled to preserve their diverse heritages from the ravages of slavery.
their children the rst generation of american born slaves melded these various african traditions guinean igbo yoruba angolan into a distinctive african american culture.
their achievement sustained them during the cruelties of enslavement and has endured to enrich american life to this day.
with the arrival of the rst africans in the seventeenth century a cornucopia of african traditions poured into the new world handicrafts and skills in numerous trades a plethora of languages styles of music and cuisines even rice planting techniques that conquered the inhospitable soil of south carolina.
it was north americas rice paddies tilled by experienced west africans that introduced rice into the english diet and furnished so many eng lish tables with the sticky staple.
these rst american slaves were mostly males.
upon arrival they were sent off to small isolated farms where social contact with other africans especially women was an unheard of luxury.
yet their legal status was at rst uncertain.
a few slaves were able to buy their freedom in the seventeenth century.
one anthony johnson of northampton county virginia actually became a slaveholder himself.
but by the beginning of the eighteenth century a settled slave society was emerging in the southern colonies.
laws tightened slave traders stepped up their deliveries of human cargo large plantations formed.
most signicantly a new generation of american born slaves joined their forebears at labor in the elds.
by 1740 large groups of slaves lived together on sprawling plantations the american born outnumbered the africanborn and the importation of african slaves slowed.
forging a common culture and nding a psychological weapon with which to resist their masters and preserve their dignity were daunting challenges for american born slaves.
plantation life was beastly an endless cycle of miserable toil in the eld or foundry from sunup to sundown.
female slaves were forced to above africans destined for slavery this engraving from 1830 is an example of antislavery propaganda in the pre civil war era.
it shows hapless africans being brought ashore in america under the whips of slave traders and ironically under the gurative shadow of the national capitol.
right advertisements for slave sales in charleston south carolina 1753 charleston had the largest slave market in the colonies.
left yarrow mamout by charles willson peale 1819 when peale painted this portrait mamout was over one hundred years old.
a devout muslim brought to maryland as a slave he eventually bought his freedom and settled in georgetown.
right the emergence of an african american culture in this scene from the mid nineteenth century african americans play musical instruments of european derivation like the ddle as well as instruments of african origin like the bones and banjo a vivid illustration of the blending of the two cultures in the crucible of the new world.
perform double duty.
after a days backbreaking work women were expected to sit up for hours spinning weaving or sewing to clothe themselves and their families.
enslaved women also lived in constant fear of sexual exploitation by predatory masters.
yet eventually a vibrant slave culture began to ower.
and precisely because of the diversity of african peoples represented in america the culture that emerged was a uniquely new world creation.
it derived from no single african model and incorporated many western elements though often with signicant modications.
slave religion illustrates this pattern.
cut off from their native african religions most slaves became christians but fused elements of african and western traditions and drew their own conclusions from scripture.
white christians might point to christs teachings of humility and obedience to encourage slaves to stay in their place but black christians emphasized gods role in freeing the hebrews from slavery and saw jesus as the messiah who would deliver them from bondage.
they also often retained an african denition of heaven as a place where they would be reunited with their ancestors.
at their sunday and evening time prayer meetings slaves also patched african remnants onto conventional christian ritual.
black methodists for example ingeniously evaded the traditional methodist ban on dancing as sinful three or four people would stand still in a ring clapping hands and beating time with their feet but never crossing their legs thus not ofcially dancing while others walked around the ring singing in unison.
this ringshout derived from african practices modern american dances including the charleston in turn derived from this african american hybrid.
christian slaves also often used outwardly religious songs as encoded messages about escape or rebellion.
good news the chariots comin might sound like an innocent hymn about divine deliverance but it could also announce the arrival of a guide to lead fugitives safely to the north.
similarly wade in the water taught eeing slaves one way of covering their trail.
the negro spirituals that took shape as a distinctive form of american music thus had their origins in both christianity and slavery.
indeed much american music was born in the slave quarters from african importations.
jazz with its meandering improvisations and complex syncopations and rhythms constitutes the most famous example.
but this rich cultural harvest came at the cost of generations of human agony.
chapter 4 american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 the new england family nature smiled more benignly on pioneer new englanders than on their disease plagued fellow colonists to the south.
clean water and cool temperatures retarded the spread of killer microbes.
in stark contrast to the fate of chesapeake immigrants settlers in seventeenth century new eng land added ten years to their life spans by migrating from the old world.
one settler claimed that a sip of new englands air is better than a whole draft of old eng lands ale the rst generations of puritan colonists enjoyed on the average about seventy years on this earth not very different from the life expectancy of present day americans.
in further contrast with the chesapeake new englanders tended to migrate not as single individuals but as families and the family remained at the center of new eng land life.
almost from the outset new eng lands population grew from natural reproductive increase.
the people were remarkably fertile even if the soil was not.
early marriage encouraged the booming birthrate.
women typically wed by their early twenties and produced babies about every two years thereafter until menopause.
ceaseless childbearing drained the vitality of many pioneer women as the weather eroded colonial tombstones eloquently reveal.
a number of the largest families were borne by several mothers though claims about the frequency of death in childbirth have probably been exaggerated.
but the dread of death in the birthing bed haunted many women and it was small wonder that they came to fear pregnancy.
a married woman could expect to experience up to ten pregnancies and rear as many as eight surviving children.
massachusetts governor william phips was one of twenty seven children all by the same mother.
a new eng land woman might well have dependent children living in her household from the earliest days of her marriage up until the day of her death and child raising became in essence her full time occupation.
the longevity of the new eng landers contributed to family stability.
children grew up in nurturing environments where they were expected to learn habits of obedience above all.
they received guidance not only from their parents but from their grandparents as well.
this novel intergenerational continuity has inspired the observation that new eng land invented grandparents.
family stability was reected in low new england early acquired a reputation as a healthy environment.
urging his fellow englishmen to emigrate to the massachusetts bay colony in 1630 the reverend john white described new england somewhat fancifully as follows mrs elizabeth freake and baby mary this portrait of a boston mother and child in about 1674 suggests the strong family ties that characterized early new england society.
no country yields a more propitious air for our temper than new england.
many of our people that have found themselves always weak and sickly at home have become strong and healthy there perhaps by the dryness of the air and constant temper ature of it which seldom varies from cold to heat as it does with us.
neither are the natives at any time troubled with pain of teeth soreness of eyes or ache in their limbs.
pioneering new englanders graveyard art these new england colonists evidently died in the prime of life.
carving likenesses on grave markers was a common way of commemorating the dead.
premarital pregnancy rates again in contrast with the chesapeake and in the generally strong tranquil social structure characteristic of colonial new eng land.
still other contrasts came to differentiate the southern and new eng land ways of life.
oddly enough the fragility of southern families advanced the economic security of southern women especially of womens property rights.
because southern men frequently died young leaving widows with small children to support the southern colonies generally allowed married women to retain separate title to their property and gave widows the right to inherit their husbands estates.
but in new eng land puritan lawmakers worried that recognizing womens separate property rights would undercut the unity of married persons by acknowledging con icting interests between husband and wife.
new eng land women therefore usually gave up their property rights when they married.
yet in contrast to old eng land the laws of new eng land made secure provision for the property rights of widows and even extended important protections to women within marriage.
a true wife accounts subjection her honor one massachusetts puritan leader declared expressing a sentiment then common in europe as well as america.
but in the new world a rudimentary conception of womens rights as individuals was beginning to appear in the seventeenth century.
women still could not vote and the popular attitude persisted that they were morally weaker than men a belief rooted in the biblical tale of eves treachery in the garden of eden.
but a husbands power over his wife was not absolute.
the new eng land authorities could and did intervene to restrain abusive spouses.
one man was punished for kicking his wife off a stool another was disciplined for drawing an uncivil portrait of his mate in the snow.
women also had some spheres of autonomy.
midwifery assisting with childbirths was a virtual female monopoly and midwives often fostered networks of women bonded by the common travails of motherhood.
one boston midwife alone delivered over three thousand babies.
above all the laws of puritan new eng land sought to defend the integrity of marriages.
divorce was exceedingly rare and the authorities commonly ordered separated couples to reunite.
outright abandonment was among the very few permissible grounds for divorce.
adultery was another.
convicted adulterers especially if they were women were whipped in public and forced forever after to wear the capital letter a cut out in cloth and sewed on their outer garments the basis for nathaniel hawthornes famous 1850 tale the scarlet letter.
chapter 4 american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 life in the new england towns sturdy new eng landers evolved a tightly knit society the basis of which was small villages and farms.
this development was natural in a people anchored by geography and hemmed in by the indians the french and the dutch.
puritanism likewise made for unity of purpose and for concern about the moral health of the whole community.
it was no accident that the nineteenth century crusade for abolishing black slavery with massachusetts agitators at the forefront sprang in some degree from the new eng land conscience with its puritan roots.
in the chesapeake region the expansion of settlement was somewhat random and was usually undertaken by lone wolf planters on their own initiative but new eng land society grew in a more orderly fashion.
new towns were legally chartered by the colonial authorities and the distribution of land was entrusted to the steady hands of sober minded town fathers or proprietors after receiving a grant of land from the colonial legislature the proprietors moved themselves and their families to the designated place and laid out their town.
it usually consisted of a meetinghouse which served as both the place of worship and the town hall surrounded by houses.
also marked out was a village green where the militia could drill.
each family received several parcels of land including a woodlot for fuel a tract suitable for growing crops and another for pasturing animals.
a colonial primer religious instruction loomed large in early colonial schools.
this eighteenth century textbook from germantown pennsylvania taught lessons of social duty and christian faith as well as reading and writing.
the massachusetts school law of 1647 stated it being one chief project of the old deluder satan to keep men from the knowledge of the scriptures as in former times by keeping them in an unknown tongue it is therefore ordered that every township in this jurisdiction after the lord has increased them in number to fty householders shall then forthwith appoint one within their town to teach all such children as shall resort to him to write and read whose wages shall be paid either by the parents or masters of such children or by the inhabitants in general.
towns of more than fty families were required to provide elementary education and roughly half of the adults knew how to read and write.
as early as 1636 just six years after the colonys founding the massachusetts puritans established harvard college today the oldest corporation in america to train local boys for the ministry.
only in 1693 eighty six years after staking out jamestown did the virginians establish their rst college william and mary.
puritans ran their own churches and democracy in congregational church government led logically to democracy in political government.
the town meeting the new england character in which the adult males met together and each man voted was a showcase and a classroom for democracy.
new eng land villagers from the outset gathered regularly in their meetinghouses to elect their ofcials appoint schoolmasters and discuss such mundane matters as road repairs.
the town meeting observed thomas jefferson was the best school of political liberty the world ever saw the half way covenant and the salem witch trials from about this time onward women were in the majority in the puritan congregations.
women also played a prominent role in one of new eng lands most frightening religious episodes.
a group of adolescent girls in salem massachusetts claimed to have been bewitched by certain older women.
a hysterical witch hunt ensued leading to the legal lynching in 1692 of twenty individuals nineteen of whom were hanged and one of whom was pressed to death.
two dogs were also hanged.
larger scale witchcraft persecutions were then common in europe and several outbreaks had already yet worries plagued the god fearing pioneers of these tidy new eng land settlements.
the pressure of a growing population was gradually dispersing the puritans onto outlying farms far from the control of church and neighbors.
and although the core of puritan belief still burned brightly the passage of time was dampening the rst generations aming religious zeal.
about the middle of the seventeenth century a new form of sermon began to be heard from puritan pulpits the jeremiad.
taking their cue from the doom saying old testament prophet jeremiah earnest preachers scolded parishioners for their waning piety.
especially alarming was the apparent decline in conversions testimonials by individuals that they had received gods grace and therefore deserved to be admitted to the church as members of the elect.
troubled ministers in 1662 announced a new formula for church membership the half way covenant.
this new arrangement modied the covenant or the agreement between the church and its adherents to admit to baptism but not full communion the children of baptized but not yet converted existing members.
on conversion see p.
by conferring partial membership rights in the once exclusive puritan congregations the half way covenant weakened the distinction between the elect and others further diluting the spiritual purity of the original settlers godly community.
the half way covenant dramatized the difculty of maintaining at fever pitch the religious devotion of the founding generation.
jeremiads continued to thunder from the pulpits but as time went on the doors of the puritan churches swung fully open to all comers whether converted or not.
this widening of church membership gradually erased the distinction between the elect and other members of society.
in effect strict religious purity was sacriced somewhat to the cause of wider religious participation.
interestingly matthew hopkinss witch finder hopkins was a seventeenth century english witch hunter whose techniques included watching suspects to see if diabolical creatures in the form of common animals fed on the alleged witchs blood.
he also urged that suspected witches be bound hand and foot and tossed in a pond.
the innocent he claimed would sink and often drown while the guilty would oat to the surface.
his methods brought death to hundreds of women men and children in eastern england in the 1640s.
chapter 4 american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 ared forth in the colonies often directed at propertyowning women.
but the reign of horror in salem grew not only from the superstitions and prejudices of the age but also from the turmoil of the wars with the indians as well as the unsettled social and religious conditions of the rapidly evolving massachusetts village.
most of the accused witches came from families associated with salems burgeoning market economy their accusers came largely from subsistence farming families in salems hinterland.
the salem witch trials thus reected the widening social stratication of new eng land as well as the fear of many religious traditionalists that the puritan heritage was being eclipsed by yankee commercialism.
the witchcraft hysteria eventually ended in 1693 when the governor alarmed by an accusation against his own wife and supported by the more responsible members of the clergy prohibited any further trials and pardoned those already convicted.
twenty years later a penitent massachusetts legislature annulled the convictions of the witches and made reparations to their heirs.
the salem witchcraft delusion marked an all time high in the american experience of popular passions run wild.
witch hunting passed into the american vocabulary as a metaphor for the often dangerously irrational urge to nd a scapegoat for social resentments.
the new england way of life oddly enough the story of new eng land was largely written by rocks.
the heavily glaciated soil was strewn with countless stones many of which were forced to the surface after a winter freeze.
in a sense the puritans did not possess the soil it possessed them by shaping their character.
scratching a living from the protesting earth was an early american success story.
backbending toil put a premium on industry and pennypinching frugality for which new eng landers became famous.
traditionally sharp yankee traders some of them palming off wooden nutmegs made their mark.
connecticut came in time to be called good humoredly the nutmeg state cynics exaggerated when they said that the three stages of progress in new eng land were to get on to get honor to get honest the grudging land also left colonial new eng land less ethnically mixed than its southern neighbors.
noneng lish immigrants were less attracted to a site where the soil was so stony and the sermons so sulfurous.
climate likewise molded new eng land where the summers were often uncomfortably hot and the winters cruelly cold.
many early immigrants complained of the regions extremes of weather.
yet the soil and climate of new eng land eventually encouraged a diversied agriculture and industry.
staple products like tobacco did not ourish as in the south.
black slavery although attempted could not exist protably on small farms especially where the surest crop was stones.
no broad fertile expanses comparable to those in the tidewater south beckoned people inland.
the mountains ran fairly close to the shore and the rivers were generally short and rapid.
and just as the land shaped new eng landers so they shaped the land.
the native americans had left an early imprint on the new eng land earth.
they traditionally beat trails through the woods as they migrated seasonally for hunting and shing.
they periodically burned the woodlands to restore leafy rst growth forests that would sustain the deer population.
the indians recognized the right to use the land but the concept of exclusive individual ownership of the land was alien to them.
the eng lish settlers had a different philosophy.
they condemned the indians for wasting the earth by underutilizing its bounty and used this logic to justify their own expropriation of the land from the native inhabitants.
consistent with this outlook the europeans felt a virtual duty to improve the land by clearing woodlands for pasturage and tillage building roads and fences and laying out permanent settlements.
some of the greatest changes resulted from the introduction of livestock.
the eng lish brought pigs horses sheep and cattle from europe to the settlements.
because the growing herds needed ever more pastureland the colonists were continually clearing forests.
the animals voracious appetites and heavy hooves compacted the soil speeding erosion and ooding.
in some cases the combined effect of these developments actually may have changed local climates and made some areas even more susceptible to extremes of heat and cold.
repelled by the rocks the hardy new eng landers turned instinctively to their ne natural harbors.
hacking timber from their dense forests they became experts in shipbuilding and commerce.
they also ceaselessly exploited the self perpetuating codsh lode off the coast of newfoundland the shy gold mines of new eng land which have yielded more wealth than all the trea sure chests of the aztecs.
during colonial the early settlers and the land days the wayfarer seldom got far from the sound of the ax and hammer or the swift rush of the ship down the ways to the sea or the smell of rotting sh.
as a reminder of the importance of shing a handsome replica of the sacred cod is proudly displayed to this day in the massachusetts statehouse in boston.
the combination of calvinism soil and climate in new eng land made for energy purposefulness sternness stubbornness self reliance and resourcefulness.
righteous new eng landers prided themselves on being gods chosen people.
they long boasted that boston was the hub of the universe at least in spirit.
a famous jingle of later days ran i come from the city of boston the home of the bean and the cod where the cabots speak only to lowells and the lowells speak only to god.
new eng land has had an incalculable impact on the rest of the nation.
ousted by their sterile soil thousands of new eng landers scattered from ohio to oregon and even hawaii.
they sprinkled the land with new communities modeled on the orderly new eng land town with its central green and tidy schoolhouse and its simple town meeting democracy.
yankee ingenuity originally fostered by the inty elds and comfortless climate of new eng land came to be claimed by all americans as a proud national trait.
and the fabled new eng land conscience born of the steadfast puritan heritage left a legacy of high idealism in the national character and inspired many later reformers.
the early settlers days and ways the cycles of the seasons and the sun set the schedules of all the earliest american colonists men as well as women northerners as well as southerners blacks as well as whites.
the overwhelming majority of colonists were farmers.
they planted in the spring tended their crops in the summer harvested in the fall and prepared in the winter to begin the cycle anew.
they usually rose at dawn and went to bed at dusk.
chores might be performed after nightfall only if they were worth the candle a phrase that has persisted in american speech.
women slave or free on southern plantations or northern farms wove cooked cleaned and cared for children.
men cleared land fenced planted and cropped it cut rewood and butchered livestock as needed.
children helped with all these tasks while picking up such schooling as they could.
life was humble but comfortable by contemporary standards.
compared to most seventeenth century europeans americans lived in afuent abundance.
life and death in colonial america by prudence punderson note the artists initials p p on the cofn.
this embroidery suggests the stoic resolve of a colonial woman calmly depicting the inevitable progression of her own life from the cradle to the grave.
chapter 4 american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 land was relatively cheap though somewhat less available in the planter dominated south than elsewhere.
in the northern and middle colonies an acre of virgin soil cost about what american carpenters could earn in one day as wages which were roughly three times those of their eng lish counterparts.
dukes dont emigrate the saying goes for if people enjoy wealth and security they are not likely to risk exposing their lives in the wilderness.
similarly the very poorest members of a society may not possess even the modest means needed to pull up stakes and seek a fresh start in life.
accordingly most white migrants to early colonial america came neither from the aristocracy nor from the dregs of european society with the partial exception of the impoverished indentured servants.
crude frontier life did not in any case permit the agrant display of class distinctions and seventeenthcentury society in all the colonies had a certain simple sameness to it especially in the more egalitarian new eng land and middle colonies.
yet many settlers who considered themselves to be of the better sort tried to re create on a modied scale the social structure they had known in the old world.
to some extent they succeeded though yeasty democratic forces frustrated their full triumph.
resentment against upper class pretensions helped to spark outbursts like bacons rebellion of 1676 in virginia and the uprising of marylands protestants toward the end of the seventeenth century.
in new york animosity between lordly landholders and aspiring merchants fueled leislers rebellion an ill starred and bloody insurgence that rocked new york city from 1689 to 1691.
for their part would be american blue bloods resented the pretensions of the meaner sort and passed laws to try to keep them in their place.
massachusetts in 1651 prohibited poorer folk from wearing gold or silver lace and in eighteenth century virginia a tailor was ned and jailed for arranging to race his horse a sport only for gentlemen but these efforts to reproduce the nely stratied societies of europe proved feeble in the early american wilderness where equality and democracy found fertile soil at least for white people.
chronology first africans arrive in virginia 1689 leislers rebellion in new york population of eng lish colonies in america about 2 000 salem witch trials in massachusetts harvard college founded college of william and mary founded half way covenant for congregational church membership established royal african company slave trade monopoly ended virginia assembly disfranchises landless freemen population of eng lish colonies in america about 250 000 bacons rebellion in virginia new york city slave revolt 1680s mass expansion of slavery in colonies south carolina slave revolt to learn more key terms indentured servants 69 headright system 70 bacons rebellion 74 royal african company 74 middle passage 74 new york slave revolt 76 south carolina slave revolt stono river 76 people to know congregational church 82 jeremiad 83 half way covenant 83 salem witch trials 84 leislers rebellion 86 william berkeley nathaniel bacon anthony johnson to learn more david cressy coming over migration and communication between england and new england in the seventeenth century 1987 william cronon changes in the land 1983 john demos entertaining satan 1982 a little commonwealth family life in plymouth colony 1970 david hackett fischer albions seed four british folkways in america 1989 richard godbeer escaping salem the other witch hunt of 1692 2005 patrick grif n the people with no name irelands ulster scots americas scots irish and the creation of a british atlantic world 1689 1764 2001 kenneth lockridge new england town dedham 1970 mary beth norton in the devils snare the salem witchcraft crisis of 1692 2002 daniel blake smith inside the great house planter family life in eighteenth century chesapeake society 1980 laurel t ulrich good wives image and reality in the lives of women in northern new england 1650 1750 1982 daniel vickers farmers and fishermen two centuries of work in essex county massachusetts 1630 1850 1994 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 driven from every other corner of the earth freedom of thought and the right of private judgment in matters of conscience direct their course to this happy country as their last asylum.
t he common term thirteen original colonies is misleading.
britain ruled thirty two colonies in north america by 1775 including canada the floridas and various caribbean islands.
but only thirteen of them unfurled the standard of rebellion.
a few of the nonrebels such as canada and jamaica were larger wealthier or more populous than some of the revolting thirteen.
why then did some british colonies eventually strike for their independence while others did not.
part of the answer is to be found in the distinctive social economic and political structures of the thirteen atlantic seaboard colonies and in the halting gradual appearance of a recognizably american way of life.
conquest by the cradle among the distinguishing characteristics that the eventually rebellious settlements shared was lusty population growth.
in 1700 they contained fewer than 300 000 souls about 20 000 of whom were black.
by 1775 2 5 million people inhabited the thirteen colonies of whom about half a million were black.
white immigrants made up nearly 400 000 of the increased number and black forced immigrants accounted for almost as many again.
but most of the spurt stemmed from the remarkable natural fertility of all americans white and black.
to the amazement and dismay of europeans the colonists were doubling their numbers every twenty ve years.
unfriendly dr samuel johnson back in eng land growled that the americans were multiplying like their own rattlesnakes.
they were also a youthful people whose average age in 1775 was about sixteen.
this population boom had political consequences.
in 1700 there were twenty eng lish subjects for each american colonist.
by 1775 the eng lish advantage in numbers had fallen to three to one setting the stage for a momentous shift in the balance of power between the colonies and britain.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website immigration to the colonies ce r en st l aw abenaki maine mass.
n h 200 mi.
new york de er i e l pennsylvania n 70w new york n j hi o sh aw ne e or.
mo un tai ns philadelphia n md.
r i newport conn la se mass.
ra ario tu wa sca ro re nt l o a mingling of the races del.
virginia to philadelphia germans scots irish to the chesapeake africans british convicts at l a n t i c oc ean ta ch north carolina ca ero ap kee pal ach ian n 35 w ba south carolina to charleston africans germans charleston scots irish scots cr colonial america was a melting pot and had been from the outset.
the population although basically eng lish in stock and language was picturesquely mottled with numerous foreign groups see map 5 1.
heavy accented germans constituted about 6 percent of the total population or 150 000 by 1775.
fleeing religious persecution economic oppression and the ravages of war they had ocked to america in the early 1700s and had settled chiey in pennsylvania.
they belonged to several different protestant sects primarily lutheran and thus further enhanced the religious diversity of the colony.
known popularly but erroneously as the pennsylvania dutch a corruption of the german word deutsch for german they totaled about onethird of the colonys population.
in parts of philadelphia the street signs were painted in both german and eng lish.
these german newcomers moved into the backcountry of pennsylvania where their splendid stone barns gave and still give mute evidence of industry and prosperity.
not having been brought up eng lish they had no deep rooted loyalty to the british crown and they clung tenaciously to their german language and customs.
the scots irish who in 1775 numbered around 175 000 or 7 percent of the population were an important non eng lish group although they spoke eng lish.
they were not irish at all but turbulent scots lowlanders.
over many decades they had been transplanted to northern ireland where they had not prospered.
the irish catholics already there hating scottish presbyterianism resented the intruders and still do the source of many of the modern day troubles in the northern ireland province of ulster.
the economic life of the scots irish was severely hampered especially when the eng lish government placed burdensome restrictions on their production of linens and woolens.
n r ne ca ca yu on ga on on dag ei a mo da ha wk the bulk of the population was cooped up east of the alleghenies although by 1775 a vanguard of pioneers had trickled into the stump studded clearings of tennessee and kentucky.
the most populous colonies in 1775 were virginia massachusetts pennsylvania north carolina and maryland in that order.
only four communities could properly be called cities philadelphia including suburbs was rst with about 34 000 residents trailed by new york boston and charleston.
about 90 percent of the people lived in rural areas.
ee k 80w georgia savannah creek indian lands 30n 75w predominant immigrant group african scots irish dutch english and welsh german scottish no european settlement map 5 1 immigrant groups in 1775 america was already a nation of diverse nationalities in the colonial period.
this map shows the great variety of immigrant groups especially in pennsylvania and new york.
it also illustrates the tendency of later arrivals particularly the scots irish to push into the backcountry.
interactive map.
