chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction robert smalls and black politicians during reconstruction during the reconstruction period immediately following the civil war african americans struggled to become equal citizens of a democratic republic.
they produced a number of remarkable leaders who showed that blacks were as capable as other americans of voting holding office and legislating for a complex and rapidly changing society.
among these leaders was robert smalls of south carolina.
although virtually forgotten by the time of his death in 1915 smalls was perhaps the most famous and widely respected southern black leader of the civil war and reconstruction era.
his career reveals some of the main features of the african american experience during that crucial period.
born a slave in 1839 smalls had a white father whose identity has never been clearly established.
but his white ancestry apparently gained him some advantages and as a young man he was allowed to live and work independently hiring his own time from a master who may have been his half brother.
smalls worked as a sailor and trained himself to be a pilot in charleston harbor.
when the union navy blockaded charleston in 1862 smalls who was then working on a confederate steamship called the planter saw a chance to win his freedom in a particularly dramatic way.
at three oclock in the morning on may 13 1862 when the white officers of the planter were ashore he took command of the vessel and its slave crew sailed it out of the heavily fortified harbor and surrendered it to the union navy.
smalls immediately became a hero to those antislavery northerners who were seeking evidence that the slaves were willing and able to serve the union.
the planter was turned into a union army transport and smalls was made its captain after being commissioned as an officer.
during the remainder of the war he rendered conspicuous and gallant service as captain and pilot of union vessels off the coast of south carolina.
like a number of other african americans who had fought valiantly for the union smalls went on to a distinguished political career during reconstruction serving in the south carolina constitutional convention in the state legislature and for several terms in the u s congress.
he was also a shrewd businessman and became the owner of extensive properties in beaufort south carolina and its vicinity.
his first purchase was the house of his former master where he had spent his early years as a slave.
as the leading citizen of beaufort during reconstruction and for some years thereafter he acted like many successful white americans combining the acquisition of wealth with the exercise of political power.
the electoral organization smalls established resembled in some ways the well oiled machines being established in northern towns and cities.
it was so effective that he was able to control local government and get himself elected to congress even after the election of 1876 had placed the state under the read the document pearson profiles robert smalls with the help of several black crewmen robert smalls then twenty three years old commandeered the planter a confederate steamship used to transport guns and ammunition and surrendered it to the union vessel uss onward.
smalls provided distinguished service to the union during the civil war and after the war went on to become a successful politician and businessman.
chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction control of white conservatives bent on depriving blacks of political power.
organized mob violence defeated him in 1878 but he bounced back to win by decision of congress a contested congressional election in 1880.
he did not leave the house of representatives for good until 1886 when he lost another contested election that had to be decided by congress.
it revealed the changing mood of the country that his white challenger was seated despite evidence of violence and intimidation against black voters.
in their efforts to defeat him smalls white opponents frequently charged that he had a hand in the corruption that was allegedly rampant in south carolina during reconstruction.
but careful historical investigation shows that he was by the standards of the time an honest and responsible public servant.
in the south carolina convention of 1868 and later in the state legislature he was a conspicuous champion of free and compulsory public education.
in congress he fought for the enactment and enforcement of federal civil rights laws.
not especially radical on social questions he sometimes bent over backward to accommodate what he regarded as the legitimate interests and sensibilities of south carolina whites.
like other middle class black political leaders in reconstructionera south carolina he can perhaps be faulted in hindsight for not doing more to help poor blacks gain access to land of their own.
but in 1875 he sponsored congressional legislation that opened for purchase at low prices the land in his own district that had been confiscated by the federal government during the war.
as a result blacks were able to buy most of it and they soon owned three fourths of the land in beaufort and its vicinity.
robert smalls spent the later years of his life as u s collector of customs for the port of beaufort a beneficiary of the patronage that the republican party continued to provide for a few loyal southern blacks.
but the loss of real political clout for smalls and men like him was one of the tragic consequences of the fall of reconstruction.
or a brief period of years black politicians such as robert smalls exercised more power in the south than they would for another century.
a series of political developments on the national and regional stage made reconstruction an unfinished revolution promising but not delivering true equality for newly freed african americans.
national party politics shifting priorities among northern republicans white southerners commitment to white supremacy backed by legal restrictions as well as massive extralegal violence against blacks all combined to stifle the promise of reconstruction.
f yet the reconstruction era also saw major transformations in american society in the wake of the civil war new ways of organizing labor and family life new institutions within and outside of the government and new ideologies regarding the role of institutions and government in social and economic life.
many of the changes begun during reconstruction laid the groundwork for later revolutions in american life.
the president vs congress what conflicts arose among lincoln johnson and congress during reconstruction.
the problem of how to reconstruct the union in the wake of the souths military defeat was one of the most difficult and perplexing challenges ever faced by american policy makers.
the constitution provided no firm guidelines for the framers had not anticipated a division of the country into warring sections.
after emancipation became a northern war aim the problem was compounded by a new issue how far should the federal government go to secure freedom and civil rights for four million former slaves.
the debate that evolved led to a major political crisis.
advocates of a minimal reconstruction policy favored quick restoration of the union with no protection for the freed slaves beyond the prohibition of slavery.
proponents of a more radical policy wanted readmission of the southern states to be dependent on guarantees that loyal men would displace the confederate elite in positions of power and that blacks would acquire basic rights of american citizenship.
the white house favored the minimal approach whereas congress came to endorse the more radical and thoroughgoing form of reconstruction.
the resulting struggle between congress and the chief executive was the most serious clash between two branches of government in the nations history.
wartime reconstruction tension between the president and congress over how to reconstruct the union began during the war.
occupied mainly with achieving victory lincoln never set forth a final and comprehensive plan for bringing rebellious states back into the fold.
but he did take initiatives that indicated he favored a lenient and conciliatory policy toward southerners who would give up the struggle and repudiate slavery.
in december 1863 he issued a proclamation of amnesty and reconstruction which offered a full pardon to all southerners with the exception of certain classes of confederate leaders who would take an oath of allegiance to the union and acknowledge the legality of emancipation.
this ten percent plan provided that once 10 percent or more of the voting population of any occupied state had taken the oath they were authorized to set up a loyal government.
by 1864 louisiana and arkansas states that were wholly or partially occupied by union troops had established unionist governments.
lincolns policy was meant to shorten the war.
first he hoped to weaken the southern cause by making it easy for disillusioned or lukewarm confederates to switch sides.
second he hoped to further his emancipation policy by insisting that the new governments abolish slavery.
the president vs congress congress was unhappy with the presidents reconstruction experquarrel with congress would have worsened or been resolved.
given iments and in 1864 refused to seat the unionists elected to the house lincolns past record of political flexibility the best bet is that he and senate from louisiana and arkansas.
a minority of congressiowould have come to terms with the majority of his party.
nal republicans the strongly antislavery radical republicans favored protection for black rights especially black male suffrage as a andrew johnson at the helm precondition for the readmission of southern states.
but a larger group of congressional moderates opposed lincolns plan not on the basis of andrew johnson the man suddenly made president by an assasblack rights but because they did not trust the repentant confederates sins bullet attempted to put the union back together on his own who would play a major role in the new governments.
they feared authority in 1865.
but his policies eventually set him at odds with that the old ruling class would return to power and cheat the north of congress and the republican party and provoked the most serithe full fruits of its impending victory.
ous crisis in the history of relations between the executive and congress also believed the president was exceeding his authorlegislative branches of the federal government.
ity by using executive powers to restore the union.
lincoln operjohnsons background shaped his approach to reconstruction.
ated on the theory that secession being illegal did not place the born in dire poverty in north carolina he migrated as a young confederate states outside the union in a constitutional sense.
since individuals and not states had defied federal authority the president could use his pardoning power to read the document thirteenth fourteenth and certify a loyal electorate which could then function as the fifteenth amendments 1865 1868 1870 legitimate state government.
the dominant view in congress however was that the southern states had forfeited their place in the union and that it was up to congress to decide when and how they would be readmitted.
the most popular justification for congressional responsibility was based on the clause of the constitution providing that the united states shall guarantee to every state in this union a republican form of government by seceding radicals argued the confederate states had ceased to be republican and congress had to set the conditions to be met before they could be readmitted.
after refusing to recognize lincolns 10 percent governments congress passed a reconstruction bill of its own in july 1864.
known as the wade davis bill this legislation required that 50 percent of the voters take an oath of future loyalty before the restoration process could begin.
once this had occurred those who could swear they had never willingly supported the confederacy could vote in an election for delegates to a constitutional convention.
the bill in its final form did not require black suffrage but it did give federal courts the power to enforce emancipation.
faced with this attempt to nullify his own program lincoln exercised a pocket veto by refusing to sign the bill before congress adjourned.
he justified his action by announcing that he did not want to be committed to any single reconstruction plan.
the sponsors of the bill responded with an angry manifesto and lincolns relations with congress reached their low.
congress and the president remained stalemated on the reconstruction issue for the rest of the war.
during his last months in office however lincoln showed some willingness to compromise.
he persisted in his efforts to obtain full recognition for the governments he had nurtured in louisiana and arkansas but seemed receptive to the setting of other conditions perhaps including black suffrage for readmis in this cartoon president andrew johnson left and thaddeus stevens the radical sion of those states where wartime conditions had prevented republican congressman from pennsylvania are depicted as train engineers in a execution of his plan.
however he died without clarifying deadlock on the tracks.
indeed neither johnson nor stevens would give way on his his intentions leaving historians to speculate whether his plans for reconstruction.
chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction read the document the mississippi black code 1865 slavery is dead asks this 1866 cartoon by thomas nast.
to the cartoonist the emancipation proclamation of 1863 and the norths victory in the civil war meant little difference to the treatment of the freed slaves in the south.
freed slaves convicted of crimes often endured the same punishments as had slaves sale as depicted in the left panel of the cartoon or beatings as shown on the right.
man to eastern tennessee where he made his living as a tailor.
lacking formal schooling he did not learn to read and write until adult life.
entering politics as a jacksonian democrat he became known as an effective stump speaker.
his railing against the planter aristocracy made him the spokesman for tennessees nonslaveholding whites and the most successful politician in the state.
he advanced from state legislator to congressman to governor and in 1857 was elected to the u s senate.
when tennessee seceded in 1861 johnson was the only senator from a confederate state who remained loyal to the union and continued to serve in washington.
but his unionism and defense of the common people did not include antislavery sentiments.
nor was he friendly to blacks.
while campaigning in tennessee he had objected only to the fact that slaveholding was the privilege of a wealthy minority.
he revealed his attitude when he wished that every head of family in the united states had one slave to take the drudgery and menial service off his family during the war while acting as military governor of tennessee johnson endorsed lincolns emancipation policy and carried it into effect.
but he viewed it primarily as a means of destroying the power of the hated planter class rather than as a recognition of black humanity.
he was chosen as lincolns running mate in 1864 because it was thought that a proadministration democrat who was a southern unionist in the bargain would strengthen the ticket.
no one expected johnson to succeed to the presidency it is one of the strange accidents of american history that a southern democrat a fervent white supremacist came to preside over a republican administration immediately after the civil war.
some radical republicans initially welcomed johnsons ascent to the nations highest office.
their hopes make sense in the light of johnsons record of fierce loyalty to the union and his apparent agreement with the radicals that ex confederates should be severely treated.
more than lincoln who had spoken of malice toward none and charity for all johnson seemed likely to punish southern traitors and prevent them from regaining political influence.
only gradually did the deep disagreement between the president and the republican congressional majority become evident.
the reconstruction policy that johnson initiated on may 29 1865 created some uneasiness among the radicals but most republicans were willing to give it a chance.
johnson placed north carolina and eventually other states under appointed provisional governors chosen mostly from among prominent southern politicians who had opposed the secession movement and had rendered no conspicuous service to the confederacy.
the governors were responsible for calling constitutional conventions and ensuring that only loyal whites were permitted to vote for delegates.
participation required taking the oath of allegiance that lincoln had prescribed earlier.
once again confederate leaders and former officeholders who had the president vs congress participated in the rebellion were excluded.
to regain their political and property rights those in the exempted categories had to apply for individual presidential pardons.
johnson made one significant addition to the list of the excluded all those possessing taxable property exceeding 20 000 in value.
in this fashion he sought to prevent his longtime adversaries the wealthy planters from participating in the reconstruction of southern state governments.
once the conventions met johnson urged them to do three things declare the ordinances of secession illegal repudiate the confederate debt and ratify the thirteenth amendment abolishing slavery.
after governments had been reestablished under constitutions meeting these conditions the president assumed that the reconstruction process would be complete and that the ex confederate states could regain their full rights under the constitution.
the results of the conventions which were dominated by prewar unionists and representatives of backcountry yeoman farmers were satisfactory to the president but troubling to many congressional republicans.
rather than quickly accepting johnsons recommendations delegates in several states approved them begrudgingly or with qualifications.
furthermore all the resulting constitutions limited suffrage to whites disappointing the large number of northerners who hoped as lincoln had that at least some african americans perhaps those who were educated or had served in the union army would be given the right to vote.
johnson on the whole seemed eager to give southern white majorities a free hand in determining the civil and political status of the freed slaves.
republican uneasiness turned to disillusionment and anger when the state legislatures elected under the new constitutions proceeded to pass black codes subjecting former slaves to a variety of special regulations and restrictions on their freedom.
for more on the black codes see p.
to radicals the black codes looked suspiciously like slavery under a new guise.
more upsetting to northern public opinion in general a number of prominent ex confederate leaders were elected to congress in the fall of 1865.
johnson himself was partly responsible for this turn of events.
despite his lifelong feud with the planter class he was generous in granting pardons to members of the old elite who came to him hat in hand and asked for them.
when former confederate vice president alexander stephens and other proscribed ex rebels were elected to congress although they had not been pardoned johnson granted them special amnesty so they could serve.
the growing rift between the president and congress came into the open in december when the house and senate refused to seat the recently elected southern delegation.
instead of endorsing johnsons work and recognizing the state governments he had called into being congress established a joint committee chaired by senator william pitt fessenden of maine to review reconstruction policy and set further conditions for readmission of the seceded states.
congress takes the initiative the struggle over how to reconstruct the union ended with congress doing the job of setting policy all over again.
the clash between johnson and congress was a matter of principle and could not be reconciled.
president johnson an heir of the democratic states rights tradition wanted to restore the prewar federal system as quickly as possible and without change except that states would not have the right to legalize slavery or to secede.
most republicans wanted firm guarantees that the old southern ruling class would not regain regional power and national influence by devising new ways to subjugate blacks.
they favored a reconstruction policy that would give the federal government authority to limit the political role of ex confederates and provide some protection for black citizenship.
republican leaders with the exception of a few extreme radicals such as charles sumner lacked any firm conviction that blacks were inherently equal to whites.
they did believe however that in a modern democratic state all citizens must have the same basic rights and opportunities regardless of natural abilities.
principle coincided easily with political expediency southern blacks whatever their alleged shortcomings were likely to be loyal to the republican party that had emancipated them.
they could be used if necessary to counteract the influence of resurgent ex confederates thus preventing the democrats from returning to national dominance through control of the south.
the disagreement between the president and congress became irreconcilable in early 1866 when johnson vetoed two bills that had passed with overwhelming republican support.
the first extended the life of the freedmens bureau a temporary agency set up to aid the former slaves by providing relief education legal help and assistance in obtaining land or employment.
the second was a civil rights bill meant to nullify the black codes and guarantee to freedmen full and equal benefit of all laws and proceedings for the security of person and property as is enjoyed by white citizens johnsons vetoes shocked moderate republicans who had expected the president to accept the relatively modest measures as a way of heading off more radical proposals such as black suffrage and a prolonged denial of political rights to ex confederates.
presidential opposition to policies that represented the bare minimum of republican demands on the south alienated moderates in the party and ensured a wide opposition to johnsons plan of reconstruction.
johnson succeeded in blocking the freedmens bureau bill although a modified version later passed.
but the civil rights act won the two thirds majority necessary to override his veto signifying that the president was now hopelessly at odds with most of the congressmen from what was supposed to be his own party.
never before had congress overridden a presidential veto.
johnson soon revealed that he intended to abandon the republicans and place himself at the head of a new conservative party uniting the small minority of republicans who supported him with a reviving democratic party that was rallying behind his reconstruction policy.
in preparation for the elections of 1866 johnson helped found the national union movement to promote his plan to readmit the southern states to the union without further qualifications.
a national union convention meeting in philadelphia in august 1866 called for the election to congress of men who endorsed the presidential plan for reconstruction.
meanwhile the republican majority on capitol hill fearing that johnson would not enforce civil rights legislation or that the courts would declare such federal laws unconstitutional passed the fourteenth amendment.
this perhaps the most important of all the constitutional amendments gave the federal government responsibility for guaranteeing equal rights under the law to all americans.
section 1 defined national citizenship for the first time as extending to all persons born or naturalized in the united states the states were prohibited from abridging the rights chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction of american citizens and could not deprive any person of life liberty or property without due process of law nor deny to any person.
equal protection of the laws the other sections of the amendment were important in the context of the time but had fewer long term implications.
section 2 sought to penalize the south for denying voting rights to black men by reducing the congressional representation of any state that formally deprived a portion of its male citizens of the right to vote.
section 3 denied federal office to those who had taken an oath of office to support the u s constitution and then had supported the confederacy and section 4 repudiated the confederate debt.
the amendment was sent to the states with the understanding that southerners would have no chance of being readmitted to congress unless their states ratified it.
the congressional elections of 1866 served as a referendum on the fourteenth amendment.
johnson opposed the amendment on the grounds that it created a centralized government and denied states the right to manage their own affairs he also counseled southern state legislatures to reject it and all except tennessee followed his advice.
but the presidents case for state autonomy was weakened by the publicity resulting from bloody race riots in new orleans and memphis.
these and other reported atrocities against blacks made it clear that the existing southern state governments were failing abysmally to protect the life liberty or property of ex slaves.
johnson further weakened his cause by campaigning for candidates who supported his policies.
in his notorious swing around the circle he toured the nation slandering his opponents in crude language and engaging in undignified exchanges with hecklers.
enraged by southern inflexibility and the antics of a president who acted as if he were still campaigning in the backwoods of tennessee northern voters repudiated the administration.
the republican majority in congress increased to a solid two thirds in both houses and the radical wing of the party gained strength at the expense of moderates and conservatives.
congressional reconstruction plan enacted congress was now in a position to implement its own plan of reconstruction.
in 1867 and 1868 it passed a series of acts that nullified the presidents initiatives and reorganized the south on a new basis.
generally referred to as radical reconstruction the measures actually represented a compromise between genuine radicals and more moderate republicans.
consistent radicals such as senator charles sumner of massachusetts and congressmen thaddeus stevens of pennsylvania and george julian of indiana wanted to reshape southern society before readmitting ex confederates to the union.
their program of regeneration before reconstruction required an extended period of military rule confiscation and redistribution of large landholdings among the freedmen and federal aid for schools to educate blacks and whites for citizenship.
but the majority of republican congressmen found such a program unacceptable because it broke too sharply with american traditions of federalism and regard for property rights and might mean that decades would pass before the union was back in working order.
the first reconstruction act passed over johnsons veto on march 2 1867 placed the south under the rule of the army by reorganizing the region into five military districts.
but military rule would last for only a short time.
subsequent acts of 1867 and 1868 opened the way for the quick readmission of any state that framed and ratified a new constitution providing for black suffrage.
ex confederates disqualified from holding federal office under the fourteenth amendment were prohibited from voting for delegates to the constitutional conventions or in the elections to ratify the conventions work.
since blacks were allowed to participate in this process republicans thought they had found a way to ensure that loyal men would dominate the new governments.
radical reconstruction was based on the dubious assumption that once blacks had the vote they would have the power to protect themselves against white supremacists efforts to deny them their rights.
the reconstruction acts thus signaled a retreat from the true radical position that a sustained use of federal authority was needed to complete the transition from slavery to freedom and prevent the resurgence of the souths old ruling class.
troops were used in the south after 1868 but only in a very limited and sporadic way.
the majority of republicans were unwilling to embrace centralized government and an extended period of military rule over civilians and even radicals such as thaddeus stevens supported the compromise as the best that could be achieved.
yet a genuine spirit of democratic idealism did give legitimacy and fervor to the cause of black male suffrage.
enabling people who were so poor and reconstruction amendments 1865 1870 amendment main provisions slavery prohibited in united states national citizenship state representation in congress reduced proportionally to number of voters disfranchised former confederates denied right to hold office confederate debt repudiated denial of franchise because of race color or past servitude explicitly prohibited congressional passage 2 3 majority in each house required january 1865 june 1866 february 1869 ratification process 3 4 of all states required including ex confederate states december 1865 27 states including 8 southern states rejected by 12 southern and border states february 1867 radicals make readmission of southern states hinge on ratification ratified july 1868 ratification required for readmission of virginia texas mississippi georgia ratified march 1870 the president vs congress view the map reconstruction pennsylvania iowa new jersey ohio illinois delaware indiana d c west virginia kansas missouri maryland virginia kentucky atlantic ocean north carolina 1868 1870 tennessee 1866 1869 indian territory arkansas mississippi south carolina texas alabama louisiana 200 miles 200 kilometers georgia military districts established march 1867 gulf of mexico florida dates indicate readmission to the union dates indicate reestablishment of conservative government reconstruction during the reconstruction era the southern state governments passed through three phases control by white ex confederates domination by republican legislators both white and black and finally the regain of control by conservative white democrats.
downtrodden to have access to the ballot box was a bold and innovative application of the principle of government by the consent of the governed.
the problem was finding a way to enforce equal suffrage under conditions then existing in the postwar south.
the impeachment crisis the first obstacle to enforcement of congressional reconstruction was resistance from the white house.
johnson thoroughly disapproved of the new policy and sought to thwart the will of congress by administering the plan in his own obstructive fashion.
he immediately began to dismiss officeholders who sympathized with radical reconstruction and he countermanded the orders of generals in charge of southern military districts who were zealous in their enforcement of the new legislation.
some radical generals were transferred and replaced by conservative democrats.
congress responded by passing laws designed to limit presidential authority over reconstruction matters.
one of the measures was the tenure of office act requiring senate approval for the removal of cabinet officers and other officials whose appointment had needed the consent of the senate.
another measure a rider to an army appropriations bill sought to limit johnsons authority to issue orders to military commanders.
johnson objected vigorously to the restrictions on the grounds that they violated the constitutional doctrine of the separation of powers.
when it became clear that the president was resolute in fighting for his powers and using them to resist the establishment of radical regimes in the southern states some congressmen began to call for his impeachment.
a preliminary effort foundered in 1867 but when johnson tried to discharge secretary of war edwin stanton the only radical in the cabinet and persisted in his efforts despite the disapproval of the senate the proimpeachment forces gained in strength.
in january 1868 johnson ordered general grant who already commanded the army to replace stanton as head of the war department.
but grant had his eye on the republican presidential nomination and refused to defy congress.
johnson subsequently appointed general lorenzo thomas who agreed to serve.
faced with this apparent violation of the tenure of office act the house voted overwhelmingly to impeach the president on february 24 and he was placed on trial before the senate.
because seven republican senators broke with the party leadership and voted for acquittal the effort to convict johnson and remove him from office fell one vote short of the necessary two thirds.
this outcome resulted in part from a skillful defense.
attorneys for the president argued for a narrow interpretation of the constitutional provision that a president could be impeached only for high crimes and misdemeanors asserting that this referred only to indictable offenses.
responding to the charge that johnson had deliberately violated the tenure of office act the defense contended that the law did not apply to the removal of stanton because he had been appointed by lincoln not johnson.
the prosecution countered with a different interpretation of the tenure of office act but the core of their case was that johnson chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction had abused the powers of his office in an effort to sabotage the congressional reconstruction policy.
obstructing the will of the legislative branch they claimed was sufficient grounds for conviction even if no crime had been committed.
the republicans who broke ranks to vote for acquittal could not endorse such a broad view of the impeachment power.
they feared that removal of a president for essentially political reasons would threaten the constitutional balance of powers and open the way to legislative supremacy over the executive.
in addition the man who would have succeeded johnson senator benjamin wade of ohio the president pro tem of the senate was unpopular with conservative republicans because of his radical position on labor and currency questions.
although johnsons acquittal by the narrowest of margins protected the american presidency from congressional domination the impeachment episode helped create an impression in the public mind that the radicals were ready to turn the constitution to their own use to gain their objectives.
conservatives were again alarmed when congress took action in 1868 to deny the supreme courts appellate jurisdiction in cases involving the military arrest and imprisonment of anti reconstruction activists in the south.
but the evidence of congressional ruthlessness and illegality is not as strong as most historians used to think.
modern legal scholars have found merit in the radicals claim that their actions did not violate the constitution although in 1926 the supreme court held the tenure of office act and a successor law to be unconstitutional.
their failure to remove johnson from office embarrassed congressional republicans but the episode did ensure that reconstruction in the south would proceed as the majority in congress intended.
during the trial johnson helped influence the verdict by pledging to enforce the reconstruction acts and he held to this promise during his remaining months in office.
unable to depose the president the radicals had at least succeeded in neutralizing his opposition to their program.
reconstructing southern society what problems did southern society face during reconstruction.
the civil war left the south devastated demoralized and destitute.
slavery was dead but what this meant for future relationships between whites and blacks was still in doubt.
the overwhelming majority of southern whites wanted to keep blacks adrift between slavery and freedom without rights in a status resembling that of the free negroes of the old south.
blacks sought independence from their former masters and viewed the acquisition of land education and the vote as the best means of achieving this goal.
the thousands of northerners who went south after the war for materialistic or humanitarian reasons hoped to extend yankee civilization to what they viewed as an unenlightened and barbarous region.
for most of them this reformation required the aid of the freedmen not enough southern whites were willing to accept the new order and embrace northern middle class values.
the struggle of these groups to achieve their conflicting goals bred chaos violence and instability.
unsettled conditions created many opportunities for corruption crime and terrorism.
this was scarcely an ideal setting for an experiment in interracial democracy but one was attempted nonetheless.
its success depended on massive and sustained support from the federal government.
to the extent that this was forthcoming progressive reform could be achieved.
when federal support faltered the forces of reaction and white supremacy were unleashed.
reorganizing land and labor the civil war scarred the southern landscape and wrecked its economy.
one devastated area central south carolina looked to an 1865 observer like a broad black streak of ruin and desolation the fences are gone lonesome smokestacks surrounded by dark heaps of ashes and cinders marking the spots where human habitations had stood the fields all along the roads widely overgrown with weeds with here and there a sickly patch of cotton or corn cultivated by negro squatters other areas through which the armies had passed were similarly ravaged.
several major cities including atlanta columbia and richmond were gutted by fire.
most factories were dismantled or destroyed and long stretches of railroad were torn up.
physical ruin would not have been so disastrous if investment capital had been available for rebuilding.
but the substantial wealth represented by confederate currency and bonds had melted away and emancipation of the slaves had divested the propertied classes of their most valuable and productive assets.
according to some estimates the souths per capita wealth in 1865 was only about half what it had been in 1860.
recovery could not even begin until a new labor system replaced slavery.
it was widely assumed in both the north and the south that southern prosperity would continue to depend on cotton and that the plantation was the most efficient unit for producing the crop.
hindering efforts to rebuild the plantation economy were lack of capital the deep rooted belief of southern whites that blacks would work only under compulsion and the freedmens resistance to labor conditions that recalled slavery.
blacks strongly preferred to determine their own economic relationships and for a time they had reason to hope the federal government would support their ambitions.
the freed slaves were placed in a precarious position and were in effect fighting a twofront war.
although they were grateful for the federal aid in ending slavery freed slaves often had ideas about freedom that contradicted the plans of their northern allies.
many ex slaves wanted to hold on to the family based communal work methods that they utilized during slavery.
freed slaves in areas of south carolina for example attempted to maintain the family task system rather than adopting the individual piecework system pushed by northern capitalists.
many ex slaves opposed plans to turn them into wage laborers who produced exclusively for a market.
finally freed slaves often wanted to stay on the land their families had spent generations farming rather than move elsewhere to assume plots of land as individual farmers.
while not guaranteeing all of the freed slaves hopes for economic self determination the northern military attempted to establish a new economic base for the freed men and women.
general sherman hampered by the huge numbers of black fugitives that followed his army on its famous march issued an order in january 1865 that set aside the islands and coastal areas of georgia and south carolina for exclusive black occupancy on 40 acre plots.
furthermore the freedmens bureau as one of its many responsibilities was given control of hundreds of thousands of acres of reconstructing southern society giving them something they allegedly had not earned and the desire to restore cotton proread the document a sharecrop contract 1882 duction as quickly as possible to increase agricultural exports and stabilize the economy.
consequently most blacks in physical possession of small farms failed to acquire title and the mass of freedmen were left with little or no prospect of becoming landowners.
recalling the plight of southern blacks in 1865 an ex slave later wrote that they were set free without a dollar without a foot of land and without the wherewithal to get the next meal even despite their poverty and landlessness ex slaves were reluctant to settle down and commit themselves to wage labor for their former masters.
many took to the road hoping to find something better.
some were still expecting grants of land but others were simply trying to increase their bargaining power.
one freedman later recalled that an important part of being free was that we could move around and change bosses as the end of 1865 approached many freedmen had still not signed up for the coming season anxious planters feared that blacks were plotting to seize land by force.
within a few weeks however most holdouts signed for the best terms they could get.
one common form of agricultural employment in 1866 was a contract labor system.
under this system workers committed themselves for a year in return for fixed wages a substantial portion of which was withheld until after the harvest.
since many planters were inclined to drive hard bargains abuse their workers or cheat them at the end of the year the freedmens bureau assumed the civil war brought emancipation to slaves but the sharecropping system kept many of them the role of reviewing the contracts and enforcing economically bound to their employers.
at the end of a year the sharecropper tenants might owe them.
but bureau officials had differing notions most or all of what they had made to their landlord.
here a sharecropping family poses in front of what it meant to protect african americans of their cabin.
ex slaves often built their living quarters near woods in order to have a ready supply from exploitation.
some stood up strongly for of fuel for heating and cooking.
the cabins chimney lists away from the house so that it can be the rights of the freedmen others served as allies easily pushed away from the living quarters should it catch fire.
of the planters rounding up available workers source collection of the new york historical society negative number 50475 coercing them to sign contracts for low wages and then helping keep them in line.
abandoned or confiscated land and was authorized to make 40 acre the bureaus influence waned after 1867 it was phased out grants to black settlers for three year periods after which they completely by 1869 and the experiment with contract wage would have the option to buy at low prices.
by june 1865 forty labor was abandoned.
growing up alongside the contract systhousand black farmers were at work on 300 000 acres of what tem and eventually displacing it was an alternative capital labor they thought would be their own land.
for more on this see the relationship sharecropping.
first in small groups known as feature essay forty acres and a mule pp.
squads and later as individual families blacks worked a piece of but for most of them the dream of forty acres and a mule land independently for a fixed share of the crop usually one half.
or some other arrangement that would give them control of their the advantage of this arrangement for credit starved landlords was land and labor was not to be realized.
president johnson parthat it did not require much expenditure in advance of the harvest.
doned the owners of most of the land consigned to the ex slaves the system also forced the tenant to share the risks of crop failure by sherman and the freedmens bureau and proposals for an or a fall in cotton prices.
these considerations loomed larger after effective program of land confiscation and redistribution failed disastrous harvests in 1866 and 1867 to get through congress.
among the considerations promptafrican americans initially viewed sharecropping as a step up ing most congressmen to oppose land reform were a tenderness from wage labor in the direction of landownership.
but during the for property rights fear of sapping the freedmens initiative by 1870s this form of tenancy evolved into a new kind of servitude.
chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction croppers had to live on credit until their cotton was sold and planters or merchants seized the chance to provision them at high prices and exorbitant rates of interest.
creditors were entitled to deduct what was owed to them out of the tenants share of the crop and this left most sharecroppers with no net profit at the end of the year more often than not with a debt that had to be worked off in subsequent years.
various methods legal and extralegal were eventually devised in an effort to bind indebted tenants to a single landlord for extended periods but considerable movement was still possible.
black codes a new name for slavery.
while landless african americans in the countryside were being reduced to economic dependence those in towns and cities found themselves living in an increasingly segregated society.
the black codes of 1865 attempted to require separation of the races in public places and facilities when most of the codes were overturned by federal authorities as violations of the civil rights act of 1866 the same end was often achieved through private initiative and community pressure.
in some cities blacks successfully resisted being consigned to separate streetcars by appealing to the military during the period when it exercised authority or by organizing boycotts.
but they found it almost impossible to gain admittance to most hotels restaurants and other privately owned establishments catering to whites.
although separate black or jim crow cars were not yet the rule on railroads african americans were often denied firstclass accommodations.
after 1868 black supported republican governments passed civil rights acts requiring equal access to public facilities but little effort was made to enforce the legislation.
the black codes had other onerous provisions meant to control african americans and return them to quasi slavery.
most codes even made black unemployment a crime which meant blacks had to make long term contracts with white employers or be arrested for vagrancy.
others limited the rights of african americans to own property or engage in occupations other than those of servant or laborer.
the codes were set aside by the actions of congress the military and the freedmens bureau but vagrancy laws remained in force across the south.
furthermore private violence and discrimination against blacks continued on a massive scale unchecked by state authorities.
hundreds perhaps thousands of blacks were murdered by whites in 1865 1866 and few of the perpetrators were brought to justice.
the imposition of military rule in 1867 was designed in part to protect former slaves from such violence and intimidation but the task was beyond the capacity of the few thousand troops stationed in the south.
when new constitutions were approved and states readmitted to the union under the congressional plan in 1868 the problem became more severe.
white opponents of radical reconstruction adopted systematic terrorism and organized mob violence to keep blacks away from the polls.
the freed slaves in the face of opposition from both their democratic enemies and some of their republican allies tried to defend themselves by organizing their own militia groups for protection and to assert their political rights.
however the militia groups were not powerful enough to overcome the growing power of the anti republican forces.
also the military presence was progressively reduced leaving the new republican regimes to fight a losing battle against armed white supremacists.
in the words of historian william gillette there was simply no federal force large enough to give heart to black republicans or to bridle southern white violence republican rule in the south hastily organized in 1867 the southern republican party dominated the constitution making of 1868 and the regimes that came out of it.
the party was an attempted coalition of three social groups which varied in their relative strength from state to state.
one was the same class that was becoming the backbone of the republican party in the north businessmen with an interest in enlisting government aid for private enterprise.
many republicans of this stripe were recent arrivals from the north the so called carpetbaggers but some were scalawags former whig planters or merchants who were born in the south or had immigrated to the region before the war and now saw a chance to realize their dreams for commercial and industrial development.
poor white farmers especially those from upland areas where unionist sentiment had been strong during the civil war were a second element in the original coalition.
these owners of small farms expected the party to favor their interests at the expense of the wealthy landowners and to come to their aid with special legislation when as was often the case in this period of economic upheaval they faced the loss of their homesteads to creditors.
newly enfranchised blacks were the third group to which the republicans appealed.
blacks formed the vast majority of the republican rank and file in most states and were concerned mainly with education civil rights and landownership.
under the best of conditions these coalitions would have been difficult to maintain.
each group had its own distinct goals and did not fully support the aims of the other segments.
white yeomen for example had a deeply rooted resistance to black equality.
and for how long could one expect essentially conservative businessmen to support costly measures for the elevation or relief of the lower classes of either race.
in some states astute democratic politicians exploited these divisions by appealing to disaffected white republicans.
but during the relatively brief period when they were in power in the south varying from one to nine years depending on the state the republicans made some notable achievements.
they established on paper at least the souths first adequate systems of public education democratized state and local government and appropriated funds for an enormous expansion of public services and responsibilities.
as important as these social and political reforms were they took second place to the republicans major effort to foster economic development and restore southern prosperity by subsidizing the construction of railroads and other internal improvements.
but the policy of aiding railroads turned out to be disastrous even though it addressed the regions real economic needs and was initially very popular.
extravagance corruption and routes laid out in response to local political pressure rather than on sound economic grounds made for an increasing burden of public debt and taxation.
the policy did not produce the promised payoff of efficient cheap transportation.
subsidized railroads frequently went bankrupt reconstructing southern society leaving the taxpayers holding the bag.
when the panic of 1873 brought many southern state governments to the verge of bankruptcy and railroad building came to an end it was clear the republicans gospel of prosperity through state aid to private enterprise had failed miserably.
their political opponents many of whom had originally favored such policies now saw an opportunity to take advantage of the situation by charging that republicans had ruined the southern economy.
in general the radical regimes failed to conduct public business honestly and efficiently.
embezzlement of public funds and bribery of state lawmakers or officials were common occurrences.
state debts and tax burdens rose enormously mainly because governments had undertaken heavy new responsibilities but partly because of waste and graft.
the situation varied from state to state ruling cliques in louisiana and south carolina were guilty of much wrongdoing yet mississippi had a relatively honest and frugal regime.
furthermore southern corruption was not exceptional nor was it a special result of the extension of suffrage to uneducated african americans as critics of radical reconstruction have claimed.
it was part of a national pattern during an era when private interests considered buying government favors to be a part of the cost of doing business and many politicians expected to profit by obliging them.
blacks bore only a limited responsibility for the dishonesty of the radical governments.
although sixteen african americans served in congress two in the senate between 1869 and 1880 only in south carolina did blacks constitute a majority of even one house of the state legislature.
furthermore no black governors were elected during reconstruction although pinkney b s pinchback served for a time as acting governor of louisiana.
the biggest grafters were opportunistic whites.
some of the most notorious were carpetbaggers but others were native southerners.
businessmen offering bribes included members of the prewar gentry who were staunch opponents of radical programs.
some black legislators went with the tide and accepted loans from those railroad lobbyists who would pay most for their votes but the same men could usually be depended on to vote the will of their constituents on civil rights or educational issues.
if blacks served or supported corrupt and wasteful regimes it was because the alternative was dire.
although the democrats or conservatives as they called themselves in some states made sporadic efforts to attract african american voters it was clear that if they won control they would attempt to strip blacks of their civil and political rights.
but opponents of radical reconstruction were able to capitalize on racial prejudice and persuade many americans that good government was synonymous with white supremacy.
contrary to myth the small number of african americans elected to state or national office during reconstruction demonstrated on the average more integrity and competence than their white counterparts.
most were fairly well educated having been free or unusually privileged slaves before the war.
among the most capable were robert smalls whose career was described earlier blanche k bruce of mississippi elected to the u s senate in 1874 after rising to deserved prominence in the republican party of his home state congressman robert brown elliott of south carolina an adroit politician who was also a consistent champion of civil rights and congressman james t rapier of alabama who stirred congress and the nation in 1873 with his eloquent appeals for federal aid to southern education and new laws to enforce equal rights for african americans.
claiming public and private rights as important as party politics to the changing political culture of the reconstruction south were the ways that freed slaves claimed rights for themselves.
they did so not only in negotiations with employers and in public meetings and convention halls but also through the institutions they created and perhaps most important the households they formed.
as one black corporal in the union army told an audience of ex slaves the marriage covenant is at the foundation of all our rights.
in slavery we could not have legalized marriage now we have it.
and we shall be established as a people through marriage historian laura edwards tells us african americans claimed citizenship.
freedmen hoped that marriage would allow them to take on the rights that accrued to the independent head of a household not only political rights but the right to control the labor of wives and children for the first time.
while they were in effect in 1865 1866 many states black codes included apprenticeship provisions providing for freed children to be apprenticed by courts to some white person with preference given to former masters if their parents were paupers unemployed of bad character or even simply if it were found to be better for the habits and comfort of a child ex slaves struggled to win their children back from what often amounted to reenslavement.
freedpeople challenged the apprenticeship system in county courts and through the freedmens bureau.
as one group of petitioners from maryland asserted our homes are invaded and our little ones seized at the family fireside while many former slaves lined up eagerly to formalize their marriages many also retained their own definitions of marriage and defied the efforts of the freedmens bureau to use the marriage relation as a disciplinary tool.
perhaps as many as 50 percent of ex slaves chose not to marry legally and whites criticized them heavily for it.
african american leaders worried about this refusal to follow white norms.
the army corporal who had described marriage as the foundation of all our rights urged his audience let us conduct ourselves worthy of such a blessing and all the people will respect us yet many poor blacks continued to recognize as husband and wife people who cared for and supported one another without benefit of legal sanction.
the new legal system punished couples who deviated from the legal norm through laws against bastardy adultery and fornication.
furthermore the freedmens bureau made the marriage of freedpeople a priority because as historian noralee frankel explained the agencys overriding concern was keeping blacks from depending on the federal government for economic assistance once married the husband became legally responsible for his familys support.
some ex slaves used institutions formerly closed to them like the courts to assert rights against white people as well as other blacks suing over domestic violence child support assault and debt.
freed women sued their husbands for desertion and alimony in order to enlist the freedmens bureau to help them claim property from men.
other ex slaves mobilized kin networks and other community resources to make claims on property and family.
chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction watch the video the schools that the civil war and reconstruction created a freedmens school one of the more successful endeavors supported by the freedmens bureau.
the bureau working with teachers from northern abolitionist and missionary societies founded thousands of schools for freed slaves and poor whites.
immediately after the war freed people flocked to create institutions that had been denied to them under slavery churches fraternal and benevolent associations political organizations and schools.
many joined all black denominations such as the african methodist episcopal church which provided freedom from white dominance and a more congenial style of worship.
black women formed all black chapters of organizations such as the womens christian temperance union and their own womens clubs to oppose lynching and work for uplift in the black community.
the freed slaves were thirsty for education.
it is estimated that in 1865 less than two percent of black school age children in the south attended school and only five percent could read.
according to charlotte forten a black teacher from philadelphia i never before saw children so eager to learn.
the majority learn with wonderful rapidity.
many of the grown people are desirous of learning to read.
it is wonderful how a people who have been so long crushed to the earth so embruted as these have been.
can have so great a desire for knowledge and such a capability of sustaining it the first schools for freed people were all black institutions established by the freedmens bureau and various northern missionary societies.
the teachers included both black and white northerners and educated southern blacks who were free before emancipation.
at the time having been denied all education during the antebellum period most blacks viewed separate schooling as an opportunity rather than as a form of discrimination.
however these schools were precursors to the segregated public school systems first instituted by republican governments.
by 1870 the freedmens bureau was sponsoring 4 239 schools and employing 9 300 teachers to teach 247 000 pupils in these allblack schools.
only in city schools of new orleans and at the university of south carolina were there serious attempts during reconstruction to bring white and black students together in the same classrooms.
both the freedmens bureau and the northern missionary society also established black colleges which faced many struggles.
the nondenominational private schools stressed industrial training but those supported by black churches emphasized a liberal arts education.
in a variety of ways african american men and women during reconstruction asserted freedom in the private realm as well as the public sphere by claiming rights to their own families and building their own institutions.
they did so despite the vigorous retreat from reconstruction efforts of their former masters as well as the new government agencies to control their private lives and shape their new identities as husbands wives and citizens.
retreat from reconstruction why did reconstruction end.
the era of reconstruction began coming to an end almost before it got started.
although it was only a scant three years from the end of the civil war the impeachment crisis of 1868 represented the high point of popular interest in reconstruction issues.
that year ulysses s grant was elected president.
many historians blame grant for the corruption of his administration and for the inconsistency and failure of his southern policy.
he had neither the vision nor the sense of duty to tackle the difficult challenges the nation faced.
from 1868 on political issues other than southern reconstruction moved to the forefront of national politics and the plight of african americans in the south receded in white consciousness.
be the backbone of the greenback movement for years to come now joined the soft money clamor for the first time.
responding to the money and credit crunch congress moved in 1874 to authorize a modest issue of new greenbacks.
but grant influenced by the opinions of hard money financiers vetoed the bill.
in 1875 congress led by senator john sherman of ohio enacted the specie resumption act which provided for a limited reduction of greenbacks leading to full resumption of specie payments by january 1 1879.
its action was widely interpreted as deflation in the midst of depression.
farmers and workers who were already suffering acutely from deflation reacted with dismay and anger.
the democratic party could not capitalize adequately on these sentiments because of the influence of its own hard money faction and in 1876 an independent greenback party entered the national political arena.
the partys nominee for president peter cooper received an insignificant number of votes but in 1878 the greenback labor party polled more than a million votes and elected fourteen congressmen.
the greenbackers were able to keep the money issue alive into the following decade.
rise of the money question in the years immediately following the civil war another issue already competing for public attention was the money question whether to allow greenbacks paper money issued during the war to continue to circulate or to return to sound or hard money meaning gold or silver.
supporters of paper money known as greenbackers were strongest in the credit hungry west and among expansion minded manufacturers.
defenders of hard money were mostly the commercial and financial interests in the east they received crucial support from intellectuals who regarded government sponsored inflation as immoral or contrary to the natural laws of classical economics.
in 1868 the money question surged briefly to the forefront of national politics.
faced with a business recession blamed on the johnson administrations policy of contracting the currency congress voted to stop the retirement of greenbacks.
the democratic party responding to midwestern pressure included in its platform for the 1868 national election a plan calling for the redemption of much of the civil war debt in greenbacks rather than gold.
yet they nominated for president a sound money supporter so that the greenback question never became an issue in the 1868 presidential campaign.
grant already a popular general won the election handily with the help of the republican dominated southern states.
in 1869 and 1870 a republican controlled congress passed laws that assured payment in gold to most bondholders but eased the burden of the huge civil war debt by exchanging bonds that were soon coming due for those that would not be payable for ten fifteen or thirty years.
in this way the public credit was protected.
still unresolved however was the problem of what to do about the 356 million in greenbacks that remained in circulation.
hard money proponents wanted to retire them quickly inflationists thought more should be issued to stimulate the economy.
the grant administration followed the middle course of allowing the greenbacks to float until economic expansion would bring them to a par with gold thus permitting a painless return to specie payments.
but the panic of 1873 which brought much of the economy to its knees led to a revival of agitation to inflate the currency.
debt ridden farmers who would the election of 1868 candidate grant seymour not voted party republican democratic popular vote 3 012 833 2 703 249 electoral vote unreconstructed states did not participate in the election.
final efforts of reconstruction the republican effort to make equal rights for blacks the law of the land culminated in the fifteenth amendment.
passed by congress in 1869 and ratified by the states in 1870 the amendment prohibited any state from denying a male citizen the right to vote because of race color or previous condition of servitude.
a more radical version requiring universal manhood suffrage was rejected partly because it departed too sharply from traditional views of federal state relations.
states therefore could still limit the suffrage by imposing literacy tests property qualifications or poll taxes allegedly applying to all racial groups such devices would eventually be used to strip southern blacks of the right to vote.
but the makers of the amendment did not foresee this result.
they believed their action would prevent future congresses or southern constitutional conventions from repealing or nullifying the provisions for black male suffrage included in the reconstruction acts.
a secondary aim was to enfranchise african americans in those northern states that still denied them the vote.
many feminists were bitterly disappointed that the amendment did not also extend the vote to women as well as freedmen.
a militant wing of the womens rights movement led by elizabeth cady stanton and susan b anthony was so angered that the constitution was being amended in a way that in effect made gender a qualification for voting that they campaigned against ratification of the fifteenth amendment.
another group of feminists led by lucy stone supported the amendment on the grounds that chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction view the closer look the first vote the first vote drawn by a h ward for harpers weekly november 16 1867 this was the negros hour and that women could afford to wait a few years for the vote.
this disagreement divided the woman suffrage movement for a generation to come.
the grant administration was charged with enforcing the amendment and protecting black mens voting rights in the reconstructed states.
since survival of the republican regimes depended on african american support political partisanship dictated federal action even though the norths emotional and ideological commitment to black citizenship was waning.
a reign of terror against blacks between 1868 and 1872 the main threat to southern republican regimes came from the ku klux klan and other secret societies bent on restoring white supremacy by intimidating blacks who sought to exercise their political rights.
first organized in tennessee in 1866 the klan spread rapidly to other states adopting increasingly lawless and brutal tactics.
a grassroots vigilante movement and not a centralized conspiracy the klan thrived on local initiative and gained support from whites of all social classes.
its secrecy decentralization popular support and utter ruthlessness made it very difficult to suppress.
as soon as blacks had been granted the right to vote hooded night riders began to visit the cabins of those who were known to be active republicans some victims were only threatened but others were whipped or even murdered.
one black georgian related a typical incident they broke my door open took me out of bed took me to the woods and whipped me three hours or more and left me for dead.
they said to me do you think you will vote for another damned radical ticket such methods were first used effectively in the presidential election of 1868.
grant lost in louisiana and georgia mainly because the klan or the knights of the white camellia as the louisiana variant was called launched a reign of terror to prevent prospective black voters from exercising their rights.
in louisiana political violence claimed more than a thousand lives and in arkansas which grant managed to carry more than two hundred republicans including a congressman were assassinated.
thereafter klan terrorism was directed mainly at republican state governments.
virtual insurrections broke out in arkansas tennessee north carolina and parts of south carolina.
republican governors called out the state militia to fight the klan but only the arkansas militia succeeded in bringing it to heel.
in tennessee north carolina and georgia klan activities helped undermine republican control thus allowing the democrats to come to power in all of these states by 1870.
faced with the violent overthrow of the southern republican party congress and the grant administration were forced to act.
a series of laws passed in 1870 1871 sought to enforce the fifteenth amendment by providing federal protection for black suffrage and authorizing use of the army against the klan.
the force acts also known as the ku klux klan acts made interference with voting rights a federal crime and established provisions for government supervision of elections.
in addition the legislation empowered the president to call out troops and suspend the writ of habeas corpus to quell insurrection.
in 1871 1872 thousands of suspected klansmen were arrested by the military or u s marshals and the writ was suspended in nine counties of south carolina that had been virtually taken over by the secret order.
although most of the retreat from reconstruction read the document hannah irwin describes ku klux klan ride traditional democratic and agrarian hostility to government promotion of economic development.
consequently they were able to bring back to the polls a portion of the white electorate mostly small farmers who had not been turning out because they were alienated by the leaderships apparent concessions to yankee ideas.
this new and more effective electoral strategy dovetailed with a resurgence of violence meant to reduce republican especially black republican voting.
the new reign of terror differed from the previously discussed klan episode its agents no longer wore masks but acted quite openly.
they were effective because the northern public was increasingly disenchanted with federal intervention on behalf of what were widely viewed as corrupt and tottering republican regimes.
grant used force in the south for the last time in 1874 when an overt paramilitary organization in louisiana known as the white league tried to overthrow a republican government accused of stealing an election.
when another unofficial militia in mississippi instigated a series of bloody race riots prior to the state elections of 1875 grant refused the governors request for federal troops.
as a result black voters were successfully intimidated one county registered only seven republican votes where there had been a black majority of two thousand and mississippi fell to the democratic conservatives.
according to one account grant decided to withhold troops because he had been warned that intervention might cost the republicans the crucial state of ohio in the same off year elections.
by 1876 republicans held on to only three southern states south carolina louisiana and florida.
partly because of grants hesitant and inconsistent use of presidential power but mainly because the northern electorate would no longer tolerate military action to sustain republican governments and black voting rights radical reconstruction was falling into total eclipse.
spoilsmen vs reformers this 1868 photograph shows typical regalia of members of the ku klux klan a secret white supremacist organization.
before elections hooded klansmen terrorized african americans to discourage them from voting.
accused klansmen were never brought to trial were acquitted or received suspended sentences the enforcement effort was vigorous enough to put a damper on hooded terrorism and ensure relatively fair and peaceful elections in 1872.
a heavy black turnout in these elections enabled the republicans to hold on to power in most states of the deep south despite efforts of the democratic conservative opposition to cut into the republican vote by taking moderate positions on racial and economic issues.
this setback prompted the democratic conservatives to make a significant change in their strategy and ideology.
no longer did they try to take votes away from the republicans by proclaiming support for black suffrage and government aid to business.
instead they began to appeal openly to white supremacy and to the one reason grant found it increasingly difficult to take strong action to protect southern republicans was the bad odor surrounding his stewardship of the federal government and the republican party.
reformers charged that a corrupt national administration was propping up bad governments in the south for personal and partisan advantage.
when grant intervened in louisiana in 1872 on behalf of a republican faction headed by his wifes brother inlaw who controlled federal patronage as collector of customs in new orleans it created the appearance of corruption although grant justified it on the ground that the opposing faction was blocking civil rights legislation for blacks.
the republican party in the grant era was losing the idealism and high purpose associated with the crusade against slavery.
by the beginning of the 1870s the men who had been the conscience of the party old line radicals such as thaddeus stevens charles sumner and benjamin wade were either dead out of office or at odds with the administration.
new leaders of a different stamp whom historians have dubbed spoilsmen or politicos were taking their place.
when he made common cause with hard boiled manipulators such as senators roscoe conkling of new york and james g blaine of maine grant lost credibility with reform minded republicans.
during grants first administration an aura of scandal surrounded the white house but did not directly implicate the chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction president.
in 1869 the financial buccaneer jay gould enlisted the aid of a brother in law of grant to further his fantastic scheme to corner the gold market.
gould failed in the attempt but he did manage to save himself and come away with a huge profit.
grants first term vice president schuyler colfax of indiana was directly involved in the notorious crdit mobilier scandal.
crdit mobilier was a construction company that actually served as a fraudulent device for siphoning off profits that should have gone to the stockholders of the union pacific railroad which was the beneficiary of massive federal land grants.
to forestall government inquiry into this arrangement crdit mobilier stock was distributed to influential congressmen including colfax who was speaker of the house before he was elected vice president.
the whole business came to light just before the campaign of 1872.
the election of 1872 candidate grant greeley party republican democratic and liberal republican popular vote electoral vote 3 597 132 286 2 834 125 greeley died before the electoral college voted.
out of a total of 366 electoral votes.
greeleys votes were divided among the four minor candidates.
republicans who could not tolerate such corruption or had other grievances against the administration broke with grant in 1872 and formed a third party committed to honest government and reconciliation between the north and the south.
led initially by high minded reformers such as senator carl schurz of missouri the liberal republicans endorsed reform of the civil service to curb the corruption breeding patronage system and advocated laissez faire economic policies which meant low tariffs an end to government subsidies for railroads and hard money.
despite their rhetoric of idealism and reform the liberal republicans were extremely conservative in their notions of what government should do to assure justice for blacks and other underprivileged americans.
the liberal republicans national convention nominated horace greeley editor of the respected new york tribune.
this was a curious and divisive choice since greeley was at odds with the founders of the movement on the tariff question and was indifferent to civil service reform.
the democrats also nominated greeley mainly because he promised to end radical reconstruction by restoring self government to the south.
but the journalist turned out to be a poor campaigner who failed to inspire enthusiasm from lifelong supporters of either party.
most republicans stuck with grant despite the corruption issue because they still could not stomach the idea of ex rebels returning to power in the south.
many democrats recalling greeleys previous record as a staunch republican simply stayed away from the polls.
the result was a decisive victory for grant whose 56 percent of the popular vote was the highest percentage won by any candidate between andrew jackson and theodore roosevelt.
grants second administration seemed to bear out the reformers worst suspicions about corruption in high places.
in 1875 the public learned that federal revenue offi cials had conspired with distillers to defraud the government of millions of dollars in liquor taxes.
grants private secretary orville e babcock was indicted as a member of the whiskey ring and was saved from conviction only by the presidents personal intercession.
the next year grants secretary of war william w belknap was impeached by the house after an investigation revealed he had taken bribes for the sale of indian trading posts.
he avoided conviction in the senate only by resigning from office before his trial.
grant fought hard to protect belknap to the point of participating in what a later generation might call a cover up.
there is no evidence that grant profited personally from any of the misdeeds of his subordinates.
yet he is not entirely without blame for the corruption in his administration.
he failed to take firm action against the malefactors and even after their guilt had been clearly established he sometimes tried to shield them from justice.
ulysses s grant was the only president between jackson and wilson to serve two full and consecutive terms.
but unlike other chief executives so favored by the electorate grant is commonly regarded as a failure.
although the problems he faced would have challenged any president the shame of grants administration was that he made loyalty to old friends a higher priority than civil rights or sound economic principles.
reunion and the new south who benefited and who suffered from the reconciliation of the north and south.
congressional reconstruction prolonged the sense of sectional division and conflict for a dozen years after the guns had fallen silent.
its final liquidation in 1877 opened the way to a reconciliation of north and south.
but the costs of reunion were high for less privileged groups in the south.
the civil and political rights of african americans left unprotected were progressively and relentlessly stripped away by white supremacist regimes.
lower class whites saw their interests sacrificed to those of capitalists and landlords.
despite the rhetoric hailing a prosperous new south the region remained poor and open to exploitation by northern business interests.
the compromise of 1877 the election of 1876 pitted rutherford b hayes of ohio a republican governor untainted by the scandals of the grant era against governor samuel j tilden of new york a democratic reformer who had battled against tammany hall and the tweed ring.
honest government was apparently the electorates highest priority.
when the returns came in tilden had clearly won the popular vote and seemed likely to win a narrow victory in the electoral college.
but the result was placed in doubt when the returns from the three southern states still controlled by the republicans south carolina florida and louisiana were contested.
if hayes were to be awarded these three states plus one contested electoral vote in oregon republican strategists realized he would triumph in the electoral college by a single vote.
the outcome of the election remained undecided for months plunging the nation into a major political crisis.
to resolve the reunion and the new south with southern democratic acquiescence the filibuster was broken and hayes took the oath of office.
he immediately ordered the army not to resist a democratic takeover of state governments in south carolina and louisiana.
thus fell the last of the radical governments and the entire south was firmly under the control of white democrats.
the trauma of the war and reconstruction had destroyed the chances for a renewal of two party competition among white southerners.
northern republicans soon reverted to denouncing the south for its suppression of black suffrage.
but this waving of the bloody shirt which also served as a reminder of the war and northern casualties quickly degenerated into a campaign ritual aimed at northern voters who could still be moved by sectional antagonism.
election of 1876 uncontested electoral vote electoral total popular vote republican rutherford b hayes 4 036 298 democratic samuel j tilden 4 300 590 greenback peter cooper 81 737 8 418 625 wash terr.
montana terr.
idaho terr.
dakota terr.
new mexico terr.
indian terr.
7 utah terr.
8 4 contested result settled by special election commission in favor of hayes.
impasse congress appointed a special electoral commission of fifteen members to determine who would receive the votes of the disputed states.
originally composed of seven democrats seven republicans and an independent the commission fell under republican control when the independent member resigned to run for the senate and a republican was appointed to take his place.
the commission split along party lines and voted eight to seven to award hayes all of the disputed votes.
but this decision still had to be ratified by both houses of congress.
the republican dominated senate readily approved it but the democrats in the house planned a filibuster to delay the final counting of the electoral votes until after inauguration day.
if the filibuster succeeded neither candidate would have a majority and as provided in the constitution the election would be decided by the house where the democrats controlled enough states to elect tilden.
to ensure hayess election republican leaders negotiated secretly with conservative southern democrats some of whom seemed willing to abandon the filibuster if the last troops were withdrawn and home rule restored to the south.
eventually an informal bargain was struck which historians have dubbed the compromise of 1877.
what precisely was agreed to and by whom remains a matter of dispute but one thing at least was understood by both sides hayes would be president and southern blacks would be abandoned to their fate.
in a sense hayes did not concede anything because he had already decided to end federal support for the crumbling radical regimes.
but southern negotiators were heartened by firm assurances that this would indeed be the policy.
some also were influenced by vaguer promises involving federal support for southern railroads and internal improvements.
redeeming a new south the men who came to power after radical reconstruction fell in one southern state after another are usually referred to as the redeemers.
they had differing backgrounds and previous loyalties.
some were members of the old souths ruling planter class who had warmly supported secession and now sought to reestablish the old order with as few changes as possible.
others of middle class origin or outlook favored commercial and industrial interests over agrarian groups and called for a new south committed to diversified economic development.
a third group was professional politicians bending with the prevailing winds such as joseph e brown of georgia who had been a secessionist a wartime governor and a leading scalawag republican before becoming a democratic redeemer.
although historians have tried to assign the redeemers a single coherent ideology or view of the world and have debated whether it was old south agrarianism or new south industrialism they endorsed these leaders can perhaps best be understood as power brokers mediating among the dominant interest groups of the south in ways that served their own political advantage.
in many ways the rings that they established on the state and county level were analogous to the political machines developing at the same time in northern cities.
redeemers did however agree on and endorse two basic principles laissez faire and white supremacy.
laissez faire the notion that government should be limited and should not intervene openly and directly in the economy could unite planters frustrated at seeing direct state support going to businessmen and capitalist promoters who had come to realize that low taxes and freedom from government regulation were even more advantageous than state subsidies.
it soon became clear that the redeemers responded only to privileged and entrenched interest groups especially landlords merchants and industrialists and offered little or nothing to tenants small farmers and working people.
as industrialization began to gather steam in the 1880s democratic regimes became increasingly accommodating to manufacturing interests and hospitable to agents of northern capital who were gaining control of the souths transportation system and its extractive industries.
white supremacy was the principal rallying cry that brought the redeemers to power in the first place.
once in office they found they could stay there by charging that opponents of ruling democratic cliques were trying to divide the white mans party and open the way for a return to black domination appeals to racism could also deflect attention from the economic grievances of groups without political clout.
complete the assignment forty acres and a mule on myhistorylab feature essay forty acres and a mule serving as a kind of dress rehearsal for reconstruction the port royal experiment provides a glimpse of what might have occurred had the freed slaves actually been given forty acres and a mule f ew dreams have died harder than the desire of the freed slaves to own the land on which they labored.
the hope of forty acres and a mule for every freedman was raised by general william tecumseh shermans special field order 15 in january 1865 which decreed that 40 acre plots of abandoned and confiscated land would be set aside for ex slaves.
yet the order was in effect for less than a year and few slaves realized the dream of land ownership after emancipation.
even before shermans order however there were experiments across the south with free black labor on plantations formerly held by slaveholders.
two of these so called rehearsals for reconstruction at port royal south carolina and davis bend mississippi show how reconstruction might have developed had true land reform been implemented.
the efforts to resettle freed people on abandoned plantations began out of the armys practical concern to rid itself of the many runaways who were following it and crowding its camps.
in november 1861 general benjamin f butler in a novel interpretation of international law declared runaway slaves to be contraband of war whom the union army could rightfully seize from their rebel owners.
the port royal experiment began as a solution to the problem of what to do with the contrabands.
when the u s navy occupied the sea islands of south carolina and georgia in november 1861 the whites fled leaving behind 10 000 slaves who already organized their own labor according to the task system often with black drivers rather than white overseers.
the abandoned slaves sacked the plantation houses and cotton gins but had little inclination to return to the fields and plant cotton.
to get the black laborers back to the fields as soon as possible treasury secretary salmon chase recruited edward l pierce to administer port royal and show the world that free labor could produce as much cotton as slave labor.
a motley crew of military officers treasury agents investors and idealistic teachers and missionaries known as gideons band followed pierce south.
tension soon arose among these groups.
for example edward atkinson agent for six boston cotton manufacturers was motivated by both anti slavery sentiments and profit.
he wrote the pamphlet cheap cotton by free labor to prove that free labor would be more profitable than slavery.
by contrast gideons band were young men fresh from harvard yale and brown and twelve women and included clerks doctors divinitystudents professors and teachers underground railway agents and socialist.
unitarians free thinkers methodists straitlaced and the other evangelical sects all were motivated by abolitionism and idealism about free labor none knew anything about cotton production which led to conflicts with plantation superintendents like atkinson and edward philbrick.
the freed slaves believed they had a right to the land on which they had lived and worked for so long without compensation.
they celebrated freedom from white overseers and sang no more peck o corn for me no more no more.
no more drivers lash for me.
no more pint o salt for me.
no more hundred lash for me.
no more mistress call for me no more no more.
many thousands go.
despite the conflicts between the idealists and the capitalists and the ex slaves preference for raising food crops rather than cotton the port royal experiment was a qualified success even for the cotton agents.
although cotton yields were lower than in the 1850s because of the wartime loss of fine seed and competition from cotton in egypt profits were high and free labor was nearly as productive as slave labor.
philbrick made an 80 000 profit on a 40 000 investment.
even the philanthropic gideonities earned 6 000 7 000 each.
another site of black self sufficiency was davis bend the mississippi plantation belonging to confederate president jefferson daviss brother joseph.
joseph davis had administered it as a model plantation with limited self government by slaves including a slave jury for criminal offenses and unusual material comforts.
by 1850 one slave benjamin montgomery was running the plantation store managing its cotton gin and keeping the profits.
after whites fled southern mississippi in 1863 general ulysses s grant decided that davis bend should become a negro paradise and the land was leased directly to former slaves who paid only for tools mules and rations.
they set up an even more comprehensive self government that included an elected sheriff and judges.
davis bend was an impressive success.
by 1865 laborers there had produced nearly 2 000 bales of cotton and earned a profit of 160 000.
during reconstruction davis bend also produced several elected black officials.
on january 12 1865 secretary of war edwin stanton and general sherman met with twenty black leaders to hear the concerns of the freed people.
the next day sherman issued special field order 15 designating the whole sea island region for exclusive negro settlement yet the experiment on sherman land ended almost before it began.
president andrew johnson rescinded shermans order in the summer of 1865 and restored the land to its former owners.
while the port royal experiment did lead to limited black land ownership education and strong communities it was not a rehearsal for reconstruction for the south as a whole.
instead the reconstruction south followed the model of the occupied deep south during the war which had maintained large white owned plantations with the freed people working in gangs under coercive oneyear contracts.
when general oliver o howard told the freed people on the sea islands that the land was to be restored to its white owners they were bitter we want homesteads we were promised homesteads.
if the government.
now takes away from them all right to the soil they stand upon save such as they can get by again working for your late and their all time enemies.
we are left in a more unpleasant condition than our former one.
this is not the condition of really freemen some did not leave without a struggle.
black squatters told edisto island owners who returned in february 1866 you have better go back to charleston and go to work there and if you can do nothing else you can pick oysters and earn your living as the loyal people have done by the sweat of their brows even davis bend was restored to joseph davis although he sold it on long term credit to ben montgomery and his two sons.
davis was a lenient creditor and montgomery had a measure of prosperity through the mid1870s until economic reversals led him to bankruptcy in 1879.
by then joseph davis had died and his heirs were less generous the plantation was sold at foreclosure auction and the dream of large scale black self sufficiency in mississippi ended for generations.
questions for discussion 1.
how were the attempts to give land to the freed slaves in the south related to the union war effort.
why did land reform under the port royal experiment and at davis bend ultimately fail.
chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction the new governments were more economical than those of reconstruction mainly because they cut back drastically on appropriations for schools and other needed public services.
but they were scarcely more honest embezzlement of funds and bribery of officials continued to occur to an alarming extent.
louisiana for example suffered for decades from the flagrant corruption associated with a state chartered lottery.
the redeemer regimes of the late 1870s and 1880s badly neglected the interests of small white farmers.
whites and blacks were suffering from the notorious crop lien system that gave local merchants who advanced credit at high rates of interest during the growing season the right to take possession of the harvested crop on terms that buried farmers deeper and deeper in debt.
as a result increasing numbers of whites lost title to their homesteads and were reduced to tenancy.
when a depression of world cotton prices added to the burden of a ruinous credit system agrarian protesters began to challenge the ruling elite first through the southern farmers alliance of the late 1880s and then by supporting its political descendant the populist party of the 1890s see chapter 20.
the rise of jim crow african americans bore the greatest hardships imposed by the new order.
from 1876 through the first decade of the twentieth century southern states imposed a series of restrictions on black civil rights known as jim crow laws.
the term jim crow came from an antebellum minstrel show figure first popularized by thomas daddy rice who blackened his face and sang a song called jump jim crow by the 1850s jim crow was a familiar figure in minstrel shows and had become a synonym for black or negro person in popular white speech.
it was a short step to referring to segregated railroad cars for black people as jim crow cars.
while segregation and disfranchisement began as informal arrangements in the immediate aftermath of the civil war they culminated in a legal regime of separation and exclusion that took firm hold in the 1890s.
the rise of jim crow in the political arena was especially bitter for southern blacks who realized that only political power could ensure other rights.
the redeemers promised as part of the understanding that led to the end of federal intervention in 1877 that they would respect the rights of blacks as set forth in the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments.
governor wade hampton of south carolina was especially vocal in pledging that african americans would not be reduced to second class citizenship by the new regimes.
but when blacks tried to vote republican in the redeemed states they encountered renewed violence and intimidation.
bulldozing african american voters remained common practice in state elections during the late 1870s and early 1880s those blacks who withstood the threat of losing their jobs or being evicted from tenant farms if they voted for the party of lincoln were visited at night and literally whipped into line.
the message was clear vote democratic or vote not at all.
black and white men serve on a jury together during reconstruction but they segregate themselves.
conclusion henry mcneal turner and the unfinished revolution furthermore white democrats now controlled the electoral machinery and were able to manipulate the black vote by stuffing ballot boxes discarding unwanted votes or reporting fraudulent totals.
some states also imposed complicated new voting requirements to discourage black participation.
full scale disfranchisement did not occur until literacy tests and other legalized obstacles to voting were imposed in the period from 1890 to 1910 but by that time less formal and comprehensive methods had already made a mockery of the fifteenth amendment.
nevertheless blacks continued to vote freely in some localities until the 1890s a few districts like the one robert smalls represented even elected black republicans to congress during the immediate post reconstruction period.
the last of these representative george h white of north carolina served until 1901.
his farewell address eloquently conveyed the agony of southern blacks in the era of jim crow strict segregation watch the video the promise and failure of reconstruction these parting words are in behalf of an outraged heartbroken bruised and bleeding but god fearing people faithful industrious loyal people rising people full of potential force.
the only apology that i have to make for the earnestness with which i have spoken is that i am pleading for the life the liberty the future happiness and manhood suffrage of one eighth of the entire population of the united states.
conclusion henry mcneal turner and the unfinished revolution the career of henry mcneal turner sums up the bitter side of the black experience in the south during and after reconstruction.
born free in south carolina in 1834 turner became a minister of the african methodist episcopal ame church just before the outbreak of the civil war.
during the war he recruited african americans for the union army and later served as chaplain for black troops.
after the fighting was over he went to georgia to work for the freedmens bureau but encountered racial discrimination from white bureau officers and left government service for church work and reconstruction politics.
elected to the 1867 georgia constitutional convention and to the state legislature in 1868 he was one of a number of black clergymen who assumed leadership roles among the freedmen.
but whites won control of the georgia legislature and expelled all the black members.
turners reaction was an angry speech in which he proclaimed that white men were never to be trusted.
as the inhabitant of a state in which blacks never gained the degree of power that they achieved in some other parts of the south turner was one of the first black leaders to see the failure of reconstruction as the betrayal of african american hopes for citizenship.
becoming a bishop of the ame church in 1880 turner emerged as the late nineteenth centurys leading proponent of black emigration to africa.
because he believed that white americans were so deeply prejudiced against blacks that they would never grant them equal rights turner became an early advocate of black nationalism and a total separation of the races.
emigration became a popular movement among southern blacks who were in january of 1865 general sherman s field order 15 set aside 400 000 acres for use by former slaves.
with help from gideons band a ragtag group of northern teachers and missionaries as many as 40 000 ex slaves achieved some success at cotton planting until the new president johnson returned the land to its former owners.
especially hard hit by terror and oppression just after the end of reconstruction.
still a majority of blacks in the nation as a whole and even in turners own church refused to give up on the hope of eventual equality in america.
but bishop turners anger and despair were the understandable responses of a proud man to the way that he and his fellow african americans had been treated in the post civil war period.
by the late 1880s the wounds of the civil war were healing and white americans were seized by the spirit of sectional reconciliation.
union and confederate veterans were tenting together and celebrating their common americanism.
reunion was becoming a cultural as well as political reality.
but whites could come back together only because northerners had tacitly agreed to give southerners a free hand in their efforts to reduce blacks to a new form of servitude.
the outraged heart broken bruised and bleeding african americans of the south paid the heaviest price for sectional reunion.
reconstruction remained an unfinished revolution it would be another century before african americans rose up once more to demand full civil and political rights.
chapter 16 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction on myhistorylab time line 1863 lincoln sets forth 10 percent reconstruction plan 1864 wade davis bill passes congress but is pocket1865 vetoed by lincoln johnson moves to reconstruct the south on his own initiative congress refuses to seat representatives and senators elected from states reestablished under presidential plan december johnson vetoes freedmens bureau bill february johnson vetoes civil rights act it passes over his veto april congress passes fourteenth amendment june republicans increase their congressional majority in the fall elections first reconstruction act is passed over johnsons veto march johnson is impeached he avoids conviction by one vote february may southern blacks vote and serve in constitutional conventions grant wins presidential election defeating horatio seymour 1869 congress passes fifteenth amendment granting african americans the right to vote 1870 1871 congress passes ku klux klan acts to protect black voting rights in the south 1872 grant reelected president defeating horace greeley candidate of liberal republicans and democrats 1873 financial panic plunges nation into depression 1875 congress passes specie resumption act whiskey ring scandal exposed 1876 1877 disputed presidential election resolved in favor of republican hayes over democrat tilden 1877 compromise of 1877 ends military intervention in the south and causes fall of the last radical governments chapter review the president versus congress what conflicts arose among lincoln johnson and congress during reconstruction.
both lincoln and johnson had their own notions of how reconstruction should be governed.
radical republicans who sought more protection for black rights challenged lincolns ten percent plan.
later when johnson hesitated to renew the freedmens bureau and fight the black codes congress passed the fourteenth amendment to ensure equal rights to all americans.
p 368 retreat from reconstruction why did reconstruction end.
although intended to protect civil rights the fifteenth amendment allowed states to limit local suffrage through difficult voting prerequisites.
further the ku klux klan intimidated black voters and representation.
by 1876 these tactics had defeated the republicans in most southern states and reconstruction was nearly dead.
p 379 reunion and the new south reconstructing southern society what problems did southern society face during reconstruction.
the immediate problems facing the south were economic and physical devastation and providing for the mass of freed slaves.
while former slaveholders hoped to reduce ex slaves to conditions not unlike slavery northern republicans wanted to reorganize southern land and labor on a northern free labor model.
freedmens bureau agents emphasized that ex slaves had to sign contracts and work for wages.
the freed slaves hoped instead to own land.
sharecropping was a compromise.
p 374 who benefited and who suffered from the reconciliation of north and south.
reunion came at the expense of african americans.
the compromise of 1877 restored autonomous government in the south to resolve the 1876 election.
the north would no longer enforce unpopular civil rights allowing the redeemers to bring back laissez faire economics and restore white supremacy through the jim crow laws.
p 382 key terms and definitions ten percent plan reconstruction plan proposed by president abraham lincoln as a quick way to readmit the former confederate states.
it called for pardon of all southerners except confederate leaders and readmission to the union for any state after 10 percent of its voters signed a loyalty oath and the state abolished slavery.
p 368 radical republicans congressional republicans who insisted on black suffrage and federal protection of civil rights of african americans.
p 369 wade davis bill in 1864 congress passed the wade davis bill to counter lincolns ten percent plan for reconstruction.
the bill required that a majority of a former confederate states white male population take study resources a loyalty oath and guarantee equality for african americans.
president lincoln pocket vetoed the bill.
p 369 thirteenth amendment ratified in 1865 it prohibits slavery and involuntary servitude.
p 371 black codes laws passed by southern states immediately after the civil war to maintain white supremacy by restricting the rights of the newly freed slaves.
p 371 freedmens bureau agency established by congress in march 1865 to provide freedmen with shelter food and medical aid and to help them establish schools and find employment.
the bureau was dissolved in 1872 p 371 fourteenth amendment ratified in 1868 it provided citizenship to ex slaves after the civil war and constitutionally protected equal rights under the law for all citizens.
radical republicans used it to enact a congressional reconstruction policy in the former confederate states.
p 371 radical reconstruction the reconstruction acts of 1867 divided the south into five military districts.
they required the states to guarantee black male suffrage and to ratify the fourteenth amendment as a condition of their readmission to the union.
p 372 sharecropping after the civil war the southern states adopted a sharecropping system as a compromise between former slaves who wanted land of their own and former slave owners who needed labor.
the landowners provided land tools and seed to a farming family who in turn provided labor.
the resulting crop was divided between them with the farmers receiving a share of one third to one half of the crop.
p 375 fifteenth amendment ratified in 1870 it prohibits the denial or abridgment of the right to vote by the federal or state governments on the basis of race color or prior condition as a slave.
it was intended to guarantee african americans the right to vote in the south.
p 379 ku klux klan a secret terrorist society first organized in tennessee in 1866.
the original klans goals were to disfranchise african americans stop reconstruction and restore the prewar social order of the south.
the ku klux klan re formed in the twentieth century to promote white supremacy and combat aliens catholics and jews.
p 380 force acts designed to protect black voters in the south from the ku klux klan in 1870 1871 these laws placed state elections under federal jurisdiction and imposed fines and punished those guilty of interfering with any citizen exercising his right to vote.
p 380 compromise of 1877 compromise struck during the contested presidential election of 1876 in which democrats accepted the election of rutherford b hayes republican in exchange for the withdrawal of federal troops from the south and the end of reconstruction.
p 383 redeemers a loose coalition of prewar democrats confederate veterans and whigs who took over southern state governments in the 1870s supposedly redeeming them from the corruption of reconstruction.
p 383 jim crow laws segregation laws enacted by southern states after reconstruction.
p 386 critical thinking questions 1.
do you think reconstruction may have turned out differently had lincoln not been assassinated.
why was it difficult to enforce social and cultural changes using 3.
what role did local grassroots efforts play in reserving federal government policy.
how did people retain that much autonomy even under a strong federal government.
do you think the redemption of southern government was an inevitable military force.
backlash to reconstruction.
how could things have turned out differently.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 16 on myhistorylab retreat from reconstruction the president vs congress read the document smalls p 367 pearson profiles robert read the document thirteenth fourteenth and fifteenth amendment 1865 1868 1870 p 369 read the document code 1865 p 370 view the map the mississippi black reconstruction p 373 reconstructing southern society read the document 1882 p 375 a sharecrop contract watch the video the schools that the civil war and reconstruction created p 378 view the closer look the first vote p 380 read the document hannah irwin describes ku klux klan ride p 381 reunion and the new south complete the assignment mule p 384 forty acres and a watch the video the promise and failure of reconstruction p 387 indicates study plan media assignment the agony of reconstruction contents and learning objectives the president versus congress pg.
368 retreat from reconstruction pg.
379 what conflicts arose among lincoln johnson and congress during reconstruction.
why did reconstruction end.
reconstructing southern society pg.
374 who benefited and who suffered from the reconciliation of the north and south.
what problems did southern society face during reconstruction.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab reunion and the new south pg.
382 feature essay forty acres and a mule chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction robert smalls and black politicians during reconstruction during the reconstruction period immediately following the civil war african americans struggled to become equal citizens of a democratic republic.
they produced a number of remarkable leaders who showed that blacks were as capable as other americans of voting holding office and legislating for a complex and rapidly changing society.
among these leaders was robert smalls of south carolina.
although virtually forgotten by the time of his death in 1915 smalls was perhaps the most famous and widely respected southern black leader of the civil war and reconstruction era.
his career reveals some of the main features of the african american experience during that crucial period.
born a slave in 1839 smalls had a white father whose identity has never been clearly established.
but his white ancestry apparently gained him some advantages and as a young man he was allowed to live and work independently hiring his own time from a master who may have been his half brother.
smalls worked as a sailor and trained himself to be a pilot in charleston harbor.
when the union navy blockaded charleston in 1862 smalls who was then working on a confederate steamship called the planter saw a chance to win his freedom in a particularly dramatic way.
at three oclock in the morning on may 13 1862 when the white officers of the planter were ashore he took command of the vessel and its slave crew sailed it out of the heavily fortified harbor and surrendered it to the union navy.
smalls immediately became a hero to those antislavery northerners who were seeking evidence that the slaves were willing and able to serve the union.
the planter was turned into a union army transport and smalls was made its captain after being commissioned as an officer.
during the remainder of the war he rendered conspicuous and gallant service as captain and pilot of union vessels off the coast of south carolina.
like a number of other african americans who had fought valiantly for the union smalls went on to a distinguished political career during reconstruction serving in the south carolina constitutional convention in the state legislature and for several terms in the u s congress.
he was also a shrewd businessman and became the owner of extensive properties in beaufort south carolina and its vicinity.
his first purchase was the house of his former master where he had spent his early years as a slave.
as the leading citizen of beaufort during reconstruction and for some years thereafter he acted like many successful white americans combining the acquisition of wealth with the exercise of political power.
the electoral organization smalls established resembled in some ways the well oiled machines being established in northern towns and cities.
it was so effective that he was able to control local government and get himself elected to congress even after the election of 1876 had placed the state under the read the document pearson profiles robert smalls with the help of several black crewmen robert smalls then twenty three years old commandeered the planter a confederate steamship used to transport guns and ammunition and surrendered it to the union vessel uss onward.
smalls provided distinguished service to the union during the civil war and after the war went on to become a successful politician and businessman.
chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction control of white conservatives bent on depriving blacks of political power.
organized mob violence defeated him in 1878 but he bounced back to win by decision of congress a contested congressional election in 1880.
he did not leave the house of representatives for good until 1886 when he lost another contested election that had to be decided by congress.
it revealed the changing mood of the country that his white challenger was seated despite evidence of violence and intimidation against black voters.
in their efforts to defeat him smalls white opponents frequently charged that he had a hand in the corruption that was allegedly rampant in south carolina during reconstruction.
but careful historical investigation shows that he was by the standards of the time an honest and responsible public servant.
in the south carolina convention of 1868 and later in the state legislature he was a conspicuous champion of free and compulsory public education.
in congress he fought for the enactment and enforcement of federal civil rights laws.
not especially radical on social questions he sometimes bent over backward to accommodate what he regarded as the legitimate interests and sensibilities of south carolina whites.
like other middle class black political leaders in reconstructionera south carolina he can perhaps be faulted in hindsight for not doing more to help poor blacks gain access to land of their own.
but in 1875 he sponsored congressional legislation that opened for purchase at low prices the land in his own district that had been confiscated by the federal government during the war.
as a result blacks were able to buy most of it and they soon owned three fourths of the land in beaufort and its vicinity.
robert smalls spent the later years of his life as u s collector of customs for the port of beaufort a beneficiary of the patronage that the republican party continued to provide for a few loyal southern blacks.
but the loss of real political clout for smalls and men like him was one of the tragic consequences of the fall of reconstruction.
or a brief period of years black politicians such as robert smalls exercised more power in the south than they would for another century.
a series of political developments on the national and regional stage made reconstruction an unfinished revolution promising but not delivering true equality for newly freed african americans.
national party politics shifting priorities among northern republicans white southerners commitment to white supremacy backed by legal restrictions as well as massive extralegal violence against blacks all combined to stifle the promise of reconstruction.
f yet the reconstruction era also saw major transformations in american society in the wake of the civil war new ways of organizing labor and family life new institutions within and outside of the government and new ideologies regarding the role of institutions and government in social and economic life.
many of the changes begun during reconstruction laid the groundwork for later revolutions in american life.
the president vs congress what conflicts arose among lincoln johnson and congress during reconstruction.
the problem of how to reconstruct the union in the wake of the souths military defeat was one of the most difficult and perplexing challenges ever faced by american policy makers.
the constitution provided no firm guidelines for the framers had not anticipated a division of the country into warring sections.
after emancipation became a northern war aim the problem was compounded by a new issue how far should the federal government go to secure freedom and civil rights for four million former slaves.
the debate that evolved led to a major political crisis.
advocates of a minimal reconstruction policy favored quick restoration of the union with no protection for the freed slaves beyond the prohibition of slavery.
proponents of a more radical policy wanted readmission of the southern states to be dependent on guarantees that loyal men would displace the confederate elite in positions of power and that blacks would acquire basic rights of american citizenship.
the white house favored the minimal approach whereas congress came to endorse the more radical and thoroughgoing form of reconstruction.
the resulting struggle between congress and the chief executive was the most serious clash between two branches of government in the nations history.
wartime reconstruction tension between the president and congress over how to reconstruct the union began during the war.
occupied mainly with achieving victory lincoln never set forth a final and comprehensive plan for bringing rebellious states back into the fold.
but he did take initiatives that indicated he favored a lenient and conciliatory policy toward southerners who would give up the struggle and repudiate slavery.
in december 1863 he issued a proclamation of amnesty and reconstruction which offered a full pardon to all southerners with the exception of certain classes of confederate leaders who would take an oath of allegiance to the union and acknowledge the legality of emancipation.
this ten percent plan provided that once 10 percent or more of the voting population of any occupied state had taken the oath they were authorized to set up a loyal government.
by 1864 louisiana and arkansas states that were wholly or partially occupied by union troops had established unionist governments.
lincolns policy was meant to shorten the war.
first he hoped to weaken the southern cause by making it easy for disillusioned or lukewarm confederates to switch sides.
second he hoped to further his emancipation policy by insisting that the new governments abolish slavery.
the president vs congress congress was unhappy with the presidents reconstruction experquarrel with congress would have worsened or been resolved.
given iments and in 1864 refused to seat the unionists elected to the house lincolns past record of political flexibility the best bet is that he and senate from louisiana and arkansas.
a minority of congressiowould have come to terms with the majority of his party.
nal republicans the strongly antislavery radical republicans favored protection for black rights especially black male suffrage as a andrew johnson at the helm precondition for the readmission of southern states.
but a larger group of congressional moderates opposed lincolns plan not on the basis of andrew johnson the man suddenly made president by an assasblack rights but because they did not trust the repentant confederates sins bullet attempted to put the union back together on his own who would play a major role in the new governments.
they feared authority in 1865.
but his policies eventually set him at odds with that the old ruling class would return to power and cheat the north of congress and the republican party and provoked the most serithe full fruits of its impending victory.
ous crisis in the history of relations between the executive and congress also believed the president was exceeding his authorlegislative branches of the federal government.
ity by using executive powers to restore the union.
lincoln operjohnsons background shaped his approach to reconstruction.
ated on the theory that secession being illegal did not place the born in dire poverty in north carolina he migrated as a young confederate states outside the union in a constitutional sense.
since individuals and not states had defied federal authority the president could use his pardoning power to read the document thirteenth fourteenth and certify a loyal electorate which could then function as the fifteenth amendments 1865 1868 1870 legitimate state government.
the dominant view in congress however was that the southern states had forfeited their place in the union and that it was up to congress to decide when and how they would be readmitted.
the most popular justification for congressional responsibility was based on the clause of the constitution providing that the united states shall guarantee to every state in this union a republican form of government by seceding radicals argued the confederate states had ceased to be republican and congress had to set the conditions to be met before they could be readmitted.
after refusing to recognize lincolns 10 percent governments congress passed a reconstruction bill of its own in july 1864.
known as the wade davis bill this legislation required that 50 percent of the voters take an oath of future loyalty before the restoration process could begin.
once this had occurred those who could swear they had never willingly supported the confederacy could vote in an election for delegates to a constitutional convention.
the bill in its final form did not require black suffrage but it did give federal courts the power to enforce emancipation.
faced with this attempt to nullify his own program lincoln exercised a pocket veto by refusing to sign the bill before congress adjourned.
he justified his action by announcing that he did not want to be committed to any single reconstruction plan.
the sponsors of the bill responded with an angry manifesto and lincolns relations with congress reached their low.
congress and the president remained stalemated on the reconstruction issue for the rest of the war.
during his last months in office however lincoln showed some willingness to compromise.
he persisted in his efforts to obtain full recognition for the governments he had nurtured in louisiana and arkansas but seemed receptive to the setting of other conditions perhaps including black suffrage for readmis in this cartoon president andrew johnson left and thaddeus stevens the radical sion of those states where wartime conditions had prevented republican congressman from pennsylvania are depicted as train engineers in a execution of his plan.
however he died without clarifying deadlock on the tracks.
indeed neither johnson nor stevens would give way on his his intentions leaving historians to speculate whether his plans for reconstruction.
chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction read the document the mississippi black code 1865 slavery is dead asks this 1866 cartoon by thomas nast.
to the cartoonist the emancipation proclamation of 1863 and the norths victory in the civil war meant little difference to the treatment of the freed slaves in the south.
freed slaves convicted of crimes often endured the same punishments as had slaves sale as depicted in the left panel of the cartoon or beatings as shown on the right.
man to eastern tennessee where he made his living as a tailor.
lacking formal schooling he did not learn to read and write until adult life.
entering politics as a jacksonian democrat he became known as an effective stump speaker.
his railing against the planter aristocracy made him the spokesman for tennessees nonslaveholding whites and the most successful politician in the state.
he advanced from state legislator to congressman to governor and in 1857 was elected to the u s senate.
when tennessee seceded in 1861 johnson was the only senator from a confederate state who remained loyal to the union and continued to serve in washington.
but his unionism and defense of the common people did not include antislavery sentiments.
nor was he friendly to blacks.
while campaigning in tennessee he had objected only to the fact that slaveholding was the privilege of a wealthy minority.
he revealed his attitude when he wished that every head of family in the united states had one slave to take the drudgery and menial service off his family during the war while acting as military governor of tennessee johnson endorsed lincolns emancipation policy and carried it into effect.
but he viewed it primarily as a means of destroying the power of the hated planter class rather than as a recognition of black humanity.
he was chosen as lincolns running mate in 1864 because it was thought that a proadministration democrat who was a southern unionist in the bargain would strengthen the ticket.
no one expected johnson to succeed to the presidency it is one of the strange accidents of american history that a southern democrat a fervent white supremacist came to preside over a republican administration immediately after the civil war.
some radical republicans initially welcomed johnsons ascent to the nations highest office.
their hopes make sense in the light of johnsons record of fierce loyalty to the union and his apparent agreement with the radicals that ex confederates should be severely treated.
more than lincoln who had spoken of malice toward none and charity for all johnson seemed likely to punish southern traitors and prevent them from regaining political influence.
only gradually did the deep disagreement between the president and the republican congressional majority become evident.
the reconstruction policy that johnson initiated on may 29 1865 created some uneasiness among the radicals but most republicans were willing to give it a chance.
johnson placed north carolina and eventually other states under appointed provisional governors chosen mostly from among prominent southern politicians who had opposed the secession movement and had rendered no conspicuous service to the confederacy.
the governors were responsible for calling constitutional conventions and ensuring that only loyal whites were permitted to vote for delegates.
participation required taking the oath of allegiance that lincoln had prescribed earlier.
once again confederate leaders and former officeholders who had the president vs congress participated in the rebellion were excluded.
to regain their political and property rights those in the exempted categories had to apply for individual presidential pardons.
johnson made one significant addition to the list of the excluded all those possessing taxable property exceeding 20 000 in value.
in this fashion he sought to prevent his longtime adversaries the wealthy planters from participating in the reconstruction of southern state governments.
once the conventions met johnson urged them to do three things declare the ordinances of secession illegal repudiate the confederate debt and ratify the thirteenth amendment abolishing slavery.
after governments had been reestablished under constitutions meeting these conditions the president assumed that the reconstruction process would be complete and that the ex confederate states could regain their full rights under the constitution.
the results of the conventions which were dominated by prewar unionists and representatives of backcountry yeoman farmers were satisfactory to the president but troubling to many congressional republicans.
rather than quickly accepting johnsons recommendations delegates in several states approved them begrudgingly or with qualifications.
furthermore all the resulting constitutions limited suffrage to whites disappointing the large number of northerners who hoped as lincoln had that at least some african americans perhaps those who were educated or had served in the union army would be given the right to vote.
johnson on the whole seemed eager to give southern white majorities a free hand in determining the civil and political status of the freed slaves.
republican uneasiness turned to disillusionment and anger when the state legislatures elected under the new constitutions proceeded to pass black codes subjecting former slaves to a variety of special regulations and restrictions on their freedom.
for more on the black codes see p.
to radicals the black codes looked suspiciously like slavery under a new guise.
more upsetting to northern public opinion in general a number of prominent ex confederate leaders were elected to congress in the fall of 1865.
johnson himself was partly responsible for this turn of events.
despite his lifelong feud with the planter class he was generous in granting pardons to members of the old elite who came to him hat in hand and asked for them.
when former confederate vice president alexander stephens and other proscribed ex rebels were elected to congress although they had not been pardoned johnson granted them special amnesty so they could serve.
the growing rift between the president and congress came into the open in december when the house and senate refused to seat the recently elected southern delegation.
instead of endorsing johnsons work and recognizing the state governments he had called into being congress established a joint committee chaired by senator william pitt fessenden of maine to review reconstruction policy and set further conditions for readmission of the seceded states.
congress takes the initiative the struggle over how to reconstruct the union ended with congress doing the job of setting policy all over again.
the clash between johnson and congress was a matter of principle and could not be reconciled.
president johnson an heir of the democratic states rights tradition wanted to restore the prewar federal system as quickly as possible and without change except that states would not have the right to legalize slavery or to secede.
most republicans wanted firm guarantees that the old southern ruling class would not regain regional power and national influence by devising new ways to subjugate blacks.
they favored a reconstruction policy that would give the federal government authority to limit the political role of ex confederates and provide some protection for black citizenship.
republican leaders with the exception of a few extreme radicals such as charles sumner lacked any firm conviction that blacks were inherently equal to whites.
they did believe however that in a modern democratic state all citizens must have the same basic rights and opportunities regardless of natural abilities.
principle coincided easily with political expediency southern blacks whatever their alleged shortcomings were likely to be loyal to the republican party that had emancipated them.
they could be used if necessary to counteract the influence of resurgent ex confederates thus preventing the democrats from returning to national dominance through control of the south.
the disagreement between the president and congress became irreconcilable in early 1866 when johnson vetoed two bills that had passed with overwhelming republican support.
the first extended the life of the freedmens bureau a temporary agency set up to aid the former slaves by providing relief education legal help and assistance in obtaining land or employment.
the second was a civil rights bill meant to nullify the black codes and guarantee to freedmen full and equal benefit of all laws and proceedings for the security of person and property as is enjoyed by white citizens johnsons vetoes shocked moderate republicans who had expected the president to accept the relatively modest measures as a way of heading off more radical proposals such as black suffrage and a prolonged denial of political rights to ex confederates.
presidential opposition to policies that represented the bare minimum of republican demands on the south alienated moderates in the party and ensured a wide opposition to johnsons plan of reconstruction.
johnson succeeded in blocking the freedmens bureau bill although a modified version later passed.
but the civil rights act won the two thirds majority necessary to override his veto signifying that the president was now hopelessly at odds with most of the congressmen from what was supposed to be his own party.
never before had congress overridden a presidential veto.
johnson soon revealed that he intended to abandon the republicans and place himself at the head of a new conservative party uniting the small minority of republicans who supported him with a reviving democratic party that was rallying behind his reconstruction policy.
in preparation for the elections of 1866 johnson helped found the national union movement to promote his plan to readmit the southern states to the union without further qualifications.
a national union convention meeting in philadelphia in august 1866 called for the election to congress of men who endorsed the presidential plan for reconstruction.
meanwhile the republican majority on capitol hill fearing that johnson would not enforce civil rights legislation or that the courts would declare such federal laws unconstitutional passed the fourteenth amendment.
this perhaps the most important of all the constitutional amendments gave the federal government responsibility for guaranteeing equal rights under the law to all americans.
section 1 defined national citizenship for the first time as extending to all persons born or naturalized in the united states the states were prohibited from abridging the rights chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction of american citizens and could not deprive any person of life liberty or property without due process of law nor deny to any person.
equal protection of the laws the other sections of the amendment were important in the context of the time but had fewer long term implications.
section 2 sought to penalize the south for denying voting rights to black men by reducing the congressional representation of any state that formally deprived a portion of its male citizens of the right to vote.
section 3 denied federal office to those who had taken an oath of office to support the u s constitution and then had supported the confederacy and section 4 repudiated the confederate debt.
the amendment was sent to the states with the understanding that southerners would have no chance of being readmitted to congress unless their states ratified it.
the congressional elections of 1866 served as a referendum on the fourteenth amendment.
johnson opposed the amendment on the grounds that it created a centralized government and denied states the right to manage their own affairs he also counseled southern state legislatures to reject it and all except tennessee followed his advice.
but the presidents case for state autonomy was weakened by the publicity resulting from bloody race riots in new orleans and memphis.
these and other reported atrocities against blacks made it clear that the existing southern state governments were failing abysmally to protect the life liberty or property of ex slaves.
johnson further weakened his cause by campaigning for candidates who supported his policies.
in his notorious swing around the circle he toured the nation slandering his opponents in crude language and engaging in undignified exchanges with hecklers.
enraged by southern inflexibility and the antics of a president who acted as if he were still campaigning in the backwoods of tennessee northern voters repudiated the administration.
the republican majority in congress increased to a solid two thirds in both houses and the radical wing of the party gained strength at the expense of moderates and conservatives.
congressional reconstruction plan enacted congress was now in a position to implement its own plan of reconstruction.
in 1867 and 1868 it passed a series of acts that nullified the presidents initiatives and reorganized the south on a new basis.
generally referred to as radical reconstruction the measures actually represented a compromise between genuine radicals and more moderate republicans.
consistent radicals such as senator charles sumner of massachusetts and congressmen thaddeus stevens of pennsylvania and george julian of indiana wanted to reshape southern society before readmitting ex confederates to the union.
their program of regeneration before reconstruction required an extended period of military rule confiscation and redistribution of large landholdings among the freedmen and federal aid for schools to educate blacks and whites for citizenship.
but the majority of republican congressmen found such a program unacceptable because it broke too sharply with american traditions of federalism and regard for property rights and might mean that decades would pass before the union was back in working order.
the first reconstruction act passed over johnsons veto on march 2 1867 placed the south under the rule of the army by reorganizing the region into five military districts.
but military rule would last for only a short time.
subsequent acts of 1867 and 1868 opened the way for the quick readmission of any state that framed and ratified a new constitution providing for black suffrage.
ex confederates disqualified from holding federal office under the fourteenth amendment were prohibited from voting for delegates to the constitutional conventions or in the elections to ratify the conventions work.
since blacks were allowed to participate in this process republicans thought they had found a way to ensure that loyal men would dominate the new governments.
radical reconstruction was based on the dubious assumption that once blacks had the vote they would have the power to protect themselves against white supremacists efforts to deny them their rights.
the reconstruction acts thus signaled a retreat from the true radical position that a sustained use of federal authority was needed to complete the transition from slavery to freedom and prevent the resurgence of the souths old ruling class.
troops were used in the south after 1868 but only in a very limited and sporadic way.
the majority of republicans were unwilling to embrace centralized government and an extended period of military rule over civilians and even radicals such as thaddeus stevens supported the compromise as the best that could be achieved.
yet a genuine spirit of democratic idealism did give legitimacy and fervor to the cause of black male suffrage.
enabling people who were so poor and reconstruction amendments 1865 1870 amendment main provisions slavery prohibited in united states national citizenship state representation in congress reduced proportionally to number of voters disfranchised former confederates denied right to hold office confederate debt repudiated denial of franchise because of race color or past servitude explicitly prohibited congressional passage 2 3 majority in each house required january 1865 june 1866 february 1869 ratification process 3 4 of all states required including ex confederate states december 1865 27 states including 8 southern states rejected by 12 southern and border states february 1867 radicals make readmission of southern states hinge on ratification ratified july 1868 ratification required for readmission of virginia texas mississippi georgia ratified march 1870 the president vs congress view the map reconstruction pennsylvania iowa new jersey ohio illinois delaware indiana d c west virginia kansas missouri maryland virginia kentucky atlantic ocean north carolina 1868 1870 tennessee 1866 1869 indian territory arkansas mississippi south carolina texas alabama louisiana 200 miles 200 kilometers georgia military districts established march 1867 gulf of mexico florida dates indicate readmission to the union dates indicate reestablishment of conservative government reconstruction during the reconstruction era the southern state governments passed through three phases control by white ex confederates domination by republican legislators both white and black and finally the regain of control by conservative white democrats.
downtrodden to have access to the ballot box was a bold and innovative application of the principle of government by the consent of the governed.
the problem was finding a way to enforce equal suffrage under conditions then existing in the postwar south.
the impeachment crisis the first obstacle to enforcement of congressional reconstruction was resistance from the white house.
johnson thoroughly disapproved of the new policy and sought to thwart the will of congress by administering the plan in his own obstructive fashion.
he immediately began to dismiss officeholders who sympathized with radical reconstruction and he countermanded the orders of generals in charge of southern military districts who were zealous in their enforcement of the new legislation.
some radical generals were transferred and replaced by conservative democrats.
congress responded by passing laws designed to limit presidential authority over reconstruction matters.
one of the measures was the tenure of office act requiring senate approval for the removal of cabinet officers and other officials whose appointment had needed the consent of the senate.
another measure a rider to an army appropriations bill sought to limit johnsons authority to issue orders to military commanders.
johnson objected vigorously to the restrictions on the grounds that they violated the constitutional doctrine of the separation of powers.
when it became clear that the president was resolute in fighting for his powers and using them to resist the establishment of radical regimes in the southern states some congressmen began to call for his impeachment.
a preliminary effort foundered in 1867 but when johnson tried to discharge secretary of war edwin stanton the only radical in the cabinet and persisted in his efforts despite the disapproval of the senate the proimpeachment forces gained in strength.
in january 1868 johnson ordered general grant who already commanded the army to replace stanton as head of the war department.
but grant had his eye on the republican presidential nomination and refused to defy congress.
johnson subsequently appointed general lorenzo thomas who agreed to serve.
faced with this apparent violation of the tenure of office act the house voted overwhelmingly to impeach the president on february 24 and he was placed on trial before the senate.
because seven republican senators broke with the party leadership and voted for acquittal the effort to convict johnson and remove him from office fell one vote short of the necessary two thirds.
this outcome resulted in part from a skillful defense.
attorneys for the president argued for a narrow interpretation of the constitutional provision that a president could be impeached only for high crimes and misdemeanors asserting that this referred only to indictable offenses.
responding to the charge that johnson had deliberately violated the tenure of office act the defense contended that the law did not apply to the removal of stanton because he had been appointed by lincoln not johnson.
the prosecution countered with a different interpretation of the tenure of office act but the core of their case was that johnson chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction had abused the powers of his office in an effort to sabotage the congressional reconstruction policy.
obstructing the will of the legislative branch they claimed was sufficient grounds for conviction even if no crime had been committed.
the republicans who broke ranks to vote for acquittal could not endorse such a broad view of the impeachment power.
they feared that removal of a president for essentially political reasons would threaten the constitutional balance of powers and open the way to legislative supremacy over the executive.
in addition the man who would have succeeded johnson senator benjamin wade of ohio the president pro tem of the senate was unpopular with conservative republicans because of his radical position on labor and currency questions.
although johnsons acquittal by the narrowest of margins protected the american presidency from congressional domination the impeachment episode helped create an impression in the public mind that the radicals were ready to turn the constitution to their own use to gain their objectives.
conservatives were again alarmed when congress took action in 1868 to deny the supreme courts appellate jurisdiction in cases involving the military arrest and imprisonment of anti reconstruction activists in the south.
but the evidence of congressional ruthlessness and illegality is not as strong as most historians used to think.
modern legal scholars have found merit in the radicals claim that their actions did not violate the constitution although in 1926 the supreme court held the tenure of office act and a successor law to be unconstitutional.
their failure to remove johnson from office embarrassed congressional republicans but the episode did ensure that reconstruction in the south would proceed as the majority in congress intended.
during the trial johnson helped influence the verdict by pledging to enforce the reconstruction acts and he held to this promise during his remaining months in office.
unable to depose the president the radicals had at least succeeded in neutralizing his opposition to their program.
reconstructing southern society what problems did southern society face during reconstruction.
the civil war left the south devastated demoralized and destitute.
slavery was dead but what this meant for future relationships between whites and blacks was still in doubt.
the overwhelming majority of southern whites wanted to keep blacks adrift between slavery and freedom without rights in a status resembling that of the free negroes of the old south.
blacks sought independence from their former masters and viewed the acquisition of land education and the vote as the best means of achieving this goal.
the thousands of northerners who went south after the war for materialistic or humanitarian reasons hoped to extend yankee civilization to what they viewed as an unenlightened and barbarous region.
for most of them this reformation required the aid of the freedmen not enough southern whites were willing to accept the new order and embrace northern middle class values.
the struggle of these groups to achieve their conflicting goals bred chaos violence and instability.
unsettled conditions created many opportunities for corruption crime and terrorism.
this was scarcely an ideal setting for an experiment in interracial democracy but one was attempted nonetheless.
its success depended on massive and sustained support from the federal government.
to the extent that this was forthcoming progressive reform could be achieved.
when federal support faltered the forces of reaction and white supremacy were unleashed.
reorganizing land and labor the civil war scarred the southern landscape and wrecked its economy.
one devastated area central south carolina looked to an 1865 observer like a broad black streak of ruin and desolation the fences are gone lonesome smokestacks surrounded by dark heaps of ashes and cinders marking the spots where human habitations had stood the fields all along the roads widely overgrown with weeds with here and there a sickly patch of cotton or corn cultivated by negro squatters other areas through which the armies had passed were similarly ravaged.
several major cities including atlanta columbia and richmond were gutted by fire.
most factories were dismantled or destroyed and long stretches of railroad were torn up.
physical ruin would not have been so disastrous if investment capital had been available for rebuilding.
but the substantial wealth represented by confederate currency and bonds had melted away and emancipation of the slaves had divested the propertied classes of their most valuable and productive assets.
according to some estimates the souths per capita wealth in 1865 was only about half what it had been in 1860.
recovery could not even begin until a new labor system replaced slavery.
it was widely assumed in both the north and the south that southern prosperity would continue to depend on cotton and that the plantation was the most efficient unit for producing the crop.
hindering efforts to rebuild the plantation economy were lack of capital the deep rooted belief of southern whites that blacks would work only under compulsion and the freedmens resistance to labor conditions that recalled slavery.
blacks strongly preferred to determine their own economic relationships and for a time they had reason to hope the federal government would support their ambitions.
the freed slaves were placed in a precarious position and were in effect fighting a twofront war.
although they were grateful for the federal aid in ending slavery freed slaves often had ideas about freedom that contradicted the plans of their northern allies.
many ex slaves wanted to hold on to the family based communal work methods that they utilized during slavery.
freed slaves in areas of south carolina for example attempted to maintain the family task system rather than adopting the individual piecework system pushed by northern capitalists.
many ex slaves opposed plans to turn them into wage laborers who produced exclusively for a market.
finally freed slaves often wanted to stay on the land their families had spent generations farming rather than move elsewhere to assume plots of land as individual farmers.
while not guaranteeing all of the freed slaves hopes for economic self determination the northern military attempted to establish a new economic base for the freed men and women.
general sherman hampered by the huge numbers of black fugitives that followed his army on its famous march issued an order in january 1865 that set aside the islands and coastal areas of georgia and south carolina for exclusive black occupancy on 40 acre plots.
furthermore the freedmens bureau as one of its many responsibilities was given control of hundreds of thousands of acres of reconstructing southern society giving them something they allegedly had not earned and the desire to restore cotton production as quickly as possible to increase agricultural exports and stabilize the economy.
consequently most blacks in physical possession of small farms failed to acquire title and the mass of freedmen were left with little or no prospect of becoming landowners.
recalling the plight of southern blacks in 1865 an ex slave later wrote that they were set free without a dollar without a foot of land and without the wherewithal to get the next meal even despite their poverty and landlessness ex slaves were reluctant to settle down and commit themselves to wage labor for their former masters.
many took to the road hoping to find something better.
some were still expecting grants of land but others were simply trying to increase their bargaining power.
one freedman later recalled that an important part of being free was that we could move around and change bosses as the end of 1865 approached many freedmen had still not signed up for the coming season anxious planters feared that blacks were plotting to seize land by force.
within a few weeks however most holdouts signed for the best terms they could get.
one common form of agricultural employment in 1866 was a contract labor system.
under this system workers committed themselves for a year in return for fixed wages a substantial portion of which was withheld until after the harvest.
since many planters were inclined to drive hard bargains abuse their workers or cheat them at the end of the year the freedmens bureau assumed the civil war brought emancipation to slaves but the sharecropping system kept many of them the role of reviewing the contracts and enforcing economically bound to their employers.
at the end of a year the sharecropper tenants might owe them.
but bureau officials had differing notions most or all of what they had made to their landlord.
here a sharecropping family poses in front of what it meant to protect african americans of their cabin.
ex slaves often built their living quarters near woods in order to have a ready supply from exploitation.
some stood up strongly for of fuel for heating and cooking.
the cabins chimney lists away from the house so that it can be the rights of the freedmen others served as allies easily pushed away from the living quarters should it catch fire.
of the planters rounding up available workers source collection of the new york historical society negative number 50475 coercing them to sign contracts for low wages and then helping keep them in line.
abandoned or confiscated land and was authorized to make 40 acre the bureaus influence waned after 1867 it was phased out grants to black settlers for three year periods after which they completely by 1869 and the experiment with contract wage would have the option to buy at low prices.
by june 1865 forty labor was abandoned.
growing up alongside the contract systhousand black farmers were at work on 300 000 acres of what tem and eventually displacing it was an alternative capital labor they thought would be their own land.
for more on this see the relationship sharecropping.
first in small groups known as feature essay forty acres and a mule pp.
squads and later as individual families blacks worked a piece of but for most of them the dream of forty acres and a mule land independently for a fixed share of the crop usually one half.
or some other arrangement that would give them control of their the advantage of this arrangement for credit starved landlords was land and labor was not to be realized.
president johnson parthat it did not require much expenditure in advance of the harvest.
doned the owners of most of the land consigned to the ex slaves the system also forced the tenant to share the risks of crop failure by sherman and the freedmens bureau and proposals for an or a fall in cotton prices.
these considerations loomed larger after effective program of land confiscation and redistribution failed disastrous harvests in 1866 and 1867 to get through congress.
among the considerations promptafrican americans initially viewed sharecropping as a step up ing most congressmen to oppose land reform were a tenderness from wage labor in the direction of landownership.
but during the for property rights fear of sapping the freedmens initiative by 1870s this form of tenancy evolved into a new kind of servitude.
read the document a sharecrop contract 1882 chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction croppers had to live on credit until their cotton was sold and planters or merchants seized the chance to provision them at high prices and exorbitant rates of interest.
creditors were entitled to deduct what was owed to them out of the tenants share of the crop and this left most sharecroppers with no net profit at the end of the year more often than not with a debt that had to be worked off in subsequent years.
various methods legal and extralegal were eventually devised in an effort to bind indebted tenants to a single landlord for extended periods but considerable movement was still possible.
black codes a new name for slavery.
while landless african americans in the countryside were being reduced to economic dependence those in towns and cities found themselves living in an increasingly segregated society.
the black codes of 1865 attempted to require separation of the races in public places and facilities when most of the codes were overturned by federal authorities as violations of the civil rights act of 1866 the same end was often achieved through private initiative and community pressure.
in some cities blacks successfully resisted being consigned to separate streetcars by appealing to the military during the period when it exercised authority or by organizing boycotts.
but they found it almost impossible to gain admittance to most hotels restaurants and other privately owned establishments catering to whites.
although separate black or jim crow cars were not yet the rule on railroads african americans were often denied firstclass accommodations.
after 1868 black supported republican governments passed civil rights acts requiring equal access to public facilities but little effort was made to enforce the legislation.
the black codes had other onerous provisions meant to control african americans and return them to quasi slavery.
most codes even made black unemployment a crime which meant blacks had to make long term contracts with white employers or be arrested for vagrancy.
others limited the rights of african americans to own property or engage in occupations other than those of servant or laborer.
the codes were set aside by the actions of congress the military and the freedmens bureau but vagrancy laws remained in force across the south.
furthermore private violence and discrimination against blacks continued on a massive scale unchecked by state authorities.
hundreds perhaps thousands of blacks were murdered by whites in 1865 1866 and few of the perpetrators were brought to justice.
the imposition of military rule in 1867 was designed in part to protect former slaves from such violence and intimidation but the task was beyond the capacity of the few thousand troops stationed in the south.
when new constitutions were approved and states readmitted to the union under the congressional plan in 1868 the problem became more severe.
white opponents of radical reconstruction adopted systematic terrorism and organized mob violence to keep blacks away from the polls.
the freed slaves in the face of opposition from both their democratic enemies and some of their republican allies tried to defend themselves by organizing their own militia groups for protection and to assert their political rights.
however the militia groups were not powerful enough to overcome the growing power of the anti republican forces.
also the military presence was progressively reduced leaving the new republican regimes to fight a losing battle against armed white supremacists.
in the words of historian william gillette there was simply no federal force large enough to give heart to black republicans or to bridle southern white violence republican rule in the south hastily organized in 1867 the southern republican party dominated the constitution making of 1868 and the regimes that came out of it.
the party was an attempted coalition of three social groups which varied in their relative strength from state to state.
one was the same class that was becoming the backbone of the republican party in the north businessmen with an interest in enlisting government aid for private enterprise.
many republicans of this stripe were recent arrivals from the north the so called carpetbaggers but some were scalawags former whig planters or merchants who were born in the south or had immigrated to the region before the war and now saw a chance to realize their dreams for commercial and industrial development.
poor white farmers especially those from upland areas where unionist sentiment had been strong during the civil war were a second element in the original coalition.
these owners of small farms expected the party to favor their interests at the expense of the wealthy landowners and to come to their aid with special legislation when as was often the case in this period of economic upheaval they faced the loss of their homesteads to creditors.
newly enfranchised blacks were the third group to which the republicans appealed.
blacks formed the vast majority of the republican rank and file in most states and were concerned mainly with education civil rights and landownership.
under the best of conditions these coalitions would have been difficult to maintain.
each group had its own distinct goals and did not fully support the aims of the other segments.
white yeomen for example had a deeply rooted resistance to black equality.
and for how long could one expect essentially conservative businessmen to support costly measures for the elevation or relief of the lower classes of either race.
in some states astute democratic politicians exploited these divisions by appealing to disaffected white republicans.
but during the relatively brief period when they were in power in the south varying from one to nine years depending on the state the republicans made some notable achievements.
they established on paper at least the souths first adequate systems of public education democratized state and local government and appropriated funds for an enormous expansion of public services and responsibilities.
as important as these social and political reforms were they took second place to the republicans major effort to foster economic development and restore southern prosperity by subsidizing the construction of railroads and other internal improvements.
but the policy of aiding railroads turned out to be disastrous even though it addressed the regions real economic needs and was initially very popular.
extravagance corruption and routes laid out in response to local political pressure rather than on sound economic grounds made for an increasing burden of public debt and taxation.
the policy did not produce the promised payoff of efficient cheap transportation.
subsidized railroads frequently went bankrupt reconstructing southern society leaving the taxpayers holding the bag.
when the panic of 1873 brought many southern state governments to the verge of bankruptcy and railroad building came to an end it was clear the republicans gospel of prosperity through state aid to private enterprise had failed miserably.
their political opponents many of whom had originally favored such policies now saw an opportunity to take advantage of the situation by charging that republicans had ruined the southern economy.
in general the radical regimes failed to conduct public business honestly and efficiently.
embezzlement of public funds and bribery of state lawmakers or officials were common occurrences.
state debts and tax burdens rose enormously mainly because governments had undertaken heavy new responsibilities but partly because of waste and graft.
the situation varied from state to state ruling cliques in louisiana and south carolina were guilty of much wrongdoing yet mississippi had a relatively honest and frugal regime.
furthermore southern corruption was not exceptional nor was it a special result of the extension of suffrage to uneducated african americans as critics of radical reconstruction have claimed.
it was part of a national pattern during an era when private interests considered buying government favors to be a part of the cost of doing business and many politicians expected to profit by obliging them.
blacks bore only a limited responsibility for the dishonesty of the radical governments.
although sixteen african americans served in congress two in the senate between 1869 and 1880 only in south carolina did blacks constitute a majority of even one house of the state legislature.
furthermore no black governors were elected during reconstruction although pinkney b s pinchback served for a time as acting governor of louisiana.
the biggest grafters were opportunistic whites.
some of the most notorious were carpetbaggers but others were native southerners.
businessmen offering bribes included members of the prewar gentry who were staunch opponents of radical programs.
some black legislators went with the tide and accepted loans from those railroad lobbyists who would pay most for their votes but the same men could usually be depended on to vote the will of their constituents on civil rights or educational issues.
if blacks served or supported corrupt and wasteful regimes it was because the alternative was dire.
although the democrats or conservatives as they called themselves in some states made sporadic efforts to attract african american voters it was clear that if they won control they would attempt to strip blacks of their civil and political rights.
but opponents of radical reconstruction were able to capitalize on racial prejudice and persuade many americans that good government was synonymous with white supremacy.
contrary to myth the small number of african americans elected to state or national office during reconstruction demonstrated on the average more integrity and competence than their white counterparts.
most were fairly well educated having been free or unusually privileged slaves before the war.
among the most capable were robert smalls whose career was described earlier blanche k bruce of mississippi elected to the u s senate in 1874 after rising to deserved prominence in the republican party of his home state congressman robert brown elliott of south carolina an adroit politician who was also a consistent champion of civil rights and congressman james t rapier of alabama who stirred congress and the nation in 1873 with his eloquent appeals for federal aid to southern education and new laws to enforce equal rights for african americans.
claiming public and private rights as important as party politics to the changing political culture of the reconstruction south were the ways that freed slaves claimed rights for themselves.
they did so not only in negotiations with employers and in public meetings and convention halls but also through the institutions they created and perhaps most important the households they formed.
as one black corporal in the union army told an audience of ex slaves the marriage covenant is at the foundation of all our rights.
in slavery we could not have legalized marriage now we have it.
and we shall be established as a people through marriage historian laura edwards tells us african americans claimed citizenship.
freedmen hoped that marriage would allow them to take on the rights that accrued to the independent head of a household not only political rights but the right to control the labor of wives and children for the first time.
while they were in effect in 1865 1866 many states black codes included apprenticeship provisions providing for freed children to be apprenticed by courts to some white person with preference given to former masters if their parents were paupers unemployed of bad character or even simply if it were found to be better for the habits and comfort of a child ex slaves struggled to win their children back from what often amounted to reenslavement.
freedpeople challenged the apprenticeship system in county courts and through the freedmens bureau.
as one group of petitioners from maryland asserted our homes are invaded and our little ones seized at the family fireside while many former slaves lined up eagerly to formalize their marriages many also retained their own definitions of marriage and defied the efforts of the freedmens bureau to use the marriage relation as a disciplinary tool.
perhaps as many as 50 percent of ex slaves chose not to marry legally and whites criticized them heavily for it.
african american leaders worried about this refusal to follow white norms.
the army corporal who had described marriage as the foundation of all our rights urged his audience let us conduct ourselves worthy of such a blessing and all the people will respect us yet many poor blacks continued to recognize as husband and wife people who cared for and supported one another without benefit of legal sanction.
the new legal system punished couples who deviated from the legal norm through laws against bastardy adultery and fornication.
furthermore the freedmens bureau made the marriage of freedpeople a priority because as historian noralee frankel explained the agencys overriding concern was keeping blacks from depending on the federal government for economic assistance once married the husband became legally responsible for his familys support.
some ex slaves used institutions formerly closed to them like the courts to assert rights against white people as well as other blacks suing over domestic violence child support assault and debt.
freed women sued their husbands for desertion and alimony in order to enlist the freedmens bureau to help them claim property from men.
other ex slaves mobilized kin networks and other community resources to make claims on property and family.
chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction watch the video the schools that the civil war and reconstruction created a freedmens school one of the more successful endeavors supported by the freedmens bureau.
the bureau working with teachers from northern abolitionist and missionary societies founded thousands of schools for freed slaves and poor whites.
immediately after the war freed people flocked to create institutions that had been denied to them under slavery churches fraternal and benevolent associations political organizations and schools.
many joined all black denominations such as the african methodist episcopal church which provided freedom from white dominance and a more congenial style of worship.
black women formed all black chapters of organizations such as the womens christian temperance union and their own womens clubs to oppose lynching and work for uplift in the black community.
the freed slaves were thirsty for education.
it is estimated that in 1865 less than two percent of black school age children in the south attended school and only five percent could read.
according to charlotte forten a black teacher from philadelphia i never before saw children so eager to learn.
the majority learn with wonderful rapidity.
many of the grown people are desirous of learning to read.
it is wonderful how a people who have been so long crushed to the earth so embruted as these have been.
can have so great a desire for knowledge and such a capability of sustaining it the first schools for freed people were all black institutions established by the freedmens bureau and various northern missionary societies.
the teachers included both black and white northerners and educated southern blacks who were free before emancipation.
at the time having been denied all education during the antebellum period most blacks viewed separate schooling as an opportunity rather than as a form of discrimination.
however these schools were precursors to the segregated public school systems first instituted by republican governments.
by 1870 the freedmens bureau was sponsoring 4 239 schools and employing 9 300 teachers to teach 247 000 pupils in these allblack schools.
only in city schools of new orleans and at the university of south carolina were there serious attempts during reconstruction to bring white and black students together in the same classrooms.
both the freedmens bureau and the northern missionary society also established black colleges which faced many struggles.
the nondenominational private schools stressed industrial training but those supported by black churches emphasized a liberal arts education.
in a variety of ways african american men and women during reconstruction asserted freedom in the private realm as well as the public sphere by claiming rights to their own families and building their own institutions.
they did so despite the vigorous retreat from reconstruction efforts of their former masters as well as the new government agencies to control their private lives and shape their new identities as husbands wives and citizens.
retreat from reconstruction why did reconstruction end.
the era of reconstruction began coming to an end almost before it got started.
although it was only a scant three years from the end of the civil war the impeachment crisis of 1868 represented the high point of popular interest in reconstruction issues.
that year ulysses s grant was elected president.
many historians blame grant for the corruption of his administration and for the inconsistency and failure of his southern policy.
he had neither the vision nor the sense of duty to tackle the difficult challenges the nation faced.
from 1868 on political issues other than southern reconstruction moved to the forefront of national politics and the plight of african americans in the south receded in white consciousness.
be the backbone of the greenback movement for years to come now joined the soft money clamor for the first time.
responding to the money and credit crunch congress moved in 1874 to authorize a modest issue of new greenbacks.
but grant influenced by the opinions of hard money financiers vetoed the bill.
in 1875 congress led by senator john sherman of ohio enacted the specie resumption act which provided for a limited reduction of greenbacks leading to full resumption of specie payments by january 1 1879.
its action was widely interpreted as deflation in the midst of depression.
farmers and workers who were already suffering acutely from deflation reacted with dismay and anger.
the democratic party could not capitalize adequately on these sentiments because of the influence of its own hard money faction and in 1876 an independent greenback party entered the national political arena.
the partys nominee for president peter cooper received an insignificant number of votes but in 1878 the greenback labor party polled more than a million votes and elected fourteen congressmen.
the greenbackers were able to keep the money issue alive into the following decade.
rise of the money question in the years immediately following the civil war another issue already competing for public attention was the money question whether to allow greenbacks paper money issued during the war to continue to circulate or to return to sound or hard money meaning gold or silver.
supporters of paper money known as greenbackers were strongest in the credit hungry west and among expansion minded manufacturers.
defenders of hard money were mostly the commercial and financial interests in the east they received crucial support from intellectuals who regarded government sponsored inflation as immoral or contrary to the natural laws of classical economics.
in 1868 the money question surged briefly to the forefront of national politics.
faced with a business recession blamed on the johnson administrations policy of contracting the currency congress voted to stop the retirement of greenbacks.
the democratic party responding to midwestern pressure included in its platform for the 1868 national election a plan calling for the redemption of much of the civil war debt in greenbacks rather than gold.
yet they nominated for president a sound money supporter so that the greenback question never became an issue in the 1868 presidential campaign.
grant already a popular general won the election handily with the help of the republican dominated southern states.
in 1869 and 1870 a republican controlled congress passed laws that assured payment in gold to most bondholders but eased the burden of the huge civil war debt by exchanging bonds that were soon coming due for those that would not be payable for ten fifteen or thirty years.
in this way the public credit was protected.
still unresolved however was the problem of what to do about the 356 million in greenbacks that remained in circulation.
hard money proponents wanted to retire them quickly inflationists thought more should be issued to stimulate the economy.
the grant administration followed the middle course of allowing the greenbacks to float until economic expansion would bring them to a par with gold thus permitting a painless return to specie payments.
but the panic of 1873 which brought much of the economy to its knees led to a revival of agitation to inflate the currency.
debt ridden farmers who would the election of 1868 candidate grant seymour not voted party republican democratic popular vote 3 012 833 2 703 249 electoral vote unreconstructed states did not participate in the election.
final efforts of reconstruction the republican effort to make equal rights for blacks the law of the land culminated in the fifteenth amendment.
passed by congress in 1869 and ratified by the states in 1870 the amendment prohibited any state from denying a male citizen the right to vote because of race color or previous condition of servitude.
a more radical version requiring universal manhood suffrage was rejected partly because it departed too sharply from traditional views of federal state relations.
states therefore could still limit the suffrage by imposing literacy tests property qualifications or poll taxes allegedly applying to all racial groups such devices would eventually be used to strip southern blacks of the right to vote.
but the makers of the amendment did not foresee this result.
they believed their action would prevent future congresses or southern constitutional conventions from repealing or nullifying the provisions for black male suffrage included in the reconstruction acts.
a secondary aim was to enfranchise african americans in those northern states that still denied them the vote.
many feminists were bitterly disappointed that the amendment did not also extend the vote to women as well as freedmen.
a militant wing of the womens rights movement led by elizabeth cady stanton and susan b anthony was so angered that the constitution was being amended in a way that in effect made gender a qualification for voting that they campaigned against ratification of the fifteenth amendment.
another group of feminists led by lucy stone supported the amendment on the grounds that chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction view the closer look the first vote the first vote drawn by a h ward for harpers weekly november 16 1867 this was the negros hour and that women could afford to wait a few years for the vote.
this disagreement divided the woman suffrage movement for a generation to come.
the grant administration was charged with enforcing the amendment and protecting black mens voting rights in the reconstructed states.
since survival of the republican regimes depended on african american support political partisanship dictated federal action even though the norths emotional and ideological commitment to black citizenship was waning.
a reign of terror against blacks between 1868 and 1872 the main threat to southern republican regimes came from the ku klux klan and other secret societies bent on restoring white supremacy by intimidating blacks who sought to exercise their political rights.
first organized in tennessee in 1866 the klan spread rapidly to other states adopting increasingly lawless and brutal tactics.
a grassroots vigilante movement and not a centralized conspiracy the klan thrived on local initiative and gained support from whites of all social classes.
its secrecy decentralization popular support and utter ruthlessness made it very difficult to suppress.
as soon as blacks had been granted the right to vote hooded night riders began to visit the cabins of those who were known to be active republicans some victims were only threatened but others were whipped or even murdered.
one black georgian related a typical incident they broke my door open took me out of bed took me to the woods and whipped me three hours or more and left me for dead.
they said to me do you think you will vote for another damned radical ticket such methods were first used effectively in the presidential election of 1868.
grant lost in louisiana and georgia mainly because the klan or the knights of the white camellia as the louisiana variant was called launched a reign of terror to prevent prospective black voters from exercising their rights.
in louisiana political violence claimed more than a thousand lives and in arkansas which grant managed to carry more than two hundred republicans including a congressman were assassinated.
thereafter klan terrorism was directed mainly at republican state governments.
virtual insurrections broke out in arkansas tennessee north carolina and parts of south carolina.
republican governors called out the state militia to fight the klan but only the arkansas militia succeeded in bringing it to heel.
in tennessee north carolina and georgia klan activities helped undermine republican control thus allowing the democrats to come to power in all of these states by 1870.
faced with the violent overthrow of the southern republican party congress and the grant administration were forced to act.
a series of laws passed in 1870 1871 sought to enforce the fifteenth amendment by providing federal protection for black suffrage and authorizing use of the army against the klan.
the force acts also known as the ku klux klan acts made interference with voting rights a federal crime and established provisions for government supervision of elections.
in addition the legislation empowered the president to call out troops and suspend the writ of habeas corpus to quell insurrection.
in 1871 1872 thousands of suspected klansmen were arrested by the military or u s marshals and the writ was suspended in nine counties of south carolina that had been virtually taken over by the secret order.
although most of the retreat from reconstruction read the document hannah irwin describes ku klux klan ride traditional democratic and agrarian hostility to government promotion of economic development.
consequently they were able to bring back to the polls a portion of the white electorate mostly small farmers who had not been turning out because they were alienated by the leaderships apparent concessions to yankee ideas.
this new and more effective electoral strategy dovetailed with a resurgence of violence meant to reduce republican especially black republican voting.
the new reign of terror differed from the previously discussed klan episode its agents no longer wore masks but acted quite openly.
they were effective because the northern public was increasingly disenchanted with federal intervention on behalf of what were widely viewed as corrupt and tottering republican regimes.
grant used force in the south for the last time in 1874 when an overt paramilitary organization in louisiana known as the white league tried to overthrow a republican government accused of stealing an election.
when another unofficial militia in mississippi instigated a series of bloody race riots prior to the state elections of 1875 grant refused the governors request for federal troops.
as a result black voters were successfully intimidated one county registered only seven republican votes where there had been a black majority of two thousand and mississippi fell to the democratic conservatives.
according to one account grant decided to withhold troops because he had been warned that intervention might cost the republicans the crucial state of ohio in the same off year elections.
by 1876 republicans held on to only three southern states south carolina louisiana and florida.
partly because of grants hesitant and inconsistent use of presidential power but mainly because the northern electorate would no longer tolerate military action to sustain republican governments and black voting rights radical reconstruction was falling into total eclipse.
spoilsmen vs reformers this 1868 photograph shows typical regalia of members of the ku klux klan a secret white supremacist organization.
before elections hooded klansmen terrorized african americans to discourage them from voting.
accused klansmen were never brought to trial were acquitted or received suspended sentences the enforcement effort was vigorous enough to put a damper on hooded terrorism and ensure relatively fair and peaceful elections in 1872.
a heavy black turnout in these elections enabled the republicans to hold on to power in most states of the deep south despite efforts of the democratic conservative opposition to cut into the republican vote by taking moderate positions on racial and economic issues.
this setback prompted the democratic conservatives to make a significant change in their strategy and ideology.
no longer did they try to take votes away from the republicans by proclaiming support for black suffrage and government aid to business.
instead they began to appeal openly to white supremacy and to the one reason grant found it increasingly difficult to take strong action to protect southern republicans was the bad odor surrounding his stewardship of the federal government and the republican party.
reformers charged that a corrupt national administration was propping up bad governments in the south for personal and partisan advantage.
when grant intervened in louisiana in 1872 on behalf of a republican faction headed by his wifes brother inlaw who controlled federal patronage as collector of customs in new orleans it created the appearance of corruption although grant justified it on the ground that the opposing faction was blocking civil rights legislation for blacks.
the republican party in the grant era was losing the idealism and high purpose associated with the crusade against slavery.
by the beginning of the 1870s the men who had been the conscience of the party old line radicals such as thaddeus stevens charles sumner and benjamin wade were either dead out of office or at odds with the administration.
new leaders of a different stamp whom historians have dubbed spoilsmen or politicos were taking their place.
when he made common cause with hard boiled manipulators such as senators roscoe conkling of new york and james g blaine of maine grant lost credibility with reform minded republicans.
during grants first administration an aura of scandal surrounded the white house but did not directly implicate the chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction president.
in 1869 the financial buccaneer jay gould enlisted the aid of a brother in law of grant to further his fantastic scheme to corner the gold market.
gould failed in the attempt but he did manage to save himself and come away with a huge profit.
grants first term vice president schuyler colfax of indiana was directly involved in the notorious crdit mobilier scandal.
crdit mobilier was a construction company that actually served as a fraudulent device for siphoning off profits that should have gone to the stockholders of the union pacific railroad which was the beneficiary of massive federal land grants.
to forestall government inquiry into this arrangement crdit mobilier stock was distributed to influential congressmen including colfax who was speaker of the house before he was elected vice president.
the whole business came to light just before the campaign of 1872.
the election of 1872 candidate grant greeley party republican democratic and liberal republican popular vote electoral vote 3 597 132 286 2 834 125 greeley died before the electoral college voted.
out of a total of 366 electoral votes.
greeleys votes were divided among the four minor candidates.
republicans who could not tolerate such corruption or had other grievances against the administration broke with grant in 1872 and formed a third party committed to honest government and reconciliation between the north and the south.
led initially by high minded reformers such as senator carl schurz of missouri the liberal republicans endorsed reform of the civil service to curb the corruption breeding patronage system and advocated laissez faire economic policies which meant low tariffs an end to government subsidies for railroads and hard money.
despite their rhetoric of idealism and reform the liberal republicans were extremely conservative in their notions of what government should do to assure justice for blacks and other underprivileged americans.
the liberal republicans national convention nominated horace greeley editor of the respected new york tribune.
this was a curious and divisive choice since greeley was at odds with the founders of the movement on the tariff question and was indifferent to civil service reform.
the democrats also nominated greeley mainly because he promised to end radical reconstruction by restoring self government to the south.
but the journalist turned out to be a poor campaigner who failed to inspire enthusiasm from lifelong supporters of either party.
most republicans stuck with grant despite the corruption issue because they still could not stomach the idea of ex rebels returning to power in the south.
many democrats recalling greeleys previous record as a staunch republican simply stayed away from the polls.
the result was a decisive victory for grant whose 56 percent of the popular vote was the highest percentage won by any candidate between andrew jackson and theodore roosevelt.
grants second administration seemed to bear out the reformers worst suspicions about corruption in high places.
in 1875 the public learned that federal revenue offi cials had conspired with distillers to defraud the government of millions of dollars in liquor taxes.
grants private secretary orville e babcock was indicted as a member of the whiskey ring and was saved from conviction only by the presidents personal intercession.
the next year grants secretary of war william w belknap was impeached by the house after an investigation revealed he had taken bribes for the sale of indian trading posts.
he avoided conviction in the senate only by resigning from office before his trial.
grant fought hard to protect belknap to the point of participating in what a later generation might call a cover up.
there is no evidence that grant profited personally from any of the misdeeds of his subordinates.
yet he is not entirely without blame for the corruption in his administration.
he failed to take firm action against the malefactors and even after their guilt had been clearly established he sometimes tried to shield them from justice.
ulysses s grant was the only president between jackson and wilson to serve two full and consecutive terms.
but unlike other chief executives so favored by the electorate grant is commonly regarded as a failure.
although the problems he faced would have challenged any president the shame of grants administration was that he made loyalty to old friends a higher priority than civil rights or sound economic principles.
reunion and the new south who benefited and who suffered from the reconciliation of the north and south.
congressional reconstruction prolonged the sense of sectional division and conflict for a dozen years after the guns had fallen silent.
its final liquidation in 1877 opened the way to a reconciliation of north and south.
but the costs of reunion were high for less privileged groups in the south.
the civil and political rights of african americans left unprotected were progressively and relentlessly stripped away by white supremacist regimes.
lower class whites saw their interests sacrificed to those of capitalists and landlords.
despite the rhetoric hailing a prosperous new south the region remained poor and open to exploitation by northern business interests.
the compromise of 1877 the election of 1876 pitted rutherford b hayes of ohio a republican governor untainted by the scandals of the grant era against governor samuel j tilden of new york a democratic reformer who had battled against tammany hall and the tweed ring.
honest government was apparently the electorates highest priority.
when the returns came in tilden had clearly won the popular vote and seemed likely to win a narrow victory in the electoral college.
but the result was placed in doubt when the returns from the three southern states still controlled by the republicans south carolina florida and louisiana were contested.
if hayes were to be awarded these three states plus one contested electoral vote in oregon republican strategists realized he would triumph in the electoral college by a single vote.
the outcome of the election remained undecided for months plunging the nation into a major political crisis.
to resolve the reunion and the new south with southern democratic acquiescence the filibuster was broken and hayes took the oath of office.
he immediately ordered the army not to resist a democratic takeover of state governments in south carolina and louisiana.
thus fell the last of the radical governments and the entire south was firmly under the control of white democrats.
the trauma of the war and reconstruction had destroyed the chances for a renewal of two party competition among white southerners.
northern republicans soon reverted to denouncing the south for its suppression of black suffrage.
but this waving of the bloody shirt which also served as a reminder of the war and northern casualties quickly degenerated into a campaign ritual aimed at northern voters who could still be moved by sectional antagonism.
election of 1876 uncontested electoral vote electoral total popular vote republican rutherford b hayes 4 036 298 democratic samuel j tilden 4 300 590 greenback peter cooper 81 737 8 418 625 wash terr.
montana terr.
idaho terr.
dakota terr.
new mexico terr.
indian terr.
7 utah terr.
8 4 contested result settled by special election commission in favor of hayes.
impasse congress appointed a special electoral commission of fifteen members to determine who would receive the votes of the disputed states.
originally composed of seven democrats seven republicans and an independent the commission fell under republican control when the independent member resigned to run for the senate and a republican was appointed to take his place.
the commission split along party lines and voted eight to seven to award hayes all of the disputed votes.
but this decision still had to be ratified by both houses of congress.
the republican dominated senate readily approved it but the democrats in the house planned a filibuster to delay the final counting of the electoral votes until after inauguration day.
if the filibuster succeeded neither candidate would have a majority and as provided in the constitution the election would be decided by the house where the democrats controlled enough states to elect tilden.
to ensure hayess election republican leaders negotiated secretly with conservative southern democrats some of whom seemed willing to abandon the filibuster if the last troops were withdrawn and home rule restored to the south.
eventually an informal bargain was struck which historians have dubbed the compromise of 1877.
what precisely was agreed to and by whom remains a matter of dispute but one thing at least was understood by both sides hayes would be president and southern blacks would be abandoned to their fate.
in a sense hayes did not concede anything because he had already decided to end federal support for the crumbling radical regimes.
but southern negotiators were heartened by firm assurances that this would indeed be the policy.
some also were influenced by vaguer promises involving federal support for southern railroads and internal improvements.
redeeming a new south the men who came to power after radical reconstruction fell in one southern state after another are usually referred to as the redeemers.
they had differing backgrounds and previous loyalties.
some were members of the old souths ruling planter class who had warmly supported secession and now sought to reestablish the old order with as few changes as possible.
others of middle class origin or outlook favored commercial and industrial interests over agrarian groups and called for a new south committed to diversified economic development.
a third group was professional politicians bending with the prevailing winds such as joseph e brown of georgia who had been a secessionist a wartime governor and a leading scalawag republican before becoming a democratic redeemer.
although historians have tried to assign the redeemers a single coherent ideology or view of the world and have debated whether it was old south agrarianism or new south industrialism they endorsed these leaders can perhaps best be understood as power brokers mediating among the dominant interest groups of the south in ways that served their own political advantage.
in many ways the rings that they established on the state and county level were analogous to the political machines developing at the same time in northern cities.
redeemers did however agree on and endorse two basic principles laissez faire and white supremacy.
laissez faire the notion that government should be limited and should not intervene openly and directly in the economy could unite planters frustrated at seeing direct state support going to businessmen and capitalist promoters who had come to realize that low taxes and freedom from government regulation were even more advantageous than state subsidies.
it soon became clear that the redeemers responded only to privileged and entrenched interest groups especially landlords merchants and industrialists and offered little or nothing to tenants small farmers and working people.
as industrialization began to gather steam in the 1880s democratic regimes became increasingly accommodating to manufacturing interests and hospitable to agents of northern capital who were gaining control of the souths transportation system and its extractive industries.
white supremacy was the principal rallying cry that brought the redeemers to power in the first place.
once in office they found they could stay there by charging that opponents of ruling democratic cliques were trying to divide the white mans party and open the way for a return to black domination appeals to racism could also deflect attention from the economic grievances of groups without political clout.
complete the assignment forty acres and a mule on myhistorylab feature essay forty acres and a mule serving as a kind of dress rehearsal for reconstruction the port royal experiment provides a glimpse of what might have occurred had the freed slaves actually been given forty acres and a mule f ew dreams have died harder than the desire of the freed slaves to own the land on which they labored.
the hope of forty acres and a mule for every freedman was raised by general william tecumseh shermans special field order 15 in january 1865 which decreed that 40 acre plots of abandoned and confiscated land would be set aside for ex slaves.
yet the order was in effect for less than a year and few slaves realized the dream of land ownership after emancipation.
even before shermans order however there were experiments across the south with free black labor on plantations formerly held by slaveholders.
two of these so called rehearsals for reconstruction at port royal south carolina and davis bend mississippi show how reconstruction might have developed had true land reform been implemented.
the efforts to resettle freed people on abandoned plantations began out of the armys practical concern to rid itself of the many runaways who were following it and crowding its camps.
in november 1861 general benjamin f butler in a novel interpretation of international law declared runaway slaves to be contraband of war whom the union army could rightfully seize from their rebel owners.
the port royal experiment began as a solution to the problem of what to do with the contrabands.
when the u s navy occupied the sea islands of south carolina and georgia in november 1861 the whites fled leaving behind 10 000 slaves who already organized their own labor according to the task system often with black drivers rather than white overseers.
the abandoned slaves sacked the plantation houses and cotton gins but had little inclination to return to the fields and plant cotton.
to get the black laborers back to the fields as soon as possible treasury secretary salmon chase recruited edward l pierce to administer port royal and show the world that free labor could produce as much cotton as slave labor.
a motley crew of military officers treasury agents investors and idealistic teachers and missionaries known as gideons band followed pierce south.
tension soon arose among these groups.
for example edward atkinson agent for six boston cotton manufacturers was motivated by both anti slavery sentiments and profit.
he wrote the pamphlet cheap cotton by free labor to prove that free labor would be more profitable than slavery.
by contrast gideons band were young men fresh from harvard yale and brown and twelve women and included clerks doctors divinitystudents professors and teachers underground railway agents and socialist.
unitarians free thinkers methodists straitlaced and the other evangelical sects all were motivated by abolitionism and idealism about free labor none knew anything about cotton production which led to conflicts with plantation superintendents like atkinson and edward philbrick.
the freed slaves believed they had a right to the land on which they had lived and worked for so long without compensation.
they celebrated freedom from white overseers and sang no more peck o corn for me no more no more.
no more drivers lash for me.
no more pint o salt for me.
no more hundred lash for me.
no more mistress call for me no more no more.
many thousands go.
despite the conflicts between the idealists and the capitalists and the ex slaves preference for raising food crops rather than cotton the port royal experiment was a qualified success even for the cotton agents.
although cotton yields were lower than in the 1850s because of the wartime loss of fine seed and competition from cotton in egypt profits were high and free labor was nearly as productive as slave labor.
philbrick made an 80 000 profit on a 40 000 investment.
even the philanthropic gideonities earned 6 000 7 000 each.
another site of black self sufficiency was davis bend the mississippi plantation belonging to confederate president jefferson daviss brother joseph.
joseph davis had administered it as a model plantation with limited self government by slaves including a slave jury for criminal offenses and unusual material comforts.
by 1850 one slave benjamin montgomery was running the plantation store managing its cotton gin and keeping the profits.
after whites fled southern mississippi in 1863 general ulysses s grant decided that davis bend should become a negro paradise and the land was leased directly to former slaves who paid only for tools mules and rations.
they set up an even more comprehensive self government that included an elected sheriff and judges.
davis bend was an impressive success.
by 1865 laborers there had produced nearly 2 000 bales of cotton and earned a profit of 160 000.
during reconstruction davis bend also produced several elected black officials.
on january 12 1865 secretary of war edwin stanton and general sherman met with twenty black leaders to hear the concerns of the freed people.
the next day sherman issued special field order 15 designating the whole sea island region for exclusive negro settlement yet the experiment on sherman land ended almost before it began.
president andrew johnson rescinded shermans order in the summer of 1865 and restored the land to its former owners.
while the port royal experiment did lead to limited black land ownership education and strong communities it was not a rehearsal for reconstruction for the south as a whole.
instead the reconstruction south followed the model of the occupied deep south during the war which had maintained large white owned plantations with the freed people working in gangs under coercive oneyear contracts.
when general oliver o howard told the freed people on the sea islands that the land was to be restored to its white owners they were bitter we want homesteads we were promised homesteads.
if the government.
now takes away from them all right to the soil they stand upon save such as they can get by again working for your late and their all time enemies.
we are left in a more unpleasant condition than our former one.
this is not the condition of really freemen some did not leave without a struggle.
black squatters told edisto island owners who returned in february 1866 you have better go back to charleston and go to work there and if you can do nothing else you can pick oysters and earn your living as the loyal people have done by the sweat of their brows even davis bend was restored to joseph davis although he sold it on long term credit to ben montgomery and his two sons.
davis was a lenient creditor and montgomery had a measure of prosperity through the mid1870s until economic reversals led him to bankruptcy in 1879.
by then joseph davis had died and his heirs were less generous the plantation was sold at foreclosure auction and the dream of large scale black self sufficiency in mississippi ended for generations.
questions for discussion 1.
how were the attempts to give land to the freed slaves in the south related to the union war effort.
why did land reform under the port royal experiment and at davis bend ultimately fail.
chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction the new governments were more economical than those of reconstruction mainly because they cut back drastically on appropriations for schools and other needed public services.
but they were scarcely more honest embezzlement of funds and bribery of officials continued to occur to an alarming extent.
louisiana for example suffered for decades from the flagrant corruption associated with a state chartered lottery.
the redeemer regimes of the late 1870s and 1880s badly neglected the interests of small white farmers.
whites and blacks were suffering from the notorious crop lien system that gave local merchants who advanced credit at high rates of interest during the growing season the right to take possession of the harvested crop on terms that buried farmers deeper and deeper in debt.
as a result increasing numbers of whites lost title to their homesteads and were reduced to tenancy.
when a depression of world cotton prices added to the burden of a ruinous credit system agrarian protesters began to challenge the ruling elite first through the southern farmers alliance of the late 1880s and then by supporting its political descendant the populist party of the 1890s see chapter 20.
the rise of jim crow african americans bore the greatest hardships imposed by the new order.
from 1876 through the first decade of the twentieth century southern states imposed a series of restrictions on black civil rights known as jim crow laws.
the term jim crow came from an antebellum minstrel show figure first popularized by thomas daddy rice who blackened his face and sang a song called jump jim crow by the 1850s jim crow was a familiar figure in minstrel shows and had become a synonym for black or negro person in popular white speech.
it was a short step to referring to segregated railroad cars for black people as jim crow cars.
while segregation and disfranchisement began as informal arrangements in the immediate aftermath of the civil war they culminated in a legal regime of separation and exclusion that took firm hold in the 1890s.
the rise of jim crow in the political arena was especially bitter for southern blacks who realized that only political power could ensure other rights.
the redeemers promised as part of the understanding that led to the end of federal intervention in 1877 that they would respect the rights of blacks as set forth in the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments.
governor wade hampton of south carolina was especially vocal in pledging that african americans would not be reduced to second class citizenship by the new regimes.
but when blacks tried to vote republican in the redeemed states they encountered renewed violence and intimidation.
bulldozing african american voters remained common practice in state elections during the late 1870s and early 1880s those blacks who withstood the threat of losing their jobs or being evicted from tenant farms if they voted for the party of lincoln were visited at night and literally whipped into line.
the message was clear vote democratic or vote not at all.
black and white men serve on a jury together during reconstruction but they segregate themselves.
conclusion henry mcneal turner and the unfinished revolution furthermore white democrats now controlled the electoral machinery and were able to manipulate the black vote by stuffing ballot boxes discarding unwanted votes or reporting fraudulent totals.
some states also imposed complicated new voting requirements to discourage black participation.
full scale disfranchisement did not occur until literacy tests and other legalized obstacles to voting were imposed in the period from 1890 to 1910 but by that time less formal and comprehensive methods had already made a mockery of the fifteenth amendment.
nevertheless blacks continued to vote freely in some localities until the 1890s a few districts like the one robert smalls represented even elected black republicans to congress during the immediate post reconstruction period.
the last of these representative george h white of north carolina served until 1901.
his farewell address eloquently conveyed the agony of southern blacks in the era of jim crow strict segregation watch the video the promise and failure of reconstruction these parting words are in behalf of an outraged heartbroken bruised and bleeding but god fearing people faithful industrious loyal people rising people full of potential force.
the only apology that i have to make for the earnestness with which i have spoken is that i am pleading for the life the liberty the future happiness and manhood suffrage of one eighth of the entire population of the united states.
conclusion henry mcneal turner and the unfinished revolution the career of henry mcneal turner sums up the bitter side of the black experience in the south during and after reconstruction.
born free in south carolina in 1834 turner became a minister of the african methodist episcopal ame church just before the outbreak of the civil war.
during the war he recruited african americans for the union army and later served as chaplain for black troops.
after the fighting was over he went to georgia to work for the freedmens bureau but encountered racial discrimination from white bureau officers and left government service for church work and reconstruction politics.
elected to the 1867 georgia constitutional convention and to the state legislature in 1868 he was one of a number of black clergymen who assumed leadership roles among the freedmen.
but whites won control of the georgia legislature and expelled all the black members.
turners reaction was an angry speech in which he proclaimed that white men were never to be trusted.
as the inhabitant of a state in which blacks never gained the degree of power that they achieved in some other parts of the south turner was one of the first black leaders to see the failure of reconstruction as the betrayal of african american hopes for citizenship.
becoming a bishop of the ame church in 1880 turner emerged as the late nineteenth centurys leading proponent of black emigration to africa.
because he believed that white americans were so deeply prejudiced against blacks that they would never grant them equal rights turner became an early advocate of black nationalism and a total separation of the races.
emigration became a popular movement among southern blacks who were in january of 1865 general sherman s field order 15 set aside 400 000 acres for use by former slaves.
with help from gideons band a ragtag group of northern teachers and missionaries as many as 40 000 ex slaves achieved some success at cotton planting until the new president johnson returned the land to its former owners.
especially hard hit by terror and oppression just after the end of reconstruction.
still a majority of blacks in the nation as a whole and even in turners own church refused to give up on the hope of eventual equality in america.
but bishop turners anger and despair were the understandable responses of a proud man to the way that he and his fellow african americans had been treated in the post civil war period.
by the late 1880s the wounds of the civil war were healing and white americans were seized by the spirit of sectional reconciliation.
union and confederate veterans were tenting together and celebrating their common americanism.
reunion was becoming a cultural as well as political reality.
but whites could come back together only because northerners had tacitly agreed to give southerners a free hand in their efforts to reduce blacks to a new form of servitude.
the outraged heart broken bruised and bleeding african americans of the south paid the heaviest price for sectional reunion.
reconstruction remained an unfinished revolution it would be another century before african americans rose up once more to demand full civil and political rights.
chapter 16 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction on myhistorylab time line 1863 lincoln sets forth 10 percent reconstruction plan 1864 wade davis bill passes congress but is pocket1865 vetoed by lincoln johnson moves to reconstruct the south on his own initiative congress refuses to seat representatives and senators elected from states reestablished under presidential plan december johnson vetoes freedmens bureau bill february johnson vetoes civil rights act it passes over his veto april congress passes fourteenth amendment june republicans increase their congressional majority in the fall elections first reconstruction act is passed over johnsons veto march johnson is impeached he avoids conviction by one vote february may southern blacks vote and serve in constitutional conventions grant wins presidential election defeating horatio seymour 1869 congress passes fifteenth amendment granting african americans the right to vote 1870 1871 congress passes ku klux klan acts to protect black voting rights in the south 1872 grant reelected president defeating horace greeley candidate of liberal republicans and democrats 1873 financial panic plunges nation into depression 1875 congress passes specie resumption act whiskey ring scandal exposed 1876 1877 disputed presidential election resolved in favor of republican hayes over democrat tilden 1877 compromise of 1877 ends military intervention in the south and causes fall of the last radical governments chapter review the president versus congress what conflicts arose among lincoln johnson and congress during reconstruction.
both lincoln and johnson had their own notions of how reconstruction should be governed.
radical republicans who sought more protection for black rights challenged lincolns ten percent plan.
later when johnson hesitated to renew the freedmens bureau and fight the black codes congress passed the fourteenth amendment to ensure equal rights to all americans.
p 368 retreat from reconstruction why did reconstruction end.
although intended to protect civil rights the fifteenth amendment allowed states to limit local suffrage through difficult voting prerequisites.
further the ku klux klan intimidated black voters and representation.
by 1876 these tactics had defeated the republicans in most southern states and reconstruction was nearly dead.
p 379 reunion and the new south reconstructing southern society what problems did southern society face during reconstruction.
the immediate problems facing the south were economic and physical devastation and providing for the mass of freed slaves.
while former slaveholders hoped to reduce ex slaves to conditions not unlike slavery northern republicans wanted to reorganize southern land and labor on a northern free labor model.
freedmens bureau agents emphasized that ex slaves had to sign contracts and work for wages.
the freed slaves hoped instead to own land.
sharecropping was a compromise.
p 374 who benefited and who suffered from the reconciliation of north and south.
reunion came at the expense of african americans.
the compromise of 1877 restored autonomous government in the south to resolve the 1876 election.
the north would no longer enforce unpopular civil rights allowing the redeemers to bring back laissez faire economics and restore white supremacy through the jim crow laws.
p 382 key terms and definitions ten percent plan reconstruction plan proposed by president abraham lincoln as a quick way to readmit the former confederate states.
it called for pardon of all southerners except confederate leaders and readmission to the union for any state after 10 percent of its voters signed a loyalty oath and the state abolished slavery.
p 368 radical republicans congressional republicans who insisted on black suffrage and federal protection of civil rights of african americans.
p 369 wade davis bill in 1864 congress passed the wade davis bill to counter lincolns ten percent plan for reconstruction.
the bill required that a majority of a former confederate states white male population take study resources a loyalty oath and guarantee equality for african americans.
president lincoln pocket vetoed the bill.
p 369 thirteenth amendment ratified in 1865 it prohibits slavery and involuntary servitude.
p 371 black codes laws passed by southern states immediately after the civil war to maintain white supremacy by restricting the rights of the newly freed slaves.
p 371 freedmens bureau agency established by congress in march 1865 to provide freedmen with shelter food and medical aid and to help them establish schools and find employment.
the bureau was dissolved in 1872 p 371 fourteenth amendment ratified in 1868 it provided citizenship to ex slaves after the civil war and constitutionally protected equal rights under the law for all citizens.
radical republicans used it to enact a congressional reconstruction policy in the former confederate states.
p 371 radical reconstruction the reconstruction acts of 1867 divided the south into five military districts.
they required the states to guarantee black male suffrage and to ratify the fourteenth amendment as a condition of their readmission to the union.
p 372 sharecropping after the civil war the southern states adopted a sharecropping system as a compromise between former slaves who wanted land of their own and former slave owners who needed labor.
the landowners provided land tools and seed to a farming family who in turn provided labor.
the resulting crop was divided between them with the farmers receiving a share of one third to one half of the crop.
p 375 fifteenth amendment ratified in 1870 it prohibits the denial or abridgment of the right to vote by the federal or state governments on the basis of race color or prior condition as a slave.
it was intended to guarantee african americans the right to vote in the south.
p 379 ku klux klan a secret terrorist society first organized in tennessee in 1866.
the original klans goals were to disfranchise african americans stop reconstruction and restore the prewar social order of the south.
the ku klux klan re formed in the twentieth century to promote white supremacy and combat aliens catholics and jews.
p 380 force acts designed to protect black voters in the south from the ku klux klan in 1870 1871 these laws placed state elections under federal jurisdiction and imposed fines and punished those guilty of interfering with any citizen exercising his right to vote.
p 380 compromise of 1877 compromise struck during the contested presidential election of 1876 in which democrats accepted the election of rutherford b hayes republican in exchange for the withdrawal of federal troops from the south and the end of reconstruction.
p 383 redeemers a loose coalition of prewar democrats confederate veterans and whigs who took over southern state governments in the 1870s supposedly redeeming them from the corruption of reconstruction.
p 383 jim crow laws segregation laws enacted by southern states after reconstruction.
p 386 critical thinking questions 1.
do you think reconstruction may have turned out differently had lincoln not been assassinated.
why was it difficult to enforce social and cultural changes using 3.
what role did local grassroots efforts play in reserving federal government policy.
how did people retain that much autonomy even under a strong federal government.
do you think the redemption of southern government was an inevitable military force.
backlash to reconstruction.
how could things have turned out differently.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 16 on myhistorylab retreat from reconstruction the president vs congress read the document smalls p 367 pearson profiles robert read the document thirteenth fourteenth and fifteenth amendment 1865 1868 1870 p 369 read the document code 1865 p 370 view the map the mississippi black reconstruction p 373 reconstructing southern society read the document 1882 p 375 a sharecrop contract watch the video the schools that the civil war and reconstruction created p 378 view the closer look the first vote p 380 read the document hannah irwin describes ku klux klan ride p 381 reunion and the new south complete the assignment mule p 384 forty acres and a watch the video the promise and failure of reconstruction p 387 indicates study plan media assignment the west exploiting an empire contents and learning objectives beyond the frontier pg.
391 the bonanza west pg.
403 what were the challenges of settling the country west of the mississippi.
why was the west a bonanza of dreams and get rich quick schemes.
crushing the native americans pg.
392 how did white americans crush the culture of the native americans as they moved west.
feature essay blacks in blue the buffalo soldiers in the west settlement of the west pg.
400 why did americans and others move to the west.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire lean bears changing west in 1863 federal indian agents took a delegation of cheyenne arapaho comanche kiowa and plains apache to visit the eastern united states hoping to impress them with the power of the white man.
the visitors were in fact impressed.
in new york city they stared at the tall buildings and crowded streets so different from the wide open plains with which they were accustomed.
they visited the museum of the great showman phineas t barnum who in turn put them on display.
in washington they met with president abraham lincoln.
lean bear a cheyenne chief assured lincoln that indians wanted peace but worried about the numbers of white people who were pouring into their country.
lincoln swore friendship said the indians would be better off if they began to farm and promised he would do his best to keep the peace.
but he said smiling at lean bear you know it is not always possible for any father to have his children do precisely as he wishes them to do lean bear who had children of his own understood what lincoln had had to say in washington at least in a way.
just a year later back on his own lands he watched as federal troops lincolns children approached his camp.
wearing a peace medal that lincoln had given him lean bear rode slowly toward the troops to once again offer his friendship.
when he was twenty yards away they opened fire then rode closer and fired again and again into his fallen body.
s lean bear had feared in the last three decades of the nineteenth century a flood of settlers ventured into the vast lands across the mississippi river.
prospectors searched for pay dirt railroads crisscrossed the continent eastern and foreign capitalists invested in cattle and land bonanzas and farmers took up the promise of free western lands.
in 1867 horace greeley editor of the new york tribune told new york citys unemployed if you strike off into the broad free west and make yourself a farm from uncle sams generous domain you will crowd nobody starve nobody and neither you nor your children need evermore beg for something to do with the end of the civil war white americans again claimed a special destiny to expand across the continent.
in the process they crushed the culture of the native americans and ignored the contributions of people of other races such as the chinese miners and laborers and the mexican herdsmen.
as millions moved west the states of colorado washington montana the dakotas idaho wyoming and utah were carved out of the lands across the mississippi.
at the turn of the century only arizona new mexico and oklahoma remained as territories.
the west became a great colonial empire harnessed to eastern capital and tied increasingly to national and international markets.
its raw materials sent east by wagon train and ship helped fuel eastern factories.
western economies relied heavily on the federal government which subsidized their railroads distributed their land and spent millions of dollars for the upkeep of soldiers and indians.
by the 1890s the lands beyond the mississippi had undergone substantial change.
in place of buffalo and unfenced vistas a kicking bear recorded the battle of the little bighorn in this pictograph.
there were cities and towns health resorts homesteads sheep ranches and in the arid regions the beginnings of the irrigated agriculture that would reshape the west in the twentieth century.
ghost towns abandoned farms and the scars in the earth left by miners and farmers spoke to the less favorable side of settlement.
as the new century dawned the west had become a place of conquest and exploitation as well as a mythic land of cowboys and quick fortunes.
beyond the frontier what were the challenges of settling the country west of the mississippi.
the line of white settlement had reached the edge of the missouri timber country by 1840.
beyond lay an enormous land of rolling prairies parched deserts and rugged majestic mountains.
emerging from the timber country travelers first encountered the great plains treeless nearly flat an endless sea of grassy hillocks extending from the mississippi river to the rocky mountains.
to the west of the great plains were the high plains rough semiarid rising gently to the foothills of the rocky mountains.
running from alaska to central new mexico the rockies presented a formidable barrier.
there were valuable beaver in the streams and gold near pikes peak.
but most travelers hurried through the northern passes emerging in the desolate basin of present day southern idaho and utah.
native americans lived there the ute paiute bannock and shoshone tribes surviving in the harsh environment by digging for roots and gathering seeds and berries.
in the west the lofty coast ranges the cascades and sierra nevada held back rainfall beyond were the temperate lands of the pacific coast.
early explorers such as zebulon pike thought the country beyond the mississippi was uninhabitable fit only pike said for wandering and uncivilized aborigines mapmakers agreed between 1825 and 1860 american maps showed this land as the great american desert as a result settlement paused on chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire canada columbia r texas de an present day state boundaries okla ohio w va r tenn ark.
st l aw r ds n j del.
va n n c s c ga ala co la.
conn ky ia n mo.
at l a gr 20 isohyet rainfall line pa io oh miss.
ri o land region boundaries lake michigan coas t pacific ocean r i ap pa la ch n mex.
ill plains i hi nte gh r la ior nd s pikes peak s colo ron.
r n h vt n y lake erie iowa in pla ariz r wis nebr.
s ain pl lo co do ra pi interior ins pla utah h hig plateau lake ontario me.
hu ie air pr at da va ne ra nev calif e r sie great basin ains unt mo western iss ip r wyo.
pacific mountains s dak.
g idaho superior ke lak e m is s ore la.
a a st c ai minn r pl n dak.
ri r sou mis hi gh la n mont.
c ky r an ges cas cad er an ge ro en ce wash atlantic ocean l fla gulf of mexico mexico 100th meridian 300 miles 300 kilometers physiographic map of the united states in the great plains and rocky mountains the topography altitudes crops and climate especially the lack of rain west of the rainfall line shown here led to changes in a mode of settlement that had been essentially uniform from the atlantic coast through kentucky ohio and missouri.
the rectangular land surveys and quarter section lots that were traditional before could not accommodate great plains conditions.
the edge of the plains and most early settlers headed directly for california and oregon.
few rivers cut through the plains those that did raged in the winter and trickled in the summer.
rainfall usually did not reach fifteen inches a year not enough to support extensive agriculture.
there was little lumber for homes and fences and the tools of eastern settlement the cast iron plow the boat and the ax were virtually useless on the tough and treeless plains soil.
east of the mississippi historian walter prescott webb noted civilization stood on three legs land water and timber west of the mississippi not one but two of these legs were withdrawn water and timber and civilization was left on one leg land hot winds seared the plains in summer and northers blizzards and hailstorms froze them in winter.
wildlife roamed in profusion.
the american bison better known as the buffalo grazed in enormous herds from mexico to canada.
in 1865 perhaps fifteen million buffalo lived on the plains so many they seemed like leaves in a forest to an early observer.
a single herd sighted in 1871 had four million head.
crushing the native americans how did white americans crush the culture of the native americans as they moved west.
when greeley urged new yorkers to move west and crowd nobody he like almost all white americans ignored the fact that large numbers of people already lived there.
at the close of the civil war native americans inhabited nearly half the united states.
by 1880 they had been driven onto smaller and smaller reservations and were no longer an independent people.
a decade later even their culture had crumbled under the impact of white domination.
in 1865 nearly a quarter million native americans lived in the western half of the country.
tribes such as the winnebago menominee cherokee and chippewa were resettled there forced out of their eastern lands by advancing white settlement.
other tribes were native to the region.
in the southwest there were the pueblo groups including the hopi zuni and rio grande pueblos.
crushing the native americans peaceful farmers and herders they had built up complex traditions around a settled way of life.
the pueblo groups were cultivators of corn.
they lived on the subdesert plateau of present day western new mexico and eastern arizona.
harassed by powerful neighboring tribes they built communal houses of adobe brick on high mesas or in cracks in the cliffs.
more nomadic were the camp dwellers the jicarilla apache and navajo who roamed eastern new mexico and western texas.
blending elements of the plains and plateau environments they lived in tepees or mud huts grew some crops to supplement their hunting and moved readily from place to place.
the navajo herded sheep and produced beautiful ornamental silver baskets and blankets.
fierce fighters apache horsemen were feared by whites and fellow indians across the southwestern plains.
farther west were the tribes that inhabited present day california.
divided into many small bands they eked out a difficult existence living on roots grubs berries acorns and small game.
in the pacific northwest where fish and forest animals made life easier the klamath chinook yurok and shasta tribes developed a rich civilization.
they built plank houses and canoes worked extensively in wood and evolved a complex social and political organization.
settled and determined they resisted the invasion of the whites.
by the 1870s most of these tribes had been destroyed or beaten into submission.
the powerful ute crushed in 1855 ceded most of their utah lands to the united states and settled on a small reservation near great salt lake.
the navajo and apache fought back fiercely but between 1865 and 1873 they too were confined to reservations.
the native americans of california succumbed to the contagious diseases carried by whites during the gold rush of 1849.
miners burned their villages and by 1880 fewer than twenty thousand indians lived in california.
life of the plains indians in the mid nineteenth century nearly two thirds of the native americans lived on the great plains.
the plains tribes included the sioux of present day minnesota and the dakotas the blackfoot of idaho and montana the cheyenne crow and arapaho of the central plains the pawnee of western nebraska and the kiowa apache and comanche of present day texas and new mexico.
nomadic and warlike the plains indians depended on the buffalo and horse.
the modern horse first brought by spanish explorers in the 1500s spread north from mexico onto the plains and by the 1700s the plains indians way of life had changed.
the plains tribes gave up farming almost entirely and hunted the buffalo ranging widely over the rolling plains.
the men became superb warriors and horsemen among the best light cavalry in the world.
equipped with stout wooden bows three feet or less in length plains indians were fierce warriors.
hiding their bodies behind their racing ponies they drove deadly arrows clear through buffalo.
against white troops or settlers the skillful comanche rode three hundred yards and shot twenty arrows in the time it took a soldier to load his firearm once.
the introduction of the new colt six shooters during the 1850s gave government troops a rapid fire weapon but did not entirely offset the indians advantage.
migratory in culture the plains indians formed tribes of several thousand people but lived in smaller bands of three to five hundred.
the comanche who numbered perhaps seven thousand had thirteen bands with such names as burnt meat making bags while moving and those who move often.
each band was governed by a chief and a council of elder men and indians of the same tribe transferred freely from band to band.
bands acted independently making it difficult for the u s government to deal with the fragmented tribes.
the comanche dominated most of the plains through their exploitation of the horse their use of violence and the timely cooperation among their bands.
over the course of two centuries they crushed the feared apache harassed the spanish and mexicans and tormented american immigrants who wanted to establish trading posts in taos and santa fe.
although official maps showed spanish ownership of the southern and western plains the comanche actually controlled it their domain known as the comancheria or the comanche empire.
their last important chief quanah parker the son of a comanche brave and a captive anglo texan died in 1911.
whether comanche or other tribes all native americans on the plains followed and lived off the buffalo.
buffalo provided food clothing and shelter the indians unlike later white hunters used every part of the animal.
the meat was dried or jerked in the hot plains air.
the skins made tepees blankets and robes.
buffalo bones became knives tendons were made into bowstrings horns and hooves were boiled into glue.
buffalo chips dried manure were burned as fuel.
all in all the buffalo was a galloping department store warfare among tribes usually took the form of brief raids and skirmishes.
plains indians fought few prolonged wars and rarely coveted territory.
most conflicts involved only a few warriors intent on stealing horses or counting coup touching an enemy body with the hand or a special stick.
tribes developed a fierce and trained warrior class recognized for achievements in battle.
speaking different languages native americans of various tribes were nevertheless able to communicate with one another through a highly developed sign language.
the plains tribes divided labor tasks according to gender.
men hunted traded supervised ceremonial activities and cleared ground for planting.
they usually held the positions of authority such as chief or medicine man.
women were responsible for child rearing and artistic activity.
they also performed the camp work grew vegetables prepared buffalo meat and hides and gathered berries and roots.
in most tribes women played an important role in political economic and religious activities.
among the navajo and zuni kinship descended from the mothers side and navajo women were in charge of most of the familys property.
in tribes such as the sioux there was little difference in status.
men were respected for hunting and war women for their artistic skills with quill and paint.
chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire as long as waters run searching for an indian policy the north platte and arkansas rivers for as long as waters run and the grass shall grow the concentration policy lasted only a few years.
accustomed to hunting widely for buffalo many native americans refused to stay within their assigned areas.
white settlers poured into indian lands then called on the government to protect them.
indians were pushed out of kansas and nebraska in the 1850s even as white reformers fought to hold those territories open for free blacks.
in 1859 gold miners moved into the pikes peak country touching off warfare with the cheyenne and arapaho.
in 1864 tired of the fighting the two tribes asked for peace.
certain that the war was over chief black kettle led his seven hundred followers to camp on sand creek in southeastern colorado.
early on the morning of november 29 1864 a group of colorado militia led by colonel john m chivington attacked the sleeping group.
kill and scalp all big and little chivington told his men.
nits make lice black kettle tried to stop the ambush before the civil war americans used the land west of the mississippi as one big reservation the government named the area indian country moved eastern tribes there with firm treaty guarantees and in 1834 passed the indian intercourse act which prohibited any white person from entering indian country without a license.
the situation changed in the 1850s.
wagon trains wound their way to california and oregon miners pushed into western goldfields and there was talk of a transcontinental railroad.
to clear the way for settlement the federal government in 1851 abandoned one big reservation in favor of a new policy of concentration.
for the first time it assigned definite boundaries to each tribe.
the sioux for example were given the dakota country north of the platte river the crow a large area near the powder river and the cheyenne and arapaho the colorado foothills between view the map native americans 1850 1896 chief joseph s route bear paw mountain blackfeet wash chinook sioux chippewa mont.
shasta idaho ore little big horn cheyenne crow bozem a n bannock shoshoni il yurok shasta calif pacific ocean minn sioux s dak.
black hills fetterman massacre arapaho cheyenne shoshoni wyo.
tra klamath n dak.
sioux po wd er r.
nez perc chippewa wis menominee winnebago wounded knee iowa sioux great nebr.
platte salt r lake ute pawnee nev arapaho sand creek utah chivington colo terr.
massacre ark ansas 1864 mo.
r paiute kans.
navajo ute jicarilla pawnee apache kiowa indian arapaho terr.
cheyenne zui ariz red river war terr.
1874 1875 pueblo apache red r apache n mex.
comanche terr.
kiowa skeleton canyon la.
geronimo surrenders texas ill miss issippi r rio g ra nd e indian reservations major indian battles 300 miles 300 kilometers native americans in the west major battles and reservations they made us many promises more than i remember but they never kept but one they promised to take our land and they took it so said red cloud of the oglala sioux summarizing native american white relations in the 1870s.
crushing the native americans read the document chief red clouds speech red cloud was chief of the oglala teton sioux.
he was an important leader who opposed white incursions into native american lives and territory although he openly advocated peace whenever possible and did not support the more violent actions of crazy horse and his followers.
raising first an american flag and then a white flag.
neither worked.
the native american men women and children were clubbed stabbed and scalped.
the chivington massacre set off angry protests in colorado and the east.
congress appointed an investigating committee and the government concluded a treaty with the cheyenne and arapaho condemning the gross and wanton outrages still the two tribes were forced to surrender their sand creek reservation in exchange for lands elsewhere.
the kiowa and comanche were also ousted from areas they had been granted forever only a few years before.
as the sioux chief spotted tail said why does not the great father put his red children on wheels so that he can move them as he will before long the powerful sioux were on the warpath in the great sioux war of 1865 1867.
once again an invasion of gold miners touched off the war which flared even more intensely when the federal government announced plans to connect the various mining towns by building the bozeman trail through the heart of the sioux hunting grounds in montana.
red cloud the sioux chief determined to stop the trail.
in december 1866 pursued by an army column under captain william j fetterman he lured the incautious fetterman deep into the wilderness ambushed him and wiped out all eighty two soldiers in his command.
the fetterman massacre coming so soon after the chivington massacre sparked a public debate over the nations indian policy.
like the policy itself the debate reflected differing white views of the native americans.
in the east some reform humanitarian and church groups wanted a humane peace policy directed toward educating and civilizing the tribes.
many white people in the east and west questioned this approach convinced that native americans were savages unfit for civilization.
westerners of course had some reason to fear indian attacks and the fears often fed on wild rumors of scalped settlers and besieged forts.
as a result westerners in general favored firm control over the native americans including swift punishment of any who rebelled.
in 1867 the peace advocates won the debate.
halting construction on the bozeman trail congress created a peace commission of four civilians and three generals to end the sioux war and eliminate permanently the causes of indian wars.
setting out for the west the peace commissioners agreed that only one policy offered a permanent solution a policy of small reservations to isolate the native americans on distant lands teach them to farm and gradually civilize them.
the commissioners chose two areas to hold all the plains indians.
fifty four thousand native americans on the northern plains would be moved north of the black hills in dakota territory far from prospective white settlement.
on the southern plains eighty six thousand native americans would be moved into present day oklahoma a region also considered difficult to farm and unattractive to whites.
in both areas tribes would be assigned specific reservations where government agents could supervise them.
the kiowa comanche cheyenne and arapaho agreed to the plan in 1867 the sioux in 1868.
the policy was extended beyond the plains and the ute shoshone bannock navajo and apache tribes also accepted small reservations.
we have now selected and provided reservations for all off the great road an army commander wrote.
all who cling to their old hunting grounds are hostile and will remain so till killed off final battles on the plains few native americans settled peacefully into life on the new reservations.
the reservation system not only changed their age old customs it chained them in a situation of poverty and isolation.
soon young warriors and minor chiefs denounced the treaties and drifted back to the open countryside.
in late 1868 warfare broke out again and it took more than a decade of violence chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire a nationwide demand for revenge.
within a few months the sioux were surrounded and beaten three thousand of them surrendering in october 1876.
sitting bull and a few followers who had fled to canada gave up in 1881.
the sioux war ended the major indian warfare in the west but occasional outbreaks occurred for several years thereafter.
in 1877 the nez perc tribe of oregon a people who had warmly welcomed lewis and clark in 1805 rebelled against government policy.
hoping to reach canada chief joseph led the tribe on a courageous flight lasting 75 days and covering 1 321 miles.
they defeated the pursuing army at every turn but then ran out of food horses and ammunition.
surrendering they were sent to barren lands in the indian country of oklahoma and there most of them died from disease.
in 1890 the teton sioux of south dakota bitter and starving became restless.
many of them turned to the ghost dances a this wood engraving from 1891 depicts a group of sioux dancers performing most likely one of their last set of dances and rites that grew ghost dances before the arrest of the warrior chief sitting bull.
from a vision of a paiute messiah named wovoka.
performance of the dances wovoka said would bring back native american lands to beat the indians into submission.
the kiowa and comanche and would cause the whites to disappear.
all native americans rampaged through the texas panhandle looting and killing until would reunite the earth would be covered with dust and a new the u s army including the feared buffalo soldiers african earth would come upon the old.
the vanished buffalo would american cavalrymen on the western frontier crushed them return in great herds.
in the red river war of 1874 1875 and ended warfare in the the army intervened to stop the dancing touching off viosouthwest.
see the feature essay blacks in blue the buffalo lence that killed sitting bull and a number of other warriors.
soldiers in the west pp.
frightened native americans fled southwest to join other ghost on the northern plains fighting resulted from the black dancers under the aging chief big foot.
moving quickly troops hills gold rush of 1875.
as prospectors tramped across native of the seventh cavalry custers old regiment caught up with big american hunting grounds the sioux gathered to stop them.
foots band and took them to the army camp on wounded knee they were led by rain in the face the great war chief crazy creek in south dakota.
a native american it is thought fired horse and the famous medicine man sitting bull.
the army the first shot returned by the armys new machine guns.
firing a sent several columns of troops after the indians but one under shell a second they shredded tepees and people.
in the infamous flamboyant lieutenant colonel george armstrong custer wounded knee massacre about two hundred men women pushed recklessly ahead eager to claim the victory.
on the and children were killed in the snow.
morning of june 25 1876 thinking he had a small band of native americans surrounded in their village on the banks of the little bighorn river in montana custer divided his column the end of tribal life and took 265 men toward it.
instead of finding a small band the final step in indian policy came in the 1870s and 1880s.
he discovered he had stumbled on the main sioux camp with some reformers had long argued against segregating the native 2 500 warriors.
it was the largest native american army ever americans on reservations urging instead that the nation assimiassembled in the united states.
late them individually into white culture.
these assimilationists by midafternoon it was over custer and his men were wanted to use education land policy and federal law to eradicate dead.
custer was largely responsible for the loss but custers tribal society.
last stand set in blazing headlines across the country set off watch the video sioux ghost dance crushing the native americans to keep the indians land from falling into the hands of speculators the federal government read the document accounts of the wounded knee massacre held it in trust for twenty five years.
finally american citizenship was granted to native americans who accepted their land lived apart from the tribe and adopted the habits of civilized life through the dawes act 47 million acres of land were distributed to native americans and their families.
there were another 90 million acres in the reservations and these lands often the most fertile were sold to white settlers.
speculators evaded the twenty five year rule leasing rather than purchasing the land from the native americans.
many native americans knew little about farming.
their tools were rudimentary and in the culture of the plains indians men had not ordinarily participated in farming.
in 1934 the government returned to the idea of tribal land ownership but by then 138 million acres of indian land had shrunk to 48 million acres half of which was barren.
the final blow to tribal life came not in the dawes act but in the virtual extermination of the buffalo the plains indians chief resource in late 1890 troops of the seventh cavalry killed more than 200 native american men women and the basis for their unique way of life.
the and children at a reservation located along wounded knee creek in south dakota.
a number of longstanding issues on the reservation contributed to the tension prior to the massacre.
killing began in the 1860s as the transcontinental railroads pushed west and it stepped congress began to adopt the policy in 1871 when it ended the up as settlers found they could harm the indians by harming the practice of treaty making with native american tribes.
since tribes buffalo.
kill every buffalo you can an army officer said.
every were no longer separate nations they lost many of their political buffalo dead is an indian gone then in 1871 a pennsylvania and judicial functions and the power of the chiefs was weakened.
tannery discovered that buffalo hides made valuable leather.
in 1882 congress created a court of indian offenses to try native professional hunters such as william f buffalo bill cody americans who broke government rules and soon thereafter it swarmed across the plains killing millions of the beasts.
made them answerable in regular courts for certain crimes.
between 1872 and 1874 professional hunters slaughtered while congress worked to break down the tribes educators three million buffalo a year.
in a frontier form of a factory system trained young native americans to adjust to white culture.
in 1879 riflemen skinners and transport wagons pushed through the vast fifty pawnee kiowa and cheyenne youths were brought east to the herds which shrank steadily behind them.
new carlisle indian school in carlisle pennsylvania.
other native by 1883 the buffalo were almost gone.
when the government american schools soon opened including the haskell institute in set out to produce the famous buffalo nickel the designer had to kansas and numerous day schools on the western reservations.
go to the bronx zoo in new york city to find a buffalo.
the schools taught students to fix machines and farm they forced by 1900 there were only 250 000 native americans in the young indians to trim their long hair and made them speak english country.
there were 600 000 within the limits of the present day banned the wearing of tribal paint or clothes and forbade tribal united states in 1800 and more than 5 million in 1492 when ceremonies and dances.
kill the indian and save the man said columbus first set foot in the new world.
most of the indians richard h pratt the army officer who founded the carlisle school.
lived on reservations.
many lived in poverty.
alcoholism and land ownership was the final and most important link in the unemployment were growing problems and native americans new policy.
native americans who owned land it was thought no longer able to live off the buffalo became wards of the state.
would become responsible self reliant citizens.
deciding to give they lost their cultural distinctiveness.
once possessors of each native american a farm congress in 1887 passed the dawes the entire continent they had been crowded into smaller and severalty act the most important legal development in indian smaller areas overwhelmed by the demand to become settled white relations in more than three centuries.
literate and english speaking.
except for the internment of aiming to end tribal life the dawes act divided tribal lands the west coast japanese during world war ii said historian into small plots for distribution among members of the tribe.
each roger l nichols indian removal is the only example of largefamily head received 160 acres single adults 80 acres and children scale government enforced migration in american history.
once the land was distributed any surplus was sold to for the japanese the move was temporary for the indians white settlers with the profits going to native american schools.
it was not complete the assignment blacks in blue the buffalo soldiers in the west on myhistorylab feature essay blacks in blue the buffalo soldiers in the west although they were not in fact treated as well as the white soldiers in their regiments many african american cavalrymen such as those pictured here were probably drawn into service by hard sell recruitment posters such as the one shown on the facing page.
o n saturday afternoons youngsters used to sit in darkened movie theaters and cheer the victories of the u s cavalry over the indians.
typically the indians were about to capture a wagon train when army bugles suddenly sounded.
then the blue coated cavalry charged over the hill.
few in the theaters cheered for the indians fewer still noticed the absence of black faces among the charging cavalry.
but in fact more than two thousand african american cavalrymen served on the western frontier between 1867 and 1890.
known as the buffalo soldiers they made up one fifth of the u s cavalry.
black troops were first used on a large scale during the civil war.
organized in segregated units with white officers they fought with distinction.
nearly 180 000 blacks served in the union army 34 000 of them died.
when the war ended in 1865 congress for the first time authorized black troops to serve in the regular peacetime army.
in addition to infantry it created two cavalry regiments the ninth and tenth which became known as the famous buffalo soldiers.
like other black regiments the ninth and tenth cavalry had white officers who took special examinations before they could serve.
the chaplains were assigned not only to preach but to teach reading writing and arithmetic.
the food was poor racism was widespread.
the army stocked the first black units with worn out horses a serious matter to men whose lives depended on the speed and stamina of their mounts.
since our first mount in 1867 this regiment has received nothing but broken down horses and repaired equipment an officer said in 1870.
many white officers refused to serve with black troops.
george armstrong custer the handsome boy general turned down a position in the ninth and joined the new seventh cavalry headed for disaster at little bighorn.
the army and navy journal carried ads that told a similar story a first lieutenant of infantry white stationed at a very desirable post in the department of the south desires a transfer with an officer of the same grade on equal terms if in a white regiment but if in a colored regiment a reasonable bonus would be expected.
there was no shortage of black troops for the officers to lead.
blacks enlisted because the army offered some advancement in a closed society.
it also paid 13 a month plus room and board.
in 1867 the ninth and tenth cavalry were posted to the west where they remained for two decades.
under colonel benjamin h grierson a civil war hero the tenth went to fort riley kansas the regiment arrived in the midst of a great indian war.
the kiowa comanche cheyenne arapaho and sioux were on the warpath.
troopers of the tenth defended farms stages trains and work crews building railroad tracks to the west.
cornered by a band of cheyenne they beat back the attack and won a new name.
they had been known as the brunettes or africans but the cheyenne now called them the buffalo soldiers a name that soon applied to all african american soldiers in the west.
from 1868 to 1874 the tenth served on the kansas frontier.
the dull winter days were filled with drills and scouting parties outside the post.
in spring and summer the good weather brought forth new forays.
indian bands raided farms and ranches and stampeded cattle herds on the way north from texas.
they struck and then melted back into the reservations.
the ninth cavalry also had a difficult job.
commanded by colonel edward hatch who had served with grierson in the civil war it was stationed in west texas and along the rio grande.
the summers were so hot that men collapsed with sunstroke the winters so cold that water froze in canteens.
native americans from outside the area frequently raided it.
from the north kiowa and comanche warriors rode down the great comanche war trail kickapoo crossed the rio grande from mexico.
gangs of mexican bandits and restless civil war veterans roamed and plundered at will.
from 1874 to 1875 the ninth fought in the great red river war in which the kiowa and comanche fed up with conditions on the reservations revolted against grants peace policy.
marching fighting then marching again the soldiers harried and wore out the indians who finally surrendered in the spring of 1875.
herded into a new and desolate reservation the mescalero apache of new mexico took to the warpath in 1877 and again in 1879.
each time it took a year of grueling warfare to effect their surrender.
in 1886 black cavalrymen surrounded and captured the famous apache chief geronimo.
in that and other campaigns several buffalo soldiers won the congressional medal of honor.
black troops hunted big foot and his band before the slaughter at wounded knee in 1890 see p 396 and they served in many of the wests most famous indian battles.
while one third of all army recruits deserted between 1865 and 1890 the ninth and tenth cavalry had few desertions.
in 1880 the tenth had the fewest desertions of any regiment in the country.
it was ironic that in the west black men fought red men to benefit white men.
once the indian wars ended the buffalo soldiers worked to keep illegal settlers out of indian or government land much of which was later opened to settlement.
both regiments saw action in the spanish american war the ninth at san juan hill the tenth in the fighting around santiago.
unlike white veterans of the same campaigns the old buffalo soldiers were forgotten in retirement although some of them had the satisfaction of settling on the western lands they had done so much to pacify.
questions for discussion 1.
why did many african american men join the military during this era.
why did so few of these buffalo soldiers desert at a time when so many other u s soldiers did.
chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire view the closer look railroad and buffalo in 1872 the northern pacific railroad began to build a route that would violate sioux territory.
the government sent an army to protect the surveyors.
even as the native americans lost their identity they entered the romantic folklore of the west.
dime novels snapped up by readers young and old told tales of indian fighting on the plains.
buffalo bill cody turned it all into a profitable business.
beginning in 1883 his wild west show ran for more than three decades playing to millions of viewers in the united states canada and europe.
it featured plains indians chasing buffalo performing a war dance and attacking a settlers cabin.
in 1885 sitting bull himself victor over custer at the battle of little bighorn performed in the show.
settlement of the west why did americans and others move to the west.
between 1870 and 1900 white and some african hispanic and asian americans settled the enormous total of 430 million acres west of the mississippi they took over more land than had been occupied by americans in all the years before 1870.
people moved west for many reasons.
some sought adventure others wanted to escape the drab routine of factory or city life.
many moved to california for their health.
the mormons settled utah to escape religious persecution.
others followed the mining camps the advancing railroads and the farming and cattle frontier.
whatever the specific reason most people moved west to better their lot.
on the whole their timing was good for as the nations population grew so did demand for the livestock and the agricultural mineral and lumber products of the expanding west.
contrary to older historical views the west did not act as a major safety valve an outlet for social and economic tensions.
the poor and unemployed did not have the means to move there and establish farms.
moreover as douglass c north an economic historian said most people moved west in good times.
in periods of rising prices of expanding demand when the prospects for making money from this new land looked brightest and this aspect characterized the whole pattern of settlement men and women on the overland trail the first movement west aimed not for the nearby plains but for california and oregon on the continents far shore.
it started settlement of the west in the gold rush of 1849 to california and in the next three decades perhaps as many as half a million individuals made the long journey over the overland trail leading west.
some walked others rode horses alone or in small groups.
about half joined great caravans numbering 150 wagons or more that inched across the two thousand miles between the missouri river and the pacific coast.
more often than not men made the decision to make the crossing but except for the stampedes to the mines migration usually turned out to be a family affair.
wives were consulted though in some cases they had little real choice.
they could either go along or live alone at home.
while many women regretted leaving family and friends they agreed to the trip sometimes as eagerly as the men.
i would not be left behind said luzena wilson whose husband ached to join the gold rush to california.
i thought where he could go i could and where i went i could take my two little toddling babies like the wilsons the majority of people traveled in family groups including inlaws grandchildren aunts and uncles.
as one historian said the quest for something new would take place in the context of the very familiar individuals and wagon trains set out from various points along the missouri river.
leaving in the spring and traveling through the summer they hoped to reach their destination before the first snowfall.
during april travelers gradually assembled in spring camp just across the missouri river waiting for the new grass to ripen into forage.
they packed and repacked the wagons and elected the trains leaders who would set the line of march look for water and campsites and impose discipline.
some trains adopted detailed rules fearing a lapse into savagery in the wild lands across the missouri.
every man to carry with him a bible and other religious books as we hope not to degenerate into a state of barbarism one agreement said.
setting out in early may travelers divided the enormous route into manageable portions.
the first leg of the journey followed the platte river west to fort kearney in central nebraska territory a distance of about three hundred miles.
the land was even with good supplies of wood grass and water.
from a distance the whitetopped wagons seemed driven by a common force but in fact internal discipline broke down almost immediately.
arguments erupted over the pace of the march the choice of campsites the number of guards to post whether to rest or push on.
elected leaders quit new ones were chosen.
every train was filled with individualists and as the son of one train captain said if you think its any snap to run a wagon train of sixty six wagons with every man in the train having a different idea of what is the best thing to do all i can say is that some day you ought to try it men women and children had different tasks on the trail.
men concerned themselves almost entirely with hunting buffalo and antelope guard duty and transportation.
they rose at 4 a m to hitch the wagons and after breakfast began the days march.
at noon they stopped and set the teams to graze.
after the midday meal the march continued until sunset.
then while the men relaxed the women fixed dinner and the next days lunch and the children kindled the fires brought water to camp and searched for wood or other fuel.
walking fifteen miles a day in searing heat and mountain cold travelers were exhausted by late afternoon.
for women the trail was lonely and they worked to exhaustion.
before long some adjusted their clothing to the harsh conditions adopting the new bloomer pants shortening their skirts or wearing regular wash dresses so called because they had shorter hemlines that did not drag on the wet ground on washday.
other women continued to wear their long dresses thinking bloomers indecent both men and women carried firearms in case of indian attacks but most emigrants saw few indians en route.
what they often did see was trash miles of it for the wagon trains were an early example of the impact of migration and settlement on the western environment.
on the oregon and other trails travelers sidestepped mounds of garbage tin cans furniture cooking stoves kegs tools and clothing all discarded by people who had passed through before.
along a 40 mile trail in the nevada desert a migrant tallied two thousand abandoned wagons.
on some trails animals and people stirred up so much dust that drivers wore goggles to protect their eyes.
the first stage of the journey was deceptively easy and travelers usually reached fort kearney by late may.
the second leg led another 300 miles up the platte river to fort laramie on the eastern edge of wyoming territory.
the heat of june had dried the grass and there was no wood.
anxious to beat the early snowfalls travelers rested a day or two at the fort then hurried on to south pass 280 miles to the west the best route through the forbidding rockies.
beyond south pass some emigrants turned south to the mormon settlements on the great salt lake but most headed 340 miles north to fort hall on the snake river in idaho.
it took another three months to cover the remaining 800 miles.
california bound travelers followed the humboldt river through the summer heat of nevada.
under the best of conditions the trip took six months sixteen hours a day dawn to dusk of hard grueling labor.
walking halfway across the continent was no easy task and it provided a neverto be forgotten experience for those who did it.
the wagon trains carrying the dreams of thousands of individuals reproduced society in small focus individualistic hopeful mobile divided by age and gender roles apprehensive yet willing to strike out for the distant and new.
land for the taking as railroads pushed west in the 1870s and 1880s locomotive trains replaced wagon trains but the shift was gradual and until the end of the century emigrants often combined both modes of travel.
into the 1890s travelers could be seen making their way across the west by any available means.
early railroad transportation was expensive and the average farm family could not afford to buy tickets and ship supplies.
many europeans traveled by rail to designated outfitting places and then proceeded west with wagons and oxen.
traffic flowed in all directions belying the image of a simple westward movement.
many people did go west of course but others such as migrants from mexico became westerners by moving north and asian americans moved eastward from the pacific coast.
whatever their route they all ended up in the meeting ground of cultures that formed the modern west.
why did they come.
the motive that induced us to part with the pleasant associations and the dear friends of our childhood days explained phoebe judson an early emigrant was to obtain from the government of the united states a grant of land that uncle chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire read the document homestead act of 1862 between 1862 and 1890 the government gave away 48 million acres under the homestead act of 1862.
a law of great significance it gave 160 acres of land to anyone who would pay 10 registration fee and pledge to live on the land cultivating it for five years.
sam had promised to give to the head of each family who settled in this new country a popular camp song reflected the same motive come along come along dont be alarmed uncle sam is rich enough to give us all a farm.
uncle sam owned about one billion acres of land in the 1860s much of it mountain and desert land unsuited for agriculture.
by 1900 the various land laws had distributed half of it.
between 1862 and 1890 the government gave away 48 million acres under the homestead act of 1862 sold about 100 million acres to private citizens and corporations granted 128 million acres to railroad companies to tempt them to build across the unsettled west and sold huge tracts to the states.
the homestead act of 1862 a law of great significance gave 160 acres of land to anyone who would pay a 10 registration fee and pledge to live on it and cultivate it for five years.
the offer set off a mass migration of land hungry europeans dazzled by a country that gave its land away.
americans also seized on the acts provisions and between 1862 and 1900 nearly 600 000 families claimed free homesteads under it.
yet the homestead act did not work as congress had hoped.
few farmers and laborers had the cash to move to the frontier buy farm equipment and wait out the year or two before the farm became self supporting.
tailored to the timber and water conditions of the east the act did not work as well in the semiarid west.
in the fertile valleys of the mississippi 160 acres provided a generous farm.
a farmer on the great plains needed either a larger farm for dry farming or a smaller one for irrigation.
the timber culture act of 1873 attempted to adjust the homestead act to western conditions.
it allowed homesteaders to claim an additional 160 acres if they planted trees on a quarter of it within four years.
a moderately successful act it distributed 10 million acres of land encouraged needed forestation and enabled homesteaders to expand their farms to a workable size.
cattle ranchers lobbied for another law the desert land act of 1877 which allowed individuals to obtain 640 acres in the arid states for 1 25 an acre provided they irrigated part of it within three years.
the act invited fraud.
more than 2 6 million acres of land were distributed much of it fraudulently.
the timber and stone act of 1878 applied only to lands unfit for cultivation and valuable chiefly for timber or stone.
it permitted anyone in california nevada oregon and washington to buy up to 160 acres of forest land for 2 50 an acre.
like ranchers lumber companies used employees to file false claims.
by 1900 3 6 million acres of rich forest land had been claimed under the measure.
speculators made ingenious use of the land laws.
sending agents in advance of settlement they moved along choice river bottoms or irrigable areas accumulating large holdings to be held for high prices.
in the arid west where control of water meant control of the surrounding land shrewd ranchers plotted their holdings accordingly.
in colorado one cattleman john f iliff owned only 105 small parcels of land but by placing them around the few water holes he effectively dominated an empire stretching over 6 000 square miles.
water in fact became a dominant western issue since aside from the pacific northwest northern california parts of the rocky mountain west and the eastern half of the great plains much of the trans mississippi west was arid receiving less than twenty inches of rainfall annually.
people speculated in water as if it were gold and planned great irrigation systems in utah eastern colorado and californias central valley to make the desert bloom a sign in modesto california read water wealth contentment health irrigators received a major boost in 1902 when the national reclamation act newlands act set aside most of the proceeds from the sale of public lands in sixteen western states to finance irrigation projects in the arid states.
over the next decades dams canals and irrigation systems channeled water into dry areas creating a hydraulic society that was rich in crops and cities such as los angeles and phoenix but ever thirstier and in danger of outrunning the precious water on which it all depended.
as beneficiaries of the governments policy of land grants for railway construction the railroad companies were the wests largest landowners.
eager to have immigrants settle on the land they owned near the railroad right of way and eager to boost their freight and passenger business the companies sent agents to the east and europe.
attractive brochures touted life in the west.
railroad lines set up land departments and bureaus of immigration.
the land departments priced the land arranged credit terms and even gave free farming courses to immigrants.
the bureaus of immigration employed agents in europe met immigrants at eastern seaports and ran special cars for land seekers heading west.
half a billion acres of western land were given or sold to speculators and corporations.
at the same time only 600 000 homestead patents were issued covering 80 million acres.
thus only one acre in every nine initially went to individual pioneers the intended beneficiaries of the nations largesse.
two thirds of all homestead claimants before 1890 failed in their efforts to farm their new land.
territorial government as new areas of the west opened they were organized as territories under the control of congress and the president.
the territorial system started with the famous northwest ordinance of 1787 which the bonanza west established the rules by which territories became states.
washington ran the territories like a passive group of colonial mandates the president appointed the governor and judges in each territory congress detailed their duties set their budgets and oversaw their activities.
territorial officials had almost absolute power over the territories.
until they obtained statehood then the territories depended on the federal government for their existence.
the national political parties especially the republicans funneled government funds into the territorial economies and in areas such as wyoming and the dakotas where resources were scarce economic growth depended on this money.
many early settlers held patronage jobs or hoped for them traded with governmentsupported native americans sold supplies to army troops and speculated in government lands.
in a large portion of the trans mississippi west a generation grew up under territorial rule.
inevitably these citizens developed distinct ideas about politics government and the economy.
the spanish speaking southwest in the nineteenth century almost all spanish speaking people in the united states lived in california arizona new mexico texas and colorado.
their numbers were small california had only 8 086 mexican residents in 1900 but the influence of their culture and institutions was large.
in some respects the southwestern frontier was more spanish american than anglo american.
pushing northward from mexico the spanish gradually established the present day economic structure of the southwest.
they brought with them techniques of mining stock raising and irrigated farming.
after winning independence in the 1820s the mexicans brought new laws and ranching methods as well as chaps and the burro.
both spanish and mexicans created the legal framework for distributing land and water a precious resource in the southwest.
they gave large grants of land to communities for grazing to individuals as rewards for service and to the various native american pueblos.
in southern california the californios descendants of the original colonizers began after the 1860s to lose their once vast landholdings to drought and mortgages.
some turned to crime and became feared bandidos others such as jos mara amador lived in poverty and remembered better days when i was but a little boy i drained the chocolate pot but now i am a poor man and am condemned to slop.
in 1875 romualdo pacheco an aristocratic native son served as governor of california and then went on to congress.
but as the californios died out mexican americans continued the spanish mexican influence.
in 1880 one fourth of the residents of los angeles county were spanish speaking.
in new mexico spanish speaking citizens remained the majority ethnic group until the 1940s and the spanish mexican culture dominated the territory.
contests over land grants became new mexicos largest industry lawyers who dealt in them amassed huge holdings.
after 1888 las gorras blancas the white caps a secret organization of spanish americans attacked the movement of anglo ranchers into the las vegas community land grant.
armed and hooded they cut down fences and scattered the stock of those they viewed as intruders.
throughout the southwest the spanish mexican heritage gave a distinctive shape to society.
men headed the families and dominated economic life.
women had substantial economic rights though few political ones and they enjoyed a status their english american counterparts did not have.
wives kept full control of property acquired before their marriage they also held half title to all property in a marriage which later caused many southwestern states to pass community property laws.
in addition the spanish mexican heritage fostered a modified economic caste system a strong roman catholic influence and the primary use of the spanish language.
continuous immigration from mexico kept language and cultural ties strong.
spanish names and customs spread even among anglos.
david starr jordan arriving from indiana to become the first president of stanford university in california bestowed spanish names on streets houses and a stanford dormitory.
spanish was the regions first or second language.
confronted by sheriff pat garrett in a darkened room new mexicos famous outlaw billy the kid died asking quin es.
quin es who is it.
the bonanza west why was the west a bonanza of dreams and getrich quick schemes.
between 1850 and 1900 wave after wave of newcomers swept across the trans mississippi west.
there were riches for the taking hidden in gold washed streams spread lushly over grass covered prairies or available in the gullible minds of greedy newcomers.
the nineteenthcentury west took shape in the search for mining cattle and land bonanzas that drew eager settlers from the east and around the world.
as with all bonanzas the consequences in the west were uneven growth boom and bust economic cycles and wasted resources.
society seemed constantly in the making.
people moved here and there following river bottoms gold strikes railroad tracks and other opportunities.
instant cities arose.
san francisco salt lake city and denver were the most spectacular examples but every cow town and mining camp witnessed similar phenomena of growth.
boston needed more than two centuries to attract one third of a million people san francisco did the same in a little more than twenty years.
many westerners had left home to get rich quickly and they adopted institutions that reflected that goal.
the west was an idea as well as a region and the idea molded them as much as they molded it.
the mining bonanza mining was the first important magnet to attract people to the west.
many hoped to strike it rich in gold and silver but at least half the newcomers had no intention of working in the mines.
instead they provided food clothing and services to the thousands of miners.
leland stanford and collis p huntington who later built the central pacific railroad set up a general store in sacramento where they sold shovels and supplies.
field later a prominent justice of the u s supreme court followed the gold rush to california to practice law.
chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire thousands of miners climbed the sierra nevada that summer.
on the rough slopes of davidson mountain they created virginia city the prototype of the tumultuous western mining town.
the biggest strike was yet to come.
in 1873 john w mackay and three partners formed a company to dig deep into the mountain and at 1 167 feet they hit the big bonanza a seam of gold and silver more than 54 feet wide.
it was the richest discovery in the history of mining.
between 1859 and 1879 the comstock lode produced gold and silver worth 306 million.
most of it went to financiers and corporations.
mackay himself became the richest person in the world earning according to a european newspaper 25 a minute 5 a minute more than czar alexander ii of russia.
in the 1860s and 1870s important strikes were made in washington idaho nevada colorado montana arizona and dakota.
extremely mobile miners flocked from strike to strike and new camps and mining towns sprang up overnight.
the miners of idaho were like quicksilver said hubert howe bancroft an early historian.
a mass of them dropped this photograph from the mid 1800s shows gold miners on the american river in california in any locality broke up into individual globules and pausing for a lunch break.
although significantly outnumbered by men women on the mining ran off after any atom of gold in their vicinity.
they frontier took a variety of jobs including working claims.
stayed nowhere longer than the gold attracted them the final fling came in the black hills rush of 1874 to 1876.
the army had tried to keep miners out of the area the the california gold rush of 1849 began the mining boom and heart of the sioux hunting grounds and even sent a scientific party set the pattern for subsequent strikes in other regions.
individual under colonel george armstrong custer to disprove the rumors prospectors made the first strikes discovering pockets of gold along of gold and stop the miners invasion.
instead custer found gold streams flowing westward from the sierra nevada.
to get the gold all over the hills and the rush was on.
miners gamblers desperathey used a simple process called placer mining which required does and prostitutes flocked to deadwood the most lawless of all little skill technology or capital.
a placer miner needed only a the mining camps.
there martha jane canary a crack shot who shovel a washing pan and a good claim.
as the placers gave out as calamity jane won fame as a scout and teamster fell in love a great deal of gold remained but it was locked in quartz or buried with wild bill hickok.
hickok himself a western legend who deep in the earth.
mining became an expensive business far beyond had tamed kansas cow towns killed an unknown number of men the reach of the average miner.
and toured in buffalo bills wild west show died in deadwood large corporations moved in to dig the deep shafts and shot in the back of the head.
hickok was thirty nine years old.
finance costly equipment.
quartz mining required heavy rock towns such as deadwood in the dakota territory virginia crushers mercury vats to dissolve the gold and large retorts to city nevada leadville colorado and tombstone arizona demrecapture it.
eastern and european financiers assumed control onstrated a new development process in the frontier experience.
labor became unionized and mining towns took on some of the the farming frontier had developed naturally in a rural setting.
characteristics of the industrial city.
individual prospectors meanon the mining frontier the germ of a city the camp appeared while dashed on to the next find.
unlike other frontiers the minalmost simultaneously with the first strike periodicals the latest ing frontier moved from west to east as the original california fashions theaters schools literary clubs and lending libraries came miners the yonder siders they were called hurried eastward quickly to the camps providing civilized refinements not available in search of the big strike.
on other frontiers.
urbanization also created the need for municipal in 1859 fresh strikes were made near pikes peak in colorado government sanitation and law enforcement.
and in the carson river valley of nevada.
news of both discovmining camps were governed by a simple democracy.
soon eries set off wild migrations one hundred thousand miners were after a strike the miners in the area met to organize a mining in pikes peak country by june 1859.
the gold there quickly played district and adopted rules governing behavior in it.
rules reguout but the nevada find uncovered a thick bluish black ore that lated the size and boundaries of claims established procedures for was almost pure silver and gold.
a quick witted drifter named settling disputes and set penalties for crimes.
petty criminals were henry t p comstock talked his way into partnership in the claim banished from the district serious offenders were hanged.
in the and word of the comstock lode with ore worth 3 876 a case of a major dispute the whole camp gathered chose legal counton flashed over the mountains.
sel for both sides and heard the evidence.
if all else failed miners read the document john lester hydraulic mining the bonanza west canada wash terr.
co lumbia r.
dakota territory deadwood mo un wyoming black terr.
hills ta virginia city va utah terr.
s e an salt lake city nevada nebraska in sierr san francisco ky sn ak er montana territory roc idaho terr.
oregon central city denver leadville da colo terr.
r sutters mill miss uri r o couer dalene do silverton kansas col a or california pacific ocean santa fe arizona terr.
indian terr.
silver city tombstone ri o texas and gr e mexico major mining towns licensing fee.
as intended it drove out mexicans and other foreigners.
riots against chinese laborers occurred in the 1870s and 1880s in los angeles san francisco seattle reno and denver.
responding to pressure congress passed the chinese exclusion act of 1882 which suspended immigration of chinese laborers for ten years.
the number of chinese in the united states fell drastically.
by the 1890s the early mining bonanza was over.
all told the western mines contributed billions of dollars to the economy.
they had helped finance the civil war and provided needed capital for industrialization.
the vast boost in silver production from the comstock lode changed the relative value of gold and silver the base of american currency.
bitter disputes over the currency affected politics and led to the famous battle of the standards in the presidential election of 1896 see chapter 20.
the mining frontier populated portions of the west and sped its process of political organization.
nevada idaho and montana were granted early statehood because of mining.
merchants editors lawyers and ministers moved with the advancing frontier establishing permanent settlements.
women in the mining camps helped to foster family life and raised the moral tone by campaigning against drinking gambling and prostitution.
but not all the effects of the mining boom were positive.
the industry also left behind painful scars in the form of invaded indian reservations pitted hills and lonely ghost towns.
boundaries of 1870 gold mining regions silver mining regions 300 miles 150 300 kilometers mining regions of the west gold and silver mines dotted the west drawing settlers and encouraging political organization in many areas.
formed secret vigilance committees to hang a few offenders as a lesson to the rest.
early visitors to the mining country were struck by the way miners solitary and competitive joined together founded a camp and created a society.
in 1870 men outnumbered women in the mining districts by more than two to one there were few children.
prostitutes followed the camps around the west and a respectable woman was an object of curiosity.
four arrived in nevada city in 1853 and one observed the men stand and gaze at us with mouth and eyes wide open every time we go out some women worked claims but more often they took jobs as cooks housekeepers and seamstresses for wages considerably higher than in the east.
in most camps between one quarter and one half of the population was foreign born.
the lure of gold drew large numbers of chinese chileans peruvians mexicans french germans and english.
experienced miners the latin americans brought valuable mining techniques.
at least six thousand mexicans joined the california rush of 1849 and by 1852 there were twenty five thousand chinese in california.
painstakingly the chinese profitably worked claims others had abandoned.
in the 1860s almost one third of the miners in the west were chinese.
hostility often surfaced against foreign miners particularly the french latin americans and chinese.
in 1850 california passed a foreign miners tax that charged foreign miners a 20 monthly gold from the roots up the cattle bonanza theres gold from the grass roots down said california joe a guide in the gold districts of dakota in the 1870s but theres more gold from the grass roots up ranchers began to recognize the potential of the vast grasslands of the west.
the plains were covered with buffalo or grama grass a wiry variety with short hard stems.
cattle thrived on it.
for twenty years after 1865 cattle ranching dominated the open range a vast fenceless area extending from the texas panhandle north into canada.
the techniques of the business came from mexico.
long before american cowboys moved herds north their mexican counterparts the vaqueros developed the essential techniques of branding roundups and roping.
the cattle themselves the famous texas longhorns also came from mexico.
spreading over the grasslands of southern texas the longhorns multiplied rapidly.
although their meat was coarse and stringy they fed a nation hungry for beef at the end of the civil war.
the problem was getting the beef to eastern markets and joseph g mccoy a livestock shipper from illinois solved it.
looking for a way to market texas beef mccoy conceived the idea of taking the cattle to railheads in kansas.
he talked first with the president of the missouri pacific who ordered him out of his office and then with the head of the kansas pacific who laughed at the idea.
the persistent mccoy finally signed a contract in 1867 with the hannibal and st joseph railroad.
searching for an appropriate rail junction he settled on the sleepy kansas town of abilene a very small dead place he remembered with about a dozen log huts and one nearly bankrupt saloon.
in september 1867 mccoy shipped the first train of twenty cars of longhorn cattle.
by the end of the year a thousand carloads had chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire followed all headed for chicago markets.
in 1870 three hundred thousand head of texas cattle reached abilene followed the next year the peak year by seven hundred thousand head.
the alamo saloon crowded with tired cowboys at the end of the drive now employed seventy five bartenders working three 8 hour shifts.
the profits were enormous.
drivers bought cheap texas steers for 4 a head and sold them for 30 or 40 a head at the northern railhead.
the most famous trail was the chisholm running from southern texas through oklahoma territory to ellsworth and abilene kansas on the kansas pacific railroad.
dodge city kansas became the prime shipping center between 1875 and 1879.
cowboys pushed steers northward in herds of two to three thousand.
novels and films have portrayed the cowboys as white view the closer look but at least a quarter of them were black and possibly another quarter were mexicans.
a typical crew on the trail north might have eight men half of them black or mexican.
most of the trail bosses were white they earned about 125 a month.
james jim perry a renowned black cowboy who worked for more than twenty years as a rider roper and cook for the xit ranch said if it werent for my damned old black face id have been a boss long ago like miners cattlemen lived beyond the formal reach of the law and so established their own.
before each drive charles goodnight drew up rules governing behavior on the trail.
a cowboy who shot another was hanged on the spot.
ranchers adopted rules for cattle ownership branding roundups and drives and they formed associations to enforce them.
the wyoming stock railroad routes cattle trails gold and silver rushes minn dakota territory wisconsin wyoming territory cheyenne chicago iowa nebraska union pac ific r r.
ogallala illinois ka sa denver utah terr.
n s colorado pa cific abilene r r.
st louis ellsworth sa nta fe r r.
sedalia kansas baxter springs dge ge city dodge missouri indian terr.
arkansas fort concho ht lov ing trail bandera san antonio cattle trails d an gr me x i co e major railroads louisiana rio railheads miss.
and bax ni od go g holm trail chis western trail texas ter springs tr ai l new mexico territory se da lia gulf of mexico 300 miles 300 kilometers cattle trails cattle raised in texas were driven along the cattle trails to the northern railheads and trains carried them to market.
the bonanza west growers association the largest and most formidable had four hundred members owning two million cattle its reach extended well beyond wyoming into colorado nebraska montana and the dakotas.
throughout this vast territory the laws of the association were often the law of the land.
by 1880 more than six million cattle had been driven to northern markets.
but the era of the great cattle drive was ending.
farmers were planting wheat on the old buffalo ranges barbed wire a recent invention cut across the trails and divided up the big ranches.
mechanical improvements in slaughtering refrigerated transportation and cold storage modernized the industry.
ranchers bred the texas longhorns with heavier hereford and angus bulls and as the new breeds proved profitable more and more ranches opened on the northern ranges.
by the mid 1880s some 4 5 million cattle grazed the high plains reminding people of the once great herds of buffalo.
stories of vast profits circulated attracting outside capital.
large investments transformed ranching into big business often controlled by absentee owners and subject to new problems.
by 1885 experienced cattle ranchers were growing alarmed.
a presidential order that year forced them out of the indian territory in oklahoma adding two hundred thousand cattle to the overcrowded northern ranges.
the winter of 1885 to 1886 was cold and the following summer was one of the hottest on record.
water holes dried up the grass turned brown.
beef prices fell.
the winter of 1886 1887 was one of the worst in western history.
temperatures dropped to 45 degrees below zero and cattle that once would have saved themselves by drifting ahead of the storms came up against the new barbed wire fences.
herds jammed together pawing the frozen ground or stripping bark from trees in search of food.
cattle died by the tens of thousands.
in the spring of 1887 when the snows thawed ranchers found stacks of carcasses piled up against the fences.
the melting snows did however produce a lush crop of grass for the survivors.
the cattle business recovered but it took different directions.
outside capital so plentiful in the boom years dried up.
ranchers began fencing their lands reducing their herds and growing hay for winter food.
to the dismay of cowboys mowing machines and hay rakes became as important as chuck wagons and branding irons.
i tell you times have changed one cowboy said sadly.
the last roundup on the northern ranges took place in 1905.
ranches grew smaller and some ranchers at first in the scrub country of the southwest then on the plains themselves switched to raising sheep.
by 1900 there were nearly thirty eight million sheep west of the missouri river far more than there were cattle.
in montana there were six or seven sheep for each cow and even wyoming the great center of the northern ranches had more sheep than cows.
ranchers and sheepherders fought bitterly to control the grazing lands but they had one problem in common the troubles ahead.
homesteaders armed with barbed wire and new strains of wheat were pushing onto the plains and the day of the open range was over.
sodbusters on the plains the farming bonanza like miners and cattle ranchers millions of farmers moved into the west in the decades after 1870 to seek crop bonanzas and new ways of life.
some realized their dreams many fought just to survive.
said a folksong from greer county oklahoma hurrah for greer county.
the land of the free the land of the bedbug grasshopper and flea ill sing of its praises ill tell of its fame while starving to death on my government claim.
between 1870 and 1900 farmers cultivated more land than ever before in american history.
they peopled the plains from dakota to texas pushed the indians out of their last sanctuary in oklahoma and poured into the basins and foothills of the rockies.
by 1900 the western half of the nation contained almost 30 percent of the population compared to less than 1 percent just a half century earlier.
unlike mining farm settlement often followed predictable patterns taking population from states east of the settlement line and moving gradually westward.
crossing the mississippi farmers settled first in western iowa minnesota nebraska kansas texas and south dakota.
the movement slumped during the depression of the 1870s but then a new wave of optimism carried thousands more west.
several years of above average rainfall convinced farmers that the dakotas western nebraska and kansas and eastern colorado were the rain belt of the plains between 1870 and 1900 the population on the plains tripled.
in some areas the newcomers were blacks who had fled the south fed up with beatings and murders crop liens and the black codes that institutionalized their subordinate status.
in 1879 about six thousand african americans known as the exodusters left their homes in louisiana mississippi and texas to establish new and freer lives in kansas the home of john brown and the free soil campaigns of the 1850s.
once there they farmed or worked as laborers women worked in the fields alongside the men or cleaned houses and took in washing to make ends meet.
all told the exodusters homesteaded 20 000 acres of land and though they met prejudice it was not as extreme as they had known at home.
i asked my wife did she know the ground she stands on said john solomon lewis a louisianan soon after arriving.
she said no i said it is free ground and she cried like a child for joy other african americans moved to oklahoma thinking they might establish the first african american state.
whether headed for oklahoma or kansas they picked up and moved in sizable groups that were based on family units they took with them the customs they had known and in their new homes they were able for the first time to have some measure of self government.
for blacks and whites alike farming on the plains presented new problems.
there was little surface water and wells ranged between 50 and 500 feet deep.
well drillers charged up to 2 a foot.
taking advantage of the steady plains winds windmills brought the water to the surface but they too were expensive and until 1900 many farmers could not afford them.
lumber for homes and fences was also scarce.
unable to afford wood farmers often started out in dreary sod houses.
cut into 3 foot sections the thick prairie sod was laid like brick with space left for two windows and a door.
since glass was scarce cloth hung over the windows a blanket was hung from the ceiling to make two rooms.
sod houses were small provided little light and air and were impossible to keep chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire disappointed with the failures of reconstruction and fearful of the violence that surrounded them many southern blacks migrated to kansas in the 1870s and 1880s.
comparing their trek to the biblical story of the israelites exodus from egypt they became known as exodusters.
when it rained water seeped through the roof.
yet a sod house cost only 2 78 to build.
outside the plains environment sorely tested the men and women who moved there.
neighbors were distant the land stretched on as far as the eye could see.
always the wind blew.
as long as i live ill never see such a lonely country a woman said of the texas plains a nebraska woman said these unbounded prairies have such an air of desolation and the stillness is very oppressive in the winters savage storms swept the open grasslands.
ice caked on the cattle until their heads were too heavy to hold up.
summertime temperatures stayed near 110 degrees for weeks at a time.
fearsome rainstorms building in the summers heat beat down the young corn and wheat.
the summers also brought grasshoppers arriving without warning flying in clouds so huge they shut out the sun.
the grasshoppers ate everything in sight crops clothing mosquito netting tree bark even plow handles.
in the summer of 1874 they devastated the whole plains from texas to the dakotas eating everything but the mortgage as one farmer said.
new farming methods farmers adopted new techniques to meet conditions on the plains.
for one thing they needed cheap and effective fencing material and in 1874 joseph f glidden a farmer from de kalb illinois provided it with the invention of barbed wire.
by 1883 his factory was turning out six hundred miles of barbed wire every day and farmers were buying it faster than it could be produced.
dry farming a new technique helped compensate for the lack of rainfall.
by plowing furrows twelve to fourteen inches deep and creating a dust mulch to fill the furrow farmers loosened the soil and slowed evaporation.
wheat farmers imported european varieties of plants that could withstand the harsh plains winters.
hard kerneled varieties such as turkey red wheat from russia required new milling methods developed during the 1870s.
by 1881 minneapolis st louis and kansas city had become milling centers for the rich new process flour.
farm technology changed long before the civil war but later developments improved it.
in 1877 james oliver of indiana patented a chilled iron plow with a smooth surfaced moldboard that did not the bonanza west clog in the thick prairie soils.
the spring tooth harrow 1869 sped soil preparation the grain drill 1874 opened furrows and scientifically fed seed into the ground.
the lister 1880 dug a deep furrow planted corn at the bottom and covered the seed all in one operation.
the first baling press was built in 1866 and the hay loader was patented in 1876.
the first successful harvester the cord binder 1878 cut and tied bundles of grain enabling two men and a team of horses to harvest 20 acres of wheat a day.
invented earlier threshers grew larger employing as many as nine men and ten horses one machine could thresh 300 bushels of grain a day.
in 1890 more than nine hundred corporations manufactured farm machinery.
scientific agriculture flourished under new discoveries linking soil minerals and plant growth.
samuel johnson of yale university published how crops grow 1868 and how crops feed 1870 and one of his students pioneered work on nitrogen the base of many modern fertilizers.
the hatch act passed in 1887 supported agricultural experiment stations that spread the discoveries among farmers.
four years later the stations employed more than 450 persons and distributed more than 300 published reports annually to some 350 000 readers.
in the late 1870s huge bonanza farms rose run by the new machinery and financed with outside capital.
oliver dalrymple the most famous of the bonanza farmers headed an experiment in north dakotas red river valley in 1875 then moved on to manage the grandin bonanza of 61 000 acres five times the size of manhattan island.
dalrymple hired armies of workers bought machinery by the carload and planted on a scale that dazzled the west.
the bonanza farms thanks to their size and machinery captured the countrys imagination.
using 200 pairs of harrows 155 binders and 16 threshers dalrymple produced 600 000 bushels of wheat in 1881.
he and other bonanza managers profited from the economies of scale buying materials at wholesale prices and receiving rebates from the railroads.
then a period of drought began.
rainfall dropped between 1885 and 1890 and the large scale growers found it hard to compete with smaller farmers who diversified their crops and cultivated more intensively.
many of the large bonanzas slowly disintegrated and dalrymple himself went bankrupt in 1896.
discontent on the farm touring the south in the 1860s oliver h kelley a clerk in the department of agriculture was struck by the drabness of rural life.
in 1867 he founded the national grange of the patrons of husbandry known simply as the grange.
the grange provided social cultural and educational activities for its members.
its constitution banned involvement in politics but grangers often ignored the rules and supported railroad regulation and other measures.
canada gr ea t l ak e s pacific ocean atlantic ocean gulf of mexico mexico 400 miles 400 kilometers predominantly cropland beef cattle corn tobacco forest with scattered cropland and pasture dairying wheat sugar cane predominantly grazing land sheep rice cotton sparsely populated or nonproductive land hogs hay fruit agricultural land use in the 1880s more land to be put to productive use.
new farming technology and new crops enabled more and wine chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire the grange grew rapidly during the depression of the 1870s and by 1875 it had more than eight hundred thousand members in twenty thousand local granges.
most were in the midwest and south.
the granges set up cooperative stores grain elevators warehouses insurance companies and farm machinery factories.
many failed but in the meantime the organization made its mark.
picking up where the grange left off farm oriented groups such as the farmers alliance with branches in both south and west began to attract followers.
like the cattle boom the farming boom ended sharply after 1887.
a severe drought that year cut harvests and other droughts followed in 1889 and 1894.
thousands of new farmers were wiped out on the western plains.
between 1888 and 1892 more than half the population of western kansas left.
farmers grew angry and restless.
they complained about declining crop prices rising railroad rates and heavy mortgages.
although many farmers were unhappy the peopling of the west in those years transformed american agriculture.
the states beyond the mississippi became the garden land of the nation.
california sent fruit wine and wheat to eastern markets.
under the mormons utah flourished with irrigation.
texas beef stocked the countrys tables and vast wheat fields stretching to the horizon covered minnesota the dakotas montana and eastern colorado.
all produced more than americans could consume.
by 1890 american farmers were exporting large amounts of wheat and other crops.
farmers became more commercial and scientific.
they needed to know more and work harder.
mail order houses and rural free delivery diminished their isolation and tied them ever closer to the national future.
this is a new age to the farmer said a statistician in the department of agriculture in 1889.
he is now more than ever before a citizen of the world guthrie to the north had fifteen thousand.
speculators swiftly erected pay toilets and drinking water cost as much as a beer.
the boomers those who waited for the signal and sooners those who had jumped the gun reflected the speed of western settlement.
creation a character in edna ferbers novel cimarron declared.
that took six days.
this was done in one.
it was history made in an hour and i helped make it conclusion the meaning of the west between the civil war and 1900 the west witnessed one of the greatest migrations in history.
with the native americans driven into smaller and smaller areas farms ranches mines and cities took over the vast lands from the mississippi to the pacific.
read the document turner the significance of the frontier in american history the final fling as the west filled in with people pressure mounted on the president and congress to open the last indian territory oklahoma to settlers.
in march 1889 congress acted and forced the creek and seminole tribes which had been moved into oklahoma in the 1820s to surrender their rights to the land.
with arrangements complete president benjamin harrison announced the opening of the oklahoma district as of noon april 22 1889.
preparations were feverish all along the frontier.
from all the west historian ray allen billington noted the homeless the speculators the adventurers flocked to the still forbidden land on the morning of april 22 nearly a hundred thousand people lined the oklahoma borders for miles on end horsemen wagons hacks carriages bicycles and a host of vehicles beggaring description stood wheel to wheel awaiting the signal fifteen santa fe trains were jammed with people from platform to roof.
at noon the starting flag dropped.
bugles and cannon signaled the opening of the last territory.
horsemen lunged forward overloaded wagons collided and overturned.
the trains steamed slowly forward forced by army troops to keep a pace that would not give their passengers an undue advantage.
by sunset that day settlers claimed twelve thousand homesteads and the 1 92 million acres of the oklahoma district were officially settled.
homesteaders threw up shelters for the night.
by evening oklahoma city that morning merely a spot on the prairie with cottonwoods and grass had ten thousand people during a gathering of historians at the worlds columbian exhibition in chicago in 1893 frederick jackson turner presented an essay titled the significance of the frontier in american history turners article also known as the frontier thesis argued that the settlement of the frontier made the american nation unique.
turner credited the frontiers settlement as the primary force in shaping the nations democratic institutions.
study resources the 1890 census noted that for the first time in the countrys history there can hardly be said to be a frontier line picking up the theme frederick jackson turner a young history instructor at the university of wisconsin examined its importance in an influential 1893 paper the significance of the frontier in american history the existence of an area of free land turner wrote its continuous recession and the advance of american settlement westward explain american development it shaped customs and character gave rise to independence self confidence and individualism and fostered invention and adaptation.
historians have substantially modified turners thesis by pointing to frontier conservatism and imitativeness the influence of varying racial groups and the persistence of european ideas and institutions.
most recently they have shown that family and community loomed as large as individualism on the frontier men women and children played very much the same roles as they had back home.
rejecting turner almost completely a group of new western historians has advanced a different and complex view of the west and one with few heroes and heroines.
emphasizing the regions racial and ethnic diversity these historians emphasize the role of women as well as men trace struggles between economic interests instead of fights between gunslingers and question the impact of development on the environment.
white english speaking americans they suggest could be said to have conquered the west rather than settled it.
the west in this view was not settled by a wave of white migrants moving west across the continent turners frontier but by a set of waves anglo mexican american african american asian american and others moving in many directions and interacting with each other and with native american cultures to produce the modern west.
nor did western history end in 1890 as turner would have it.
instead migration development and economic exploitation continued into the twentieth century illustrated in the fact that the number of people who moved to the west after 1900 far exceeded those who had moved there before.
in both the nineteenth and twentieth centuries there can be no doubt that the image of the frontier and the west influenced american development.
western lands attracted european latin american and asian immigrants adding to the societys talent and diversity.
the mines forests and farms of the west fueled the economy sent raw materials to eastern factories and fed the growing cities.
though defeated in warfare the native americans and mexicans influenced art architecture law and western folklore.
the west was the first american empire and it had a profound impact on the american mind and imagination.
study y resources take the study plan for chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire on myhistorylab time line 1849 gold rush to california 1859 more gold and silver discoveries in colorado and nevada 1862 congress passes homestead act encouraging western settlement 1864 nevada admitted to the union colonel john chivington leads massacre of indians at sand creek colorado 1865 1867 sioux war against white miners and u s army 1866 long drive of cattle touches off cattle bonanzas 1867 horace greeley urges easterners to go west young man national grange of the patrons of husbandry the grange founded to enrich farmers lives 1867 1868 policy of small reservations for indians adopted 1873 congress passes timber culture act big bonanza discovered on the comstock lode in nevada 1874 joseph f glidden invents barbed wire discovery of gold in dakota territory sets off black hills gold rush 1876 colorado admitted to the union custer and his men defeated and killed by the sioux at battle of the little bighorn june 1883 museum expedition discovers fewer than two hundred buffalo in the west 1886 1887 severe drought and winter damage cattle and farming bonanzas 1887 congress passes dawes severalty act making indians individual landowners hatch act provides funds for establishment of agricultural experiment stations 1889 washington montana and the dakotas admitted to the union oklahoma territory opened to settlement 1890 idaho and wyoming admitted to the union teton sioux massacred at battle of wounded knee south dakota december 1893 young historian frederick jackson turner analyzes closing of the frontier 1902 congress passes national reclamation act the newlands act chapter 8 chapter review chapter review beyond the frontier what were the challenges of settling the country west of the mississippi.
west of the mississippi river settlers encountered new conditions including vast treeless plains and towering mountain ranges.
above all they left behind the water and timber on which they had depended in the east forcing them to devise new ways to deal with the different challenges.
p 391 settlement of the west why did americans and others move to the west.
americans moved west for many reasons including a desire to get rich seek religious freedom and improve health.
the federal government helped out with generous land laws and laws favoring irrigation in the arid west.
in the southwest a proud culture took shape around spanish laws and customs involving water the rights of women and the sale ownership and use of land.
p 400 crushing the native americans the bonanza west how did white americans crush the culture of the native americans as they moved west.
native americans had a complex culture suited to the various environments in which they lived.
the united states government and white settlers employed various methods political military legal and cultural to oust the indians from their lands civilize them and contain and control them.
p 392 why was the west a bonanza of dreams and get rich quick schemes.
the west attracted many people seeking a better economic life.
many failed but others found bonanzas in mining cattle ranching and farming.
in many of these areas western development paralleled trends in the rest of the nation larger and larger businesses new uses for technology and the employment of outside capital.
p 403 key terms and definitions ghost dances a religious movement that arose in the late nineteenth century under the prophet wavoka a paiute indian.
its followers believed that dances and rites would cause white men to disappear and restore lands to the native americans.
the u s government outlawed the ghost dances and army intervention to stop them led to the wounded knee massacre.
p 396 wounded knee massacre in december 1890 troopers of the seventh cavalry under orders to stop the ghost dance religion among the sioux took chief big foot and his followers to a camp on wounded knee creek in south dakota.
it is uncertain who fired the first shot but two hundred native americans were killed.
p 396 dawes severalty act legislation passed by congress in 1887 that aimed to break up traditional indian life by promoting individual land ownership.
it divided tribal lands into small plots that were distributed among members of each tribe.
provisions were made for education and eventual citizenship.
the law led to corruption and exploitation and weakened tribal culture.
p 397 gold rush of 1849 prospectors made the first gold strikes along the sierra nevada mountains in california in 1849 touching off a mining boom that set the pattern for subsequent strikes in other regions.
p 401 overland trail the route from the mississippi valley to the pacific coast in the last half of the nineteenth century.
p 401 homestead act of 1862 legislation granting 160 acres to anyone who paid a 10 fee and pledged to live on and cultivate the land for five years.
between 1862 and 1900 nearly 600 000 families claimed homesteads under its provisions.
p 402 national reclamation act newlands act passed in 1902 this legislation set aside most of the proceeds from the sale of public land in sixteen western states to fund irrigation projects.
p 402 placer mining mining that included using a shovel and washing pan to separate gold from the ore in streams and riverbeds.
placer miners worked as individuals or in small groups.
p 404 comstock lode discovered in 1859 near virginia city nevada this ore deposit was the richest discovery in the history of mining.
named after t p comstock the deposit produced silver and gold worth more than 306 million.
p 404 chinese exclusion act of 1882 legislation passed in 1882 that excluded chinese immigrants for ten years and denied u s citizenship to chinese nationals.
it was the first u s exclusionary law aimed at a specific racial group.
p 405 exodusters a group of about 6 000 african americans who left louisiana mississippi and texas in 1879 for freer lives as farmers or laborers in kansas.
p 406 dry farming a farming technique developed to allow farming in the more arid parts of the west where settlers had to deal with far less rainfall than they had east of the mississippi.
furrows were plowed approximately a foot deep and filled with a dust mulch to loosen soil and slow evaporation.
p 408 bonanza farms huge farms covering thousands of acres on the great plains.
in relying on large size and new machinery they represented a development in agriculture similar to that taking place in industry.
p 409 national grange of the patrons of husbandry founded by oliver h kelly in 1867 the grange sought to relieve the drabness of farm life by providing a social educational and cultural outlet for its members.
it also set up grain elevators cooperative stores warehouses insurance companies and farm machinery factories.
p 409 turners thesis put forth by historian frederick jackson turner in 1893 this thesis asserted that the existence of a frontier and its settlement had shaped american character given rise to individualism independence and self confidence and fostered the american spirit of invention and adaptation.
later historians modified the thesis by pointing out the environmental and other consequences of frontier settlement the federal governments role in peopling the west and the clash of races and cultures that took place on the frontier.
p 411 study resources critical thinking questions 1.
what kinds of conditions did settlers find as they moved into lands west of the mississippi river and how had the peoples who already lived there dealt with these conditions.
what was the nature of indian culture on the plains and how did it deal with the hordes of settlers moving into the area.
by what methods did settlers move west and adjust to the bonanzas they found in the west and southwest.
what were the three bonanzas that drew settlers into the west and in what ways did they lead to the destruction of native american culture and shape the growth of the area.
myhistorylab y sto y ab media ed a assignments ss g e ts find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 17 on myhistorylab crushing the native americans view the map read the document native americans 1850 1896 p 394 read the document settlement of the west watch the video chief red clouds speech p 395 homestead act of 1862 p 402 the bonanza west read the document sioux ghost dance p 396 john lester hydraulic mining p 404 read the document accounts of the wounded knee view the closer look railroad routes cattle trails gold and silver rushes p 407 massacre p 397 complete the assignment soldiers in the west p 398 view the closer look blacks in blue the buffalo railroad and buffalo p 400 read the document turner the significance of the frontier in american history p 410 indicates study plan media assignment the industrial society contents and learning objectives industrial development pg.
416 the wage earners pg.
428 what enabled the united states to build an industrial economy.
who were the wage earners in the new economy.
an empire on rails pg.
416 how did wage earners organize in this period and what demands did they make.
culture of work pg.
430 how and why did the railroad system grow.
an industrial empire pg.
421 what were the main characteristics of the new steel and oil industries.
feature essay shopping in a new society the sellers pg.
428 why were the new methods of advertising so important.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 15 secession and the civil war the emergence of lincoln the man elected to the white house in 1860 was striking in appearance he was 6 feet 4 inches but seemed even taller because of his disproportionately long legs and his habit of wearing a high silk stovepipe hat.
but abraham lincolns previous career provided no guarantee he would tower over most of the other presidents in his legacy.
when lincoln sketched the main events of his life for a campaign biographer in june 1860 he was modest almost to the point of self deprecation.
especially regretting his want of education he assured the biographer that he does what he can to supply the want born to poor illiterate parents on the kentucky frontier in 1809 lincoln received a few months of formal schooling in indiana after the family moved there in 1816.
but mostly he educated himself reading and rereading a few treasured books by firelight.
in 1831 when the family migrated to illinois he left home to make a living for himself in the struggling settlement of new salem where he worked as a surveyor shopkeeper and local postmaster.
his brief career as a merchant was disastrous he went bankrupt and was saddled with debt for years to come.
but he eventually found a path to success in law and politics.
while studying law on his own in new salem he managed to get elected to the state legislature.
in 1837 he moved to springfield a growing town that offered bright prospects for a young lawyer politician.
lincoln combined exceptional political and legal skills with a down to earth humorous way of addressing jurors and voters.
consequently he became a leader of the whig party in illinois and one of the most sought after lawyers riding the central illinois judicial circuit.
the high point of his political career as a whig was one term in congress 1847 1849.
lincoln would have faced certain defeat had he sought reelection.
his strong stance against the mexican american war alienated much of his constituency and the voters expressed their disaffection in 1848 by electing a democrat over the whig who tried to succeed lincoln.
in 1849 president zachary taylor for whom lincoln had campaigned vigorously and effectively failed to appoint him to a patronage job he coveted.
having been repudiated by the electorate and ignored by the national leadership of a party he had served loyally and well lincoln concentrated on building his law practice.
the kansas nebraska act of 1854 with its advocacy of popular sovereignty provided lincoln with a heaven sent opportunity to return to politics with a stronger base of support.
for the first time his driving ambition for political success and his personal convictions about what was best for the country were easy to reconcile.
lincoln had long believed slavery was an unjust institution that should be tolerated only to the extent the constitution and the tradition of sectional compromise required.
he attacked douglass plan of popular sovereignty because it broke with precedents for on february 27 1860 abraham lincoln gave his famous right makes might speech at cooper union.
that same day he went over to famed photographer mathew bradys studio at broadway and bleecker street where he sat for an official campaign portrait.
lincoln would later credit the speech and the photo with making him president.
chapter 15 secession and the civil war federal containment or control of the growth of slavery.
after trying in vain to rally free soilers around the whig standard lincoln threw his lot in with the republicans assumed leadership of the new party in illinois attracted national attention in his bid for douglass senate seat in 1858 and was the republican presidential nominee in 1860.
after lincolns election provoked southern secession and plunged the nation into the greatest crisis in its history there was understandable skepticism about him in many quarters was the former rail splitter from illinois up to the responsibilities he faced.
lincoln had less experience relevant to a wartime presidency than any previous or future chief executive he had never been a governor senator cabinet officer vice president or high ranking military officer.
but some of his training as a prairie politician would prove extremely useful.
lincoln was also effective because he identified wholeheartedly with the northern cause and could inspire others to make sacrifices for it.
to him the issue in the conflict was nothing less than the survival of the kind of political system that gave men like himself a chance for high office.
in addressing a special session of congress in 1861 lincoln provided a powerful statement of what the war was all about and this issue embraces more than the fate of these united states.
it presents to the whole family of man the question of whether a constitutional republic or a democracy a government of the people by the same people can or cannot maintain its territorial integrity against its own domestic foes.
he civil war put on trial the very principle of democracy at a time when most european nations had rejected political liberalism and accepted the conservative view that popular government would inevitably collapse into anarchy.
it also showed the shortcomings of a purely white mans democracy and brought the first hesitant steps toward black citizenship.
as lincoln put it in the gettysburg address the only cause great enough to justify the enormous sacrifice of life on the battlefields was the struggle to preserve and extend the democratic ideal or to ensure that government of the people by the people for the people shall not perish from the earth as he prepared to take office in 1861 lincoln could scarcely anticipate the challenges he would face.
the immediate problem was how to respond to the secession of the deep south.
but secession was just an expression of the larger question did the authority of the federal government outweigh the power of the individual states.
no less important were questions about slavery was it morally acceptable for one person to own another.
could the union continue to exist half slave and half free.
the sectionalism that had already led to a number of violent incidents bloody fighting in kansas the assault on charles sumner john browns raid on harpers ferry his conviction on charges of treason against virginia and his eventual execution continued to mount.
finally irreconcilable differences erupted into total war that left no part of society north or south untouched.
the storm gathers what developments and events drew the union toward civil war.
lincolns election provoked the secession of seven states of the deep south but did not lead immediately to armed conflict.
before the sectional quarrel would turn from a cold war into a hot one two things had to happen a final effort to defuse the conflict by compromise and conciliation had to fail and the north needed to develop a firm resolve to maintain the union by military action.
both of these developments may seem inevitable in watch the video what caused the civil war.
t there really should not be a great debate over what caused the civil war.
imagine if you will an america before the civil war without slavery.
the storm gathers retrospect but for most of those living at the time it was not clear until the guns blazed at fort sumter that the sectional crisis would have to be resolved on the battlefield.
the deep south secedes south carolina which had long been in the forefront of southern rights and proslavery agitation was the first state to secede.
on december 20 1860 a convention meeting in charleston declared unanimously that the union now subsisting between south carolina and other states under the name of the united states of america read the document south carolina declaration of the causes of secession a south carolina newspaper announces the dissolution of the union.
south carolinas secession was celebrated in the south with bonfires parades and fireworks.
is hereby dissolved the constitutional theory behind secession was that the union was a compact among sovereign states each of which could withdraw from the union by the vote of a convention similar to the one that had initially ratified the constitution.
the south carolinians justified seceding at that time by charging that a sectional party had elected a president whose opinions and purposes are hostile to slavery in other states of the cotton kingdom there was similar outrage at lincolns election but less certainty about how to respond to it.
those who advocated immediate secession by each state individually were opposed by the cooperationists who believed the slave states should act as a unit.
if the cooperationists had triumphed secession would have been delayed until a southern convention had agreed on it.
some of these moderates hoped a delay would provide time to extort major concessions from the north removing the need for secession.
but south carolinas unilateral action set a precedent that weakened the cooperationists cause.
elections for delegates to secession conventions in six other deep south states were hotly contested.
cooperationists did especially well in georgia louisiana and texas.
but nowhere did they stop secessionists from winning a majority.
by february 1 seven states had removed themselves from the union south carolina alabama mississippi florida georgia louisiana and texas.
in the upper south however a moderate unionist element deriving mainly from the old whig party had maintained its strength and cohesion.
economic diversification had increased the importance of free labor and ties to the northern economy.
consequently leaders in the border slave states were more willing than those in the lower south to seek a sectional compromise.
without waiting for their sister slave states to the north delegates from the deep south met in montgomery alabama on february 4 to establish the confederate states of america.
the convention acted as a provisional government while at the same time drafting a permanent constitution.
relatively moderate leaders dominated the proceedings and defeated or modified some of the pet schemes of a radical faction composed of extreme southern nationalists.
the resulting constitution was surprisingly similar to that of the united states.
most of the differences merely spelled out traditional southern interpretations of the federal charter the central government was denied the authority to impose protective tariffs subsidize internal improvements or interfere with slavery in the states and was required to pass laws protecting slavery in the territories.
as provisional president and vice president the convention chose jefferson davis of mississippi and alexander stephens of georgia men who had resisted secessionist agitation.
stephens in fact had led the cooperationist forces in his home state.
radical fire eaters such as william yancey of alabama and robert barnwell rhett of south carolina were denied positions of authority.
the moderation shown in montgomery resulted in part from a desire to win support for the cause of secessionism in the reluctant states of the upper south where such radical measures as reopening the slave trade were unpopular.
but it also revealed something important about the nature of the separatist impulse.
proslavery reactionaries who were totally lacking in reverence for the union and wanted to found an aristocratic nation very different from the democratic united states had never succeeded in getting a majority behind them.
most southerners opposed dissolving the union for so long as slavery was safe from northern interference.
chapter 15 secession and the civil war view the map wash in secession british north america canada gr ea g s.
n y wis r i conn mich nebraska territory nevada terr.
vt n h ke n to oregon minn dakota territory maine t l a utah territory pa iowa ind.
ill colorado territory calif kansas ohio w va n j md.
statehood d c 1863 del.
ky n c new mexico territory tenn indian territory ark.
unorganized s c ala miss.
texas ga ft sumter la.
fla pacific ocean slave states seceding before the fall of ft sumter april 1861 slave states seceding after the fall of ft sumter april 1861 slave states loyal to the union gulf of mexico mexico atlantic ocean 500 miles 500 kilometers free states free territories secession the fall of fort sumter was a watershed for the secessionist movement.
with no room left for compromise slave states of the upper south chose to join the confederacy.
the montgomery convention did not try to establish a slaveholders reactionary utopia but just aimed to re create the union as it had been before the rise of the new republican party.
the decision to allow free states to join the confederacy reflected a hope that much of the old union could be reconstituted under southern direction.
some optimists even predicted that all of the north except new england would eventually transfer its loyalty to the new government.
secession and the formation of the confederacy thus amounted to a very conservative and defensive kind of revolution the only justification for southern independence on which a majority could agree was the need for greater security for the peculiar institution vice president stephens spoke for all the founders of the confederacy when he described the cornerstone of the new government as the great truth that the negro is not equal to the white man that slavery subordination to the superior race is his natural condition the failure of compromise while the deep south was opting for independence moderates in the north and border slave states were trying to devise a compromise that would stem the secessionist tide before it could engulf the entire south.
when the lame duck congress reconvened in december 1860 strong sentiment existed even among some republicans to seek an adjustment of sectional differences.
senator john crittenden of kentucky presented a plan that served as the focus for discussion.
the proposed crittenden compromise which resembled henry clays ear lier compromises advocated extending the missouri compromise line to the pacific to guarantee the protection of slavery in the southwestern territories and in any territories south of the line that might later be acquired.
it also recommended federal compensation to the owners of escaped slaves and a constitutional amendment that would forever prohibit the federal government from abolishing or regulating slavery.
initially congressional republicans showed some willingness to take the proposals seriously.
at one point william seward of new york the leading republican in the senate leaned toward supporting a version of the crittenden plan.
republicans in congress turned for guidance to the president elect who had remained in springfield and was refusing to make public statements on the secession crisis.
an emissary brought back word that lincoln was adamantly opposed to the compromise.
congressional republicans therefore voted against compromise as did the remaining senators and congressmen of the seceding states who had vowed in advance to support no compromise unless the majority of republicans also endorsed it.
their purpose in taking this stand was to obtain guarantees that the northern sectional party would end its attacks on southern rights the republicans did in the end agree to support crittendens un amendable amendment guaranteeing that slavery would be immune from future federal action.
this action was not really a concession to the south because republicans had always acknowledged that the federal government had no constitutional authority to meddle with slavery in the states.
the storm gathers some historians have blamed lincoln and the republicans for causing an unnecessary war by rejecting a compromise that would have appeased southern pride without providing any immediate practical opportunities for the expansion of slavery.
but it is questionable whether approval of the compromise would have halted secession of the deep south.
the republicans also believed that extending the missouri compromise line of 3630 to the pacific would not halt agitation for extending slavery to new areas such as cuba and central america.
the only way to resolve the crisis over the future of slavery and to reunite the house divided was to remove any chance that slaveholders could enlarge their domain.
lincoln was also convinced that backing down in the face of secessionist threats would fatally undermine the democratic principle of majority rule.
in his inaugural address of march 4 1861 he recalled that during the winter many patriotic men had urged him to accept a compromise that would shift the ground on which he had been elected.
but to do so would have signified that a victorious presidential candidate cannot be inaugurated till he betrays those who elected him by breaking his pledges and surrendering to those who tried and failed to defeat him at the polls making such a concession would mean that this government and all popular government is already at an end and the war came by the time of lincolns inauguration seven states had seceded formed an independent confederacy and seized most federal forts and other installations in the deep south without firing a shot.
some northerners thought it would be best to let the confederate states depart in peace whether because they wanted to maintain commercial links with the cotton producing south or because they opposed a bloody war.
the collapse of compromise efforts narrowed the choices to peaceful separation or war between the sections.
by early march the tide of public opinion even in the business community was beginning to shift in favor of coercive measures to preserve the union.
in his inaugural address lincoln called for a cautious and limited use of force.
he would defend federal forts and installations not yet in confederate hands but would not attempt to recapture the ones already taken.
he thus tried to shift the burden for beginning hostilities to the confederacy which would have to attack before it would be attacked.
as lincoln spoke only four military installations within the seceded states were still held by u s forces.
one of these was fort sumter in charleston harbor which was under pressure from the confederacy and running low on food.
against the advice of some of his cabinet lincoln decided to send a ship to resupply the fort.
before the expedition arrived the confederate army attacked the fort.
after two days of heavy bombardment the union forces surrendered and the confederate flag was raised over fort sumter.
the south had won a victory without a single death on either side.
on april 15 lincoln proclaimed that an insurrection against federal authority existed in the deep south and called on the militia of the loyal states to provide seventy five thousand troops for short term service to put it down.
two days later a sitting virginia convention which had earlier rejected secession reversed itself this contemporary currier and ives lithograph depicts the bombardment of fort sumter on april 12 13 1861.
the soldiers are firing from fort moultrie in charleston harbor which the union garrison had evacuated the previous december in order to strengthen fort sumter.
chapter 15 secession and the civil war and voted to join the confederacy.
within the next five weeks arkansas tennessee and north carolina followed suit.
these slave states of the upper south had been unwilling to secede just because lincoln was elected but when he called on them to provide troops to coerce other southern states they had to choose sides.
in the north the firing on sumter evoked strong feelings of patriotism and dedication to the union.
it seems as if we were never alive till now never had a country till now wrote a new yorker and a bostonian noted i never before knew what a popular excitement can be stephen a douglas lincolns former political rival pledged his full support for the crusade against secession and literally worked himself to death rallying midwestern democrats.
by firing on the flag the confederacy united the north.
everyone assumed the war would be short and not very bloody.
it remained to be seen whether unionist fervor could be sustained through a prolonged struggle.
the entire confederacy which now moved its capital from montgomery to richmond virginia contained only eleven of the fifteen states in which slavery was lawful.
in the border slave states of maryland delaware kentucky and missouri a combination of local unionism and federal intervention thwarted secession.
kentucky the most crucial of these states greeted the outbreak of war by proclaiming its neutrality.
kentucky eventually sided with the union mainly because lincoln who was careful to respect this tenuous neutrality provoked the south into violating it first by sending regular troops into the state.
maryland which surrounded the nations capital and provided it with access to the free states was kept in the union by more ruthless methods which included the use of martial law to suppress confederate sympathizers.
in missouri the presence of regular troops aided significantly by a staunchly pro union german immigrant population stymied the secession movement.
but pro union forces failed to establish order in this deeply divided frontier state.
brutal guerrilla fighting made wartime missouri an unsafe and bloody place.
hence the civil war was not strictly speaking a struggle between slave and free states.
nor did it simply pit states that could not tolerate lincolns election against those that could.
more than anything else conflicting views on the right of secession determined the ultimate division of states and the choices of individuals in areas where sentiment was divided.
general robert e lee for example was neither a defender of slavery nor a southern nationalist.
but he followed virginia out of the union because he was the loyal son of a sovereign state general george thomas another virginian chose the union because he believed it was indissoluble.
although concern about the future of slavery had driven the deep south to secede in the first place the actual lineup of states and supporters meant the two sides would initially define the war less as a struggle over slavery than as a contest to determine whether the union was indivisible.
adjusting to total war what challenges did total war bring for each side.
the civil war was a total war it involved every aspect of society because the north could achieve its aim of restoring the union only by defeating the south so thoroughly that its separatist government would be overthrown.
total war is a test of societies economies and political systems as well as a battle of wits between generals and military strategists and the civil war was no exception.
prospects plans and expectations if the war was to be decided by sheer physical strength then the north had an enormous edge in population industrial capacity and railroad mileage.
nevertheless the south had some advantages that went a long way toward counterbalancing the norths demographic and industrial superiority.
the south could do more with less because its armies faced an easier task.
to achieve its aim of independence the confederacy needed only to defend its own territory successfully.
the north on the other hand had to invade and conquer the south.
consequently the confederacy faced a less serious supply problem had a greater capacity to choose the time and place of combat and could take advantage of familiar terrain and a sympathetic civilian population.
the nature of the war meant southern leaders could define their cause as defense of their homeland against an alien invader and thus appeal to the fervid patriotism of a white population that viewed yankee domination as a form of slavery.
the northern cause however was not nearly as clear cut as that of the south.
it seemed doubtful in 1861 that northerners would be willing to give equally fervent support to a war fought for the seemingly abstract principle that the union was sacred and perpetual.
confederate optimism on the eve of the war was also fed by other and more dubious calculations.
it was widely assumed that southerners would make better fighting men than yankees.
farm boys accustomed to riding and shooting could allegedly whip several times their number among the clerks and factory workers many of them immigrants who it was anticipated would make up a large part of the union army.
actually a majority of northern soldiers would also be farm boys.
when most of the large proportion of high ranking officers in the u s army who were of southern origin resigned to accept confederate commands southerners confidently expected that their armies would be better led.
if external help was needed major foreign powers such as england and france might aid the confederacy because the industrial economies of those european nations depended on the importation of southern cotton.
as they thought about strategy after fort sumter the leaders of both sides tried to find the best way to capitalize on their advantages and compensate for their limitations.
although the confederates primary strategic orientation was defensive it was an offensive defense that southern commanders enacted acting aggressively against exposed northern forces within the south.
northern military planners had greater difficulty in working out a basic strategy and it took a good deal of trial and error before there was a clear sense of what had to be done.
quite early it became evident that the optimistic hope of a quick and easy war was unrealistic.
aware of the costs of invading the south at points where its forces were concentrated the aged general winfield scott who commanded the union army during the early months of the war recommended an anaconda policy.
like a great boa constrictor the north would squeeze the south adjusting to total war resources of the union and the confederacy 1861.
1 300 000 industrial workers 110 000 110 000 factories union 1 800 confederacy ratio 20 1 pig iron ratio 17 1 textiles including cotton cloth and woolen goods value of industrial production 1 5 billion 155 million 22 000 miles railroad tracks 9 000 miles ratio 32 1 firearms into submission by blockading the southern coasts seizing control of the mississippi and cutting off supplies of food and other essential commodities.
this plan pointed to the west as the main locus of military operations.
eventually lincoln decided on a two front war.
he would keep the pressure on virginia in the hope a breakthrough would occur there while at the same time he would authorize an advance down the mississippi valley with the aim of isolating texas arkansas and louisiana.
lincoln also attached great importance to the coastal blockade and expected naval operations to seize the ports through which goods entered and left the confederacy.
his basic plan of applying pressure and probing for weaknesses at several points simultaneously was a good one because it took maximum advantage of the norths superiority in manpower and matriel.
but it required better military leadership than the north possessed at the beginning of the war and took a painfully long time to put into effect.
mobilizing the home fronts the north and south faced similar problems in trying to create the vast support systems needed by armies in the field.
at the beginning of the conflict both sides had more volunteers than could be armed and outfitted.
the south was forced to reject about two hundred thousand men in the first year of the war and the north could commit only a fraction of its forces to battle.
further confusion resulted from the fact that recruiting was done primarily by the states which were reluctant to surrender control of their forces.
both lincoln and davis had to deal with governors who resisted centralized military direction.
as it became clear that hopes for a short and easy war were false the pool of volunteers began to dry up.
many of the early recruits who had been enrolled for short terms showed a reluctance to reenlist.
to resolve this problem the confederacy passed a conscription law in april 1862 and the union edged toward a draft in july.
see the feature essay soldiering in the civil war pp.
to produce the materials of war both governments relied mainly on private industry.
while there was some inefficiency in its private contracting system the norths economy was strong at the core and by 1863 its factories and farms were producing more than enough to provision the troops without significantly lowering the living standards of the civilian population.
the southern economy was much less adaptable.
because of the weakness of its industrial base the south of 1861 depended on the outside world for most of its manufactured goods.
as the union blockade became more effective the confederacy had to rely increasingly on a government sponsored crash program to produce war materials.
astonishingly the confederates succeeded in producing or procuring sufficient armaments to keep southern armies well supplied.
southern agriculture however failed to meet the challenge.
planters were reluctant to shift from staples that could no longer be readily exported to foodstuffs that were urgently needed.
but more significant was the inadequacy of the souths internal transportation system.
new railroad construction during the war did not resolve the problem most of the new lines were aimed at facilitating the movement of troops rather than the distribution of food.
when northern forces penetrated parts of the south they created new gaps in the system.
as a result much of the corn or livestock that was raised could not reach the people who needed it.
although well armed confederate soldiers were increasingly undernourished and by 1863 civilians in urban areas were rioting to protest shortages of food.
to supply the troops the confederate commissary resorted to the impressment of available agricultural produce at below the market price a policy resisted so vigorously by farmers and local politicians that it eventually had to be abandoned.
chapter 15 secession and the civil war wis mich mo.
o ohi pa n j gettysburg del.
washington d c drive north to demoralize and pressure on divert union forces richmond and virginia richmond va iowa ir mississipp another challenge faced by both sides was how to finance an enormously costly struggle.
although special war taxes were imposed neither side was willing to resort to the heavy taxation that was needed to maintain fiscal integrity.
besides floating loans and selling bonds both treasuries deliberately inflated the currency by printing large quantities of paper money that could not be redeemed in gold and silver known as greenbacks because of their color.
the presses rolled throughout the war and runaway inflation was the inevitable result.
the problem was much less severe in the north because of the overall strength of its economy.
war taxes on income were more readily collectable than in the south and bond issues were more successful.
in the south by contrast the confederate government fell deeper and deeper into debt and printed more and more paper money until it could be said with little exaggeration that it took a wheelbarrow full of money to buy a purse full of goods.
r ky advance along the mississippi to isolate arkansas louisiana and texas e ns fe de e iv an ns by fe uth se s c of so defen te the ve atlanta ra end ssi e e miss.
ed def gr g ga nf to a o ala tenn ark.
n c atlantic ocean c vicksburg la.
union naval blockade to restrict shipping texas new orleans fla.
political leadership northern success and southern failure gulf of mexico both the union and the confederacy exercised unprecedented government authority during the war.
presidents lincoln and davis took actions that would have been regarded as arbitrary or even tyrannical in peacetime.
nevertheless politics as usual in the form of free elections public political controversy and the maneuverings of parties factions and interest groups persisted to a surprising degree.
lincoln was especially bold in assuming new executive powers even interfering with civil liberties to an extent that may have been unconstitutional.
he expanded the regular army and advanced public money to private individuals without authorization by congress.
on april 27 1861 he declared martial law which enabled the military to arrest civilians suspected of aiding the enemy and suspended the writ of habeas corpus in the area between philadelphia and washington an action deemed necessary because of mob attacks on union troops passing through baltimore.
suspension of the writ enabled the government to arrest confederate sympathizers and hold them without trial and in september 1862 lincoln extended this authority to all parts of the united states where disloyal elements were active.
lincoln argued that necessity justified a flexible interpretation of his war powers.
for critics of suspension he had a question are all the laws but one to go unexecuted and the government itself to go to pieces lest that one be violated in fact however most of the thousands of civilians arrested by military authorities were not exercising their right to criticize the government but were suspected deserters and draft dodgers refugees smugglers or people who were simply found wandering in areas under military control.
for the most part the lincoln administration showed restraint and tolerated a broad spectrum of political dissent.
although the government closed down a few newspapers for brief periods when they allegedly published false information or military secrets antiadministration journals were allowed to criticize the president and his party.
a few politicians including an ohio congressman were arrested for pro confederate activity but a large number of peace democrats who called for restoration of the union by negotiation 250 miles 250 kilometers the union the confederacy border states overview of civil war strategy confederate military leaders were convinced the south could not be defended unless they took the initiative to determine where critical battles would be fought.
rather than force ran for office and sat in congress and in state legislatures where they were able to present their views to the public.
in fact the persistence of vigorous two party competition in the north during the civil war strengthened lincolns hand.
since his war policies were also the platform of his party he could usually rely on unified partisan backing for the most controversial of his decisions.
lincoln was singularly adept at the art of party leadership accommodating disagreement and encouraging unity and dedication to the cause.
when a majority of the republican party came around to the view that freeing the slaves was necessary to the war effort lincoln found a way to comply with their wishes while minimizing the disenchantment of the conservative minority.
republican cohesiveness was essential to lincolns success in unifying the nation by force.
jefferson davis most historians agree was a less effective war leader than lincoln.
he assumed personal direction of the armed forces but left policy making for the mobilization and control of the civilian population primarily to the confederate congress.
he stumbled as commander in chief when he passed over able generals in favor of the incompetent but personal favorite braxton e bragg.
davis also ignored the problems of the homefront especially the deteriorating economic situation that was sapping confederate morale.
although the south had a much more serious problem of adjusting to total war internal division and disloyalty than the north he refrained from declaring martial law on his own authority and the confederate congress allowed it to be applied only in limited areas and for short periods.
as the war dragged on daviss political and popular support eroded.
he was opposed and obstructed by state governors who resisted conscription and other confederate policies that violated the tradition of states rights.
the confederate congress served as a forum for bitter attacks on the administrations conduct of the war and by 1863 a majority of southern newspapers were taking an anti davis stand.
even if he had been a more able and inspiring leader davis would have had difficulty maintaining his authority because he did not have an organized party behind him to mobilize popular support for his policies.
early campaigns and battles the wars first major battle was a disaster for northern arms.
against his better judgment general winfield scott ordered poorly trained union troops to advance against the confederate forces gathered at manassas junction virginia.
they attacked the enemy position near bull run creek on july 21 1861 and seemed on their way to victory until nine thousand confederate reinforcements arrived.
after confederate general thomas j jackson had earned the nickname stonewall for holding the line against the northern assault the augmented southern army counterattacked and routed the invading force.
as they retreated toward washington the raw union troops gave in to panic and broke ranks in their stampede to safety.
the humiliating defeat at bull run led to a shake up of the northern high command.
the man of the hour was george mcclellan who first became commander of troops in the washington area and then became general in chief when scott retired.
a cautious disciplinarian mcclellan spent the fall and winter drilling his troops and whipping them into shape.
president lincoln who could not understand why mcclellan was taking so long to go into the field became increasingly impatient and finally tried to order the army into action.
before mcclellan made his move union forces in the west won important victories.
in february 1862 a joint military naval operation commanded by general ulysses s grant captured fort henry on the tennessee river and fort donelson on the cumberland.
fourteen thousand prisoners were taken at donelson and the confederate army was forced to withdraw from kentucky and middle tennessee.
southern forces in the west then massed at corinth mississippi just across the border from tennessee.
when a slow moving union army arrived just north of the mississippi state line the south launched a surprise attack on april 6.
in the battle of shiloh one of the bloodiest of the war only the timely arrival of reinforcements prevented the annihilation of union troops backed up against the tennessee river.
after a second day of fierce fighting the confederates retreated to corinth leaving the enemy forces battered and exhausted.
although the unions military effort to seize control of the mississippi valley was temporarily halted at shiloh the union navy soon contributed dramatically to the pursuit of that objective.
on april 26 a fleet under flag officer david farragut coming up from the gulf captured the port of new orleans after boldly running past the forts below the city.
the occupation of new orleans besides securing the mouth of the mississippi climaxed a series of naval and amphibious operations around the edges of the confederacy that had already succeeded in capturing south carolinas sea islands and north carolinas roanoke island.
strategically located bases were thus available to enforce a blockade of the southern coast.
the last serious challenge to the norths naval supremacy ended on march 9 1862 when the confederate ironclad vessel virginia originally the uss merrimac which had demolished wooden hulled northern ships in the vicinity of hampton roads virginia was repulsed by the monitor an armored and turreted union gunship.
successes around the edges of the confederacy did not relieve northern frustration at the inactivity or failure of union forces on the eastern front.
only after lincoln had relieved him of supreme command and ordered him to take the offensive at the head of the army of the potomac did mcclellan start campaigning.
he moved his forces by water to the peninsula southeast of richmond and began moving up the peninsula in early april 1862.
for a month he was bogged down before yorktown which he chose to besiege rather than assault directly.
after yorktown fell on may 4 he pushed ahead to a point twenty miles from richmond where he awaited the additional troops that he expected lincoln to send.
the reinforcements were not forthcoming.
while mcclellan was inching his way up the peninsula a relatively small southern force under stonewall jackson was on the rampage in the shenandoah valley where it succeeded in pinning down a much larger union army and defeating its detached units in a series of lightning moves.
when it appeared by late may that jackson might be poised to march east and attack the union capital lincoln decided to withhold troops from mcclellan so they would be available to defend washington.
if mcclellan had moved more boldly and decisively he probably could have captured richmond with the forces he had.
but a combination of faulty intelligence reports and his own natural caution led him to falter in the face of what he wrongly believed to be superior numbers.
at the end of may the confederates under joseph e johnston took the offensive.
during the battle general johnston was severely wounded succeeding him in command of the confederate army of northern virginia was native virginian and west point graduate robert e lee.
toward the end of june lee began an all out effort to expel mcclellan from the outskirts of richmond.
in a series of battles that lasted for seven days the two armies clawed at each other indecisively.
although mcclellan repulsed lees final assaults at malvern hill the union general decided to retreat down the peninsula to a more secure base.
this backward step convinced lincoln that the peninsula campaign was an exercise in futility.
on july 11 lincoln appointed general henry w halleck who had been in overall command in the western theater to be the new general in chief and through halleck ordered mcclellan to withdraw his troops from the peninsula and send reinforcements to an army under general john pope that was preparing to move on richmond by the overland route.
at the end of august in the second battle fought near bull run lee established his reputation for brilliant generalship he sent stonewall jackson to popes rear provoked complete the assignment soldiering in the civil war on myhistorylab feature essay soldiering in the civil war youthful idealism is still evident on the faces of these young civil war soldiers who had not yet learned general shermans message that war is hell e arly in the civil war william tecumseh sherman told an audience of fresh faced recruits theres many a boy here today who looks on war as all glory but boys it is all hell letters from civil war soldiers reveal that shermans lesson was painfully learned by young men in both armies over the four years of conflict.
at the outset the firing on fort sumter infected both north and south with war fever.
what later became a national nightmare began as a glorious defense of home and country.
young men rushed to join up in great numbers taxing the ability of the authorities to process enlistments.
in contrast to the typical soldier of modern warfare many of the early civil war volunteers had well developed ideas of what the war was about.
on both sides such troops formed a core of stalwart soldiers who were committed to the ideological and political implications of the struggle.
in the democratic atmosphere of the nineteenth century when governments had little power to coerce citizen soldiers neither army could have sustained four years of brutal fighting if significant numbers of their troops did not genuinely believe in their sides cause.
the ideologically motivated troops may have accounted for about half of the fighting force.
the other half was another matter.
as with any large military force the union and confederate armies struggled to motivate and discipline men who cared little for the principles at the root of the conflict.
such soldiers who were typically drafted cajoled or bribed into service found numerous ways to avoid the dangers of combat.
known as skulkers and sneaks these reluctant troops could avoid combat by feigning sickness hiding hanging back asking for bomb proof assignments or simply deserting in droves.
the bad blood between such soldiers and those who fervently believed in the war effort could be intense.
but the skulker and the ideologue shared one thing in common neither was fully prepared for the rigors of war.
early union defeats and a strategic stalemate not only ended talk in both the north and the south of a short engagement filled with glory but also revealed how undisciplined the troops were.
of the more than three million civil war servicemen two thirds were younger than twenty three years of age and came from rural areas.
they were not accustomed to the regimentation necessary to military life as a young recruit from illinois put it it comes rather hard at first to be deprived of liberty inadequate leadership as well as the beginnings of war weariness and the arrival of letters from home pleading for help with the harvest led to a degree of military anarchy.
the early battles were contests among armed mobs that might break and run with little provocation.
moreover the long casualty lists from the early battles discouraged new waves of enlistments.
both governments hit on similar methods of recruiting and disciplining troops.
enlistment and reenlistment bounties were instituted and the nations first conscription laws were passed.
the dual aim was to maintain the ranks of the original volunteers while at the same time stimulating more enlistments.
terms of service were lengthened in most cases to three years and all nonenlisted men of military age were registered and called on to either volunteer or be faced with the disgrace of being drafted.
although some southerners were exempted to oversee their large numbers of slaves and northerners could escape military duty by paying a 300 fee the laws did spur enlistments.
between 1861 and 1865 more than half of the nations 5 5 million men of military age were mustered into service.
the solution to the problem of training the troops was the army training camp.
with its 50 000 pup tents and wigwams the camp was the volunteers way station between home and battlefield.
it was the place the raw recruit received his first bitter taste of the tedium hardship and deprivation of soldiering.
a soldier is not his own man a louisiana recruit wrote astonished at how markedly camp routines differed from civilian life.
he has given up all claim on himself.
i will give you a little information concerning every day business.
consider yourself a private soldier and in camp.
the drum beats for drill.
you fall in and start.
you here feel youre inferirority.
even the sargeants is hollering at you close up ketch step.
dress to the right and sutch like professional noncommissioned officers from the peacetime army were used more effectively by the union to turn men into soldiers who could fire a rifle and understand simple commands.
the liberal use of the court martial and the board of review enabled the professional soldiers to rid the army of its most incompetent officer politicians and instill discipline in the ranks.
many recruits spent their entire terms of service within the tent cities forming a reserve on which field commanders could call to replace casualties.
the camps were themselves the sites of hundreds of thousands of civil war casualties.
fewer men died of battle wounds than of dysentery typhoid fever and other waterborne diseases contracted in the camps which were often located on swampy land without adequate fresh water.
the army food was always the butt of soldier humor one soldier complained the beef issued to him must have been carved from a bull too old for the conscript law but it was also the source of its own set of diseases particularly scurvy.
men in the field were condemned to a diet of hardtack and half cooked beans and no soldier could expect to receive fresh fruit or vegetables.
but food became steadily more plentiful in the union camps and doctors officers and agents of the u s sanitary commission teamed up to improve camp cleanliness.
johnny reb however had to survive under steadily worsening conditions.
the confederate supply system did not improve significantly during the course of the war and grew worse wherever the north invaded or blockaded.
nevertheless the battlefield performance of fighting men on the two sides remained roughly on a par throughout the war.
camp lessons were often forgotten in the heat of battle particularly by green troops who saw the elephant went into battle for the first time and ran from it like the youth in stephen cranes the red badge of courage.
a mississippian anxiously admitted after his first fight that though i did not run i mite have if i had thought of it in time the unions ability to call more new men into service may have guaranteed ultimate victory but it meant that battle hardened confederate veterans faced large numbers of raw northern recruits in every major battle.
since experience often counted for more than basic training and equipment southern troops could expect to engage the enemy on fairly equal terms.
the civil war was the most costly and brutal struggle in which american soldiers have ever been engaged.
more american servicemen died in that war 618 000 than in the two world wars and korea combined and was not surpassed until well into the vietnam war.
contests were decided by deadly charges in which muskets were exploded at such close range as to sear the faces of the contestants.
the survivors in their letters home attempted to describe the inhuman events but as a maine soldier wrote to his parents after the battle of gettysburg you can form no idea of a battlefield.
no pen can describe it.
no tongue can tell its horror.
i hope none of my brothers will ever have to go into a fight questions for discussion 1.
what did the stalwart soldiers on each side believe they were fighting for.
how did the experience of war change how the typical soldier thought and acted after the war was over.
chapter 15 secession and the civil war pa antietam sept 17 1862 ohio bull run july 21 1861 aug 29 30 1862 winchester may 25 1862 kernstown washington d c jacksons valley campaign apr il ju ma ne y mar.
23 1862 cross keys fredericksburg dec 13 1862 lee mc c cedar mountain llan le lee jacks on june 8 1862 richmond aug 9 1862 seven pines james r may 31 july 1 1862 fortress monroe seven days battles virginia june 25 july 1 1862 pennsylvania yorktown besieged apr.
5 may 4 1862 ohio monitor vs merrimac virginia washington d c mar.
9 1862 oh north carolina io r virginia richmond louisville james r ft henry paducah missouri fortress monroe kentucky feb 6 1862 ft donelson cairo feb 16 1862 island no.
8 1862 nashville tennessee north carolina e ll bu memphis shiloh june 6 1862 apr.
6 7 1862 corinth a s.
joh nston south carolina r be au re ga rd arkansas ft sumter bragg mississippi alabama apr.
12 13 1861 georgia vicksburg mississippi at l a n t i c ocean mobile louisiana new orleans captured apr.
26 1862 farr agu t gulf of mexico 200 miles florida 200 kilometers union troop movements confederate troop movements union blockade confederate troop retreat union victories confederate victories civil war 1861 1862 defeats on the battlefield forced a change in the unions initial military campaign of capturing richmond the confederate capital.
the unions targets in the west were the key cities of vicksburg and new orleans.
fight to the finish the rash union general to attack jackson with full force and then threw the main confederate army against the unions flank.
badly beaten pope retreated to the defenses of washington where he was stripped of command.
out of sheer desperation lincoln reappointed mcclellan to head the army of the potomac.
lee proceeded to lead his exuberant troops on an invasion of maryland in the hope of isolating washington from the rest of the north.
mcclellan caught up with him near sharpsburg and the bloodiest one day battle of the war ensued.
when the smoke cleared at antietam on september 17 almost five thousand men had been killed on the two sides and more than eighteen thousand wounded.
the result was a draw but lee was forced to fall back south of the potomac to protect his dangerously extended supply lines.
mcclellan was slow in pursuit and lincoln blamed him for letting the enemy escape.
convinced that mcclellan was fatally infected with the slows lincoln once again sought a more aggressive general and put ambrose e burnside in command of the army of the potomac.
burnside was aggressive enough but he was also rather dense.
his limitations were disastrously revealed at the battle of fredericksburg virginia on december 13 1862 when he launched a direct assault to try to capture an entrenched and elevated position.
throughout the civil war such uphill charges almost invariably failed because of the range and deadly accuracy of small arms fire when concentrated on exposed troops.
the debacle at fredericksburg where union forces suffered more than twice as many casualties as their opponents ended a year of bitter failure for the north on the eastern front.
the diplomatic struggle the critical period of civil war diplomacy was 1861 to 1862 when the south was making every effort to induce major foreign powers to recognize its independence and break the union blockade.
the hope that england and france could be persuaded to intervene on the confederate side stemmed from the fact that these nations depended on the south for three quarters of their cotton supply.
the confederate commissioners sent to england and france in may 1861 succeeded in gaining recognition of southern belligerency which meant the new government could claim some international rights of a nation at war.
the main advantage of belligerent status was that it permitted the south to purchase and outfit privateers in neutral ports.
as a result confederate raiders built and armed in british shipyards devastated northern shipping to such an extent that insurance costs eventually forced most of the american merchant marine off the high seas for the duration of the war.
in the fall of 1861 the confederate government dispatched james m mason and john slidell to be its permanent envoys to england and france respectively.
a u s warship stopped and boarded the british steamer trent on which they were traveling and mason and slidell were taken into u s custody.
this flagrant violation of its maritime rights almost led england to declare war on the united states.
after a few weeks of ferocious posturing by both sides lincoln and secretary of state seward made the prudent decision to release mason and slidell.
these envoys may as well have stayed at home they failed in their mission to obtain full recognition of the confederacy from either england or france.
the anticipated cotton shortage was slow to develop for the bumper crop of 1860 had created a large surplus in british and french warehouses.
while napoleon iii the emperor of france personally favored the southern cause he was unwilling to risk war with the united states without british support.
although sympathetic to the south the british feared the consequences of recognition or support for the confederacy.
in september 1862 the british cabinet debated mediation and recognition as serious possibilities.
but they hesitated to intervene unless the south won decisively on the battlefield.
the cotton famine finally hit in late 1862 causing massive unemployment in the british textile industry.
but contrary to southern hopes public opinion did not compel the government to abandon its neutrality and use force to break the union blockade.
influential interest groups actually benefited from the famine including owners of large cotton mills who had made extravagant profits on their existing stocks and were happy to see weaker competitors go under while they awaited new sources of supply.
by early 1863 cotton from egypt and india put the industry back on the track toward full production.
by early 1863 when it was clear that king cotton diplomacy had failed the confederacy broke off formal relations with great britain.
its hopes for foreign intervention came to nothing because the european powers acted out of self interest and calculated that the advantages of getting involved were not worth the risk of a long and costly war with the united states.
only a decisive military victory would have gained recognition for southern independence and if the confederacy had actually won such a victory it would not have needed foreign backing.
fight to the finish how did the union finally attain victory and what role did emancipation play in it.
the last two and a half years of the struggle saw the implementation of more radical war measures.
the most dramatic and important of these was the norths effort to follow through on lincolns decision to free the slaves and bring the black population into the war on the union side.
the tide of battle turned in the summer of 1863 but the south continued to resist valiantly for two more years until it was finally overcome by the sheer weight of the norths advantages in manpower and resources.
the coming of emancipation at the beginning of the war when the north still hoped for a quick and easy victory only dedicated abolitionists favored turning the struggle for the union into a crusade against slavery.
in the summer of 1861 congress voted almost unanimously for a resolution affirming that the war was being fought only to preserve the union and not to change the domestic institutions of any state.
but as it became clear how hard it was going to be to subdue the rebels sentiment developed for striking a blow at the souths economic and social system by freeing its slaves.
in a tentative move toward emancipation congress in july 1862 authorized the government to confiscate the slaves of masters who supported the confederacy.
chapter 15 secession and the civil war by this time the actions of the slaves themselves were influencing policy making.
they were voting for freedom with their feet by deserting their plantations in areas where the union forces were close enough to offer a haven.
in this way they put pressure on the government to determine their status and in effect offered themselves as a source of manpower to the union on the condition that they be made free.
although lincoln favored freedom for blacks as an ultimate goal he was reluctant to commit his administration to a policy of immediate emancipation.
in the fall of 1861 and again in the spring of 1862 he disallowed the orders of field commanders who sought to free slaves in areas occupied by their forces thus angering abolitionists and the strongly antislavery republicans known as radicals.
lincolns caution stemmed from a fear of alienating unionist elements in the border slave states and from his own preference for a gradual compensated form of emancipation.
he hoped that such a plan could be put into effect in loyal slaveholding areas and then extended to the rebellious states as the basis for a voluntary restoration of the union.
lincoln was also aware of the strong racial prejudice of most whites in both the north and the south.
although personally more tolerant than most white americans lincoln was pessimistic about prospects of equality for blacks in the united states.
he therefore coupled a proposal for gradual emancipation with a plea for government subsidies to support the voluntary colonization of freed blacks outside of the united states.
but the slaveholding states that remained loyal to the union refused to endorse lincolns gradual plan and the failure of union arms in the spring and summer of 1862 increased the public read the document clamor for striking directly at the souths peculiar institution.
the lincoln administration also realized that emancipation would win sympathy for the union cause in england and france and thus might counter the growing threat that these nations would come to the aid of the confederacy.
in july lincoln drafted an emancipation proclamation and read it to his cabinet but he was persuaded by secretary of state seward not to issue it until the north had won a victory and could not be accused of acting out of desperation.
later in the summer lincoln responded publicly to critics of his cautious policy indicating that he would take any action in regard to slavery that would further the union cause.
finally on september 22 1862 lincoln issued his preliminary emancipation proclamation.
mcclellans success in stopping lee at antietam provided the occasion but the president was also responding to growing political pressures.
most republican politicians were now firmly committed to an emancipation policy and many were on the verge of repudiating the administration for its inaction.
had lincoln failed to act his party would have been badly split and he would have been in the minority faction.
the proclamation gave the confederate states one hundred days to give up the struggle without losing their slaves.
there was little chance they would do so but in offering them the chance lincoln left the door open for a more conservative and peaceful way of ending slavery than sudden emancipation at the point of a gun.
in december lincoln proposed to congress that it approve a series of constitutional amendments providing for gradual compensated emancipation and subsidized colonization.
since there was no response from the south and little enthusiasm in congress for lincolns gradual plan the president the emancipation proclamation 1863 in this allegorical painting president lincoln extends a copy of his proclamation to the goddess of liberty who is driving her chariot emancipation.
fight to the finish went ahead on january 1 1863 and declared that all slaves in those areas under confederate control shall be.
thenceforward and forever free he justified the final proclamation as an act of military necessity sanctioned by the war powers of the president and he authorized the enlistment of freed slaves in the union army.
the language and tone of the document one historian has described it as having all the moral grandeur of a bill of lading made it clear that blacks were being freed for reasons of state and not out of humanitarian conviction.
the proclamation did not extend to slave states loyal to the union or to occupied areas and thus did not immediately free a single slave.
however it did commit the union to the abolition of slavery as a war aim.
it also accelerated the breakdown of slavery as a labor system a process that was already well under way by early 1863.
the blacks who had remained in captured areas or deserted their masters to cross union lines before 1863 had been kept in a kind of way station view the closer look between slavery and freedom in accordance with the theory that they were contraband of war as word spread among the slaves that emancipation was now official policy larger numbers of them were inspired to run off and seek the protection of approaching northern armies.
one slave who crossed the union lines summed up their motives i wants to be free.
i came in from the plantation and dont want to go back.
i dont want to be a slave again approximately one quarter of the slave population gained freedom during the war under the terms of the emancipation proclamation and thus deprived the south of an important part of its agricultural workforce.
african americans and the war almost two hundred thousand african americans most of them newly freed slaves eventually served in the union armed forces and made a vital contribution to the norths victory.
without black union soldiers this lithograph depicts the 54th massachusetts volunteer regiment engaged in the assault on fort wagner south carolina on july 18 1863.
the regiment was one of the first official black units of the union army during the civil war and saw extensive service during the war.
chapter 15 secession and the civil war them it is doubtful that the union could have been preserved.
although they were enrolled in segregated units under white officers were initially paid less than their white counterparts and were used disproportionately for garrison duty or heavy labor behind the lines blacks in blue fought heroically in several major battles during the last two years of the war.
one of the most celebrated was the unsuccessful but heroic assault on fort wagner in the harbor of charleston south carolina in july 1863.
the casualty rate for the 54th massachusetts colored regiment exceeded 50 percent.
among the dead was the young white commander robert gould shaw who became an abolitionist martyr.
the assistant secretary of war observed blacks in action at millikins bend on the mississippi in june 1863 and reported that the bravery of blacks in the battle.
completely revolutionized the sentiment of the army with regard to the employment of negro troops those freed during the war who did not serve in the military were often conscripted to serve as contract wage laborers on cotton plantations owned or leased by loyal white planters within the occupied areas of the deep south.
abolitionists protested that the coercion used by military authorities to get blacks back into the cotton fields amounted to slavery in a new form but those in power argued that the necessities of war and the northern economy required such temporary arrangements.
to some extent regimentation of the freedmen within the south was a way of assuring racially prejudiced northerners especially in the midwest that emancipation would not result in a massive migration of black refugees to their region of the country.
the heroic performance of african american troops and the easing of northern fears of being swamped by black migrants led to a deepening commitment to emancipation as a permanent and comprehensive policy.
realizing that his proclamation had a shaky constitutional foundation and might apply only to slaves actually freed while the war was going on lincoln sought to organize and recognize loyal state governments in southern areas under union control on the condition that they abolish slavery in their constitutions.
he also encouraged local campaigns to emancipate the slaves in the border states and saw these programs triumph in maryland and missouri in 1864.
finally lincoln pressed for an amendment to the federal constitution outlawing involuntary servitude.
after supporting its inclusion as a central plank in the republican platform of 1864 lincoln used all his influence to win congressional approval for the new thirteenth amendment.
on january 31 1865 the house narrowly approved the amendment.
there was an explosion of joy on the floor and in the galleries and then the house voted to adjourn for the rest of the day in honor of this immortal and sublime event the cause of freedom for blacks and the cause of the union had at last become one and the same.
lincoln despite his earlier hesitations and misgivings had earned the right to go down in history as the great emancipator.
the tide turns by early 1863 the confederate economy was in shambles and its diplomacy had collapsed.
the social order of the south was also severely strained.
masters were losing control of their slaves and nonslaveholding whites were becoming disillusioned with the hardships of a war that some of them described as a rich mans war and a poor mans fight as slaves fled from the plantations increasing numbers of lower class whites deserted the army or refused to be drafted in the first place.
whole counties in the southern backcountry became deserter havens which confederate officials could enter only at the risk of their lives.
appalachian mountaineers who had remained loyal to the union resisted the confederacy more directly by enlisting in the union army or joining guerrilla units operating behind southern lines.
yet the north was slow to capitalize on the souths internal weaknesses because it had its own serious morale problems.
the long series of defeats on the eastern front had engendered war weariness and the new policies that military necessity forced the government to adopt encountered fierce opposition.
although popular with republicans emancipation was viewed by most democrats as a betrayal of northern war aims.
racism was a main ingredient in their opposition to freeing blacks.
according to one democratic senator we mean that the united states.
shall be the white mans home.
and the nigger shall never be his equal riding a backlash against the preliminary proclamation democrats made significant gains in the congressional elections of 1862 especially in the midwest where they also captured several state legislatures.
the enrollment act of march 1863 which provided for outright conscription of white males but permitted men of wealth to hire substitutes or pay a fee to avoid military service provoked a violent response from those unable to buy their way out of service and unwilling to fight for the niggers a series of antidraft riots broke out culminating in one of the bloodiest domestic disorders in american history the new york riot of july 1863.
the new york mob composed mainly of irishamerican laborers burned the draft offices the homes of leading republicans and an orphanage for black children.
th ey also lynched more than a dozen defenseless blacks.
at least 120 people died before federal troops restored order.
besides racial prejudice the draft riots also reflected working class anger at the wartime privileges and prosperity of the middle and upper classes they exposed deep divisions in the north on the administrations conduct of the war.
to fight dissension and disloyalty the government used its martial law authority to arrest a few alleged ringleaders including one prominent democratic congressman clement vallandigham of ohio.
private patriotic organizations also issued a barrage of propaganda aimed at what they believed was a vast secret conspiracy to undermine the northern war effort.
historians disagree about the real extent of covert and illegal antiwar activity.
no vast conspiracy existed but militant advocates of peace at any price popularly known as copperheads were certainly active in some areas especially among the immigrant working classes of large cities and in southern ohio indiana and illinois.
many copperheads presented themselves as jeffersonian believers in limited government who feared a war induced growth of federal power.
but it was opposition to emancipation on racial grounds rather than anxiety about big government that gave the movement most of its emotional force.
fight to the finish read the document if it were not for my trust in christ testimony from the new york draft riots 1863 an 1863 draft call in new york provoked violence against african americans viewed by the rioters as the cause of an unnecessary war and rage against the rich men who had been able to buy exemptions from the draft.
this 1863 illustration from harpers weekly depicts a mob lynching a black man on clarkson street in new york city.
source collection of the new york historical society.
the only effective way to overcome the disillusionment that fed the peace movement was to start winning battles and thus convince the northern public that victory was assured.
before this could happen the north suffered one more humiliating defeat on the eastern front.
in early may 1863 union forces under general joseph hooker were routed at chancellorsville virginia by a confederate army less than half its size.
once again robert e lee demonstrated his superior generalship this time by dividing his forces and sending stonewall jackson to make a devastating surprise attack on the union right.
the confederacy prevailed but it did suffer one major loss jackson himself died as a result of wounds he received in the battle.
in the west however a major union triumph was taking shape.
for more than a year general ulysses s grant had been trying to put his forces in position to capture vicksburg mississippi the almost inaccessible confederate bastion that stood between the north and control of the mississippi river.
finally in late march 1863 he crossed to the west bank north of the city and moved his forces to a point south of it where he joined up with naval forces that had run the confederate batteries mounted on vicksburgs high bluffs.
in one of the boldest campaigns of the war grant crossed the river deliberately cutting himself off from his sources of supply and marched into the interior of mississippi.
living off the land and out of communication with an anxious and perplexed lincoln his troops won a series of victories over two separate confederate armies and advanced on vicksburg from the east.
after unsuccessfully assaulting the citys defenses grant settled down for a siege on may 22.
the confederate government considered and rejected proposals to mount a major offensive into tennessee and kentucky in the hope of drawing grant away from vicksburg.
instead president davis approved robert e lees plan for an all out invasion of the northeast.
although this option provided no hope for relieving vicksburg it might lead to a dramatic victory that would more than compensate for the probable loss of the mississippi stronghold.
lees army crossed the potomac in june and kept going until it reached gettysburg pennsylvania.
there lee confronted a union army that had taken up strong defensive positions on cemetery ridge and culps hill.
this was one of the few occasions in the war when the north could capitalize on the tactical advantage of choosing its ground and then defending it against an enemy whose supply lines were extended.
chapter 15 secession and the civil war on july 2 a series of confederate attacks failed to dislodge union troops from the high ground they occupied.
the following day lee faced the choice of retreating to protect his lines of communication or launching a final desperate assault.
with more boldness than wisdom he chose to make a direct attack on the strongest part of the union line.
the resulting charge on cemetery ridge was disastrous advancing confederate soldiers dropped like flies under the barrage of union artillery and rifle fire.
only a few made it to the top of the ridge and they were killed or captured.
retreat was now inevitable and lee withdrew his battered troops to the potomac only to find that the river was at flood stage and could not be crossed for several days.
but meade failed to follow up his victory with a vigorous pursuit and lee was allowed to escape a predicament that could have resulted in his annihilation.
vicksburg fell to grant on july 4 the same day lee began his withdrawal and northerners rejoiced at the simultaneous independence day victories that turned the tide of the war.
the union had secured control of the mississippi and had at last won a major battle in the east.
but lincolns joy turned to frustration when he learned his generals had missed the chance to capture lees army and bring a quick end to the war.
last stages of the conflict grants victories in the west earned him promotion to generalin chief of all the union armies.
after assuming that position in march 1864 he ordered a multipronged offensive to finish off the confederacy.
the offensives main movements were a march on richmond under grants personal command and a thrust by the western armies now led by general william tecumseh sherman toward atlanta and the heart of georgia.
in may and early june grant and lee fought a series of bloody battles in northern virginia that tended to follow a set pattern.
lee would take up an entrenched position in the path of the invading force and grant would attack it sustaining heavy losses but also inflicting confederate casualties.
when his direct assault had failed grant would move to his left hoping in vain to maneuver lee into a less defensible position.
in the battles of the wilderness spotsylvania and cold harbor the union lost about sixty thousand men more than twice the number of confederate casualties without defeating lee or opening the road to richmond.
grant decided to change his tactics moving his army to the south of richmond and settling down for a siege.
the siege of petersburg was a long drawn out affair and the resulting stalemate in the east caused northern morale to plummet during the summer of 1864.
lincoln was facing reelection and his failure to end the war dimmed his prospects.
lincoln confronted growing opposition within his own party especially from radicals who disagreed with his apparently lenient approach to the future restoration of seceded states to the union.
after lincoln vetoed a radical supported congressional reconstruction plan in july some radicals began to call for a new convention to nominate another candidate.
the democrats seemed to be in a good position to capitalize on republican divisions and make a strong bid for the white house.
their platform appealed to war weariness by calling for a cease fire followed by negotiations to reestablish the union.
the partys nominee general george mcclellan announced he would not be bound by the peace plank and would pursue the war.
but he promised to end the conflict sooner than lincoln could because he would not insist on emancipation as a condition for reconstruction.
by late summer lincoln confessed privately that he would probably be defeated.
but northern military successes changed the political outlook.
shermans invasion of georgia went well between may and september he employed a series of skillful flanking movements to force the confederates to retreat to the outskirts of atlanta.
on september 2 the city fell and northern forces occupied the hub of the deep south.
the news unified the republican party behind lincoln and improved his chances for defeating mcclellan in november.
the election itself was almost an anticlimax lincoln won 212 of a possible 233 electoral votes and 55 percent of the popular vote.
the republican cause of liberty and union was secure.
the election of 1864 candidate lincoln mcclellan party republican democratic popular vote 2 213 655 1 805 237 electoral vote out of a total of 233 electoral votes.
the eleven secessionist states alabama arkansas florida georgia louisiana mississippi north carolina south carolina tennessee texas and virginia did not vote.
the concluding military operations revealed the futility of further southern resistance.
cutting himself off from his supply lines and living off the land sherman marched unopposed through georgia to the sea destroying almost everything of possible military or economic value in a corridor three hundred miles long and sixty miles wide.
the confederate army that had opposed him at atlanta now under the command of general john b.
hood moved northward into tennessee where it was defeated and almost destroyed by union forces under general george thomas at nashville in middecember.
sherman captured savannah on december 22 and presented the city to lincoln as a christmas present.
he then turned north and carried his scorched earth policy into south carolina with the aim of continuing through north carolina and eventually joining up with grant at petersburg near richmond.
while sherman was bringing the war to the carolinas grant finally ended the stalemate at petersburg.
when lees starving and exhausted army tried to break through the union lines grant renewed his attack and forced the confederates to abandon petersburg and richmond on april 2 1865.
he then pursued them westward for a hundred miles placing his forces in position to cut off their line of retreat to the south.
recognizing the hopelessness of further resistance lee surrendered his army at appomattox courthouse on april 9.
but the joy of the victorious north turned to sorrow and anger when john wilkes booth a pro confederate actor assassinated abraham lincoln as the president watched a play at fords theater in washington on april 14.
although booth had a few fight to the finish view the map gettysburg meade pa july 1 3 1863 oke ho west virginia washington d c r lee stu ar t ohio the civil war part ii 1863 1865 brandy station june 9 1863 a gr may 1 4 1863 nt lee chancellorsville the wilderness may 5 6 1864 fredericksburg spotsylvania courthouse may 8 19 1864 cold harbor richmond james r appomattox armistice apr.
9 1865 petersburg five forks virginia june 3 1864 apr.
1 1865 besieged june 1864 apr.
1865 pennsylvania raleigh armistice apr.
18 1865 ohio washington d c north carolina oh bentonville mar.
19 1865 j e.
johnston west virginia io r richmond james r appomattox armistice apr.
9 1865 kentucky missouri dec 15 16 1864 virginia raleigh armistice apr.
18 1865 tennessee nashville fredericksburg murfreesboro north carolina chattanooga nov 23 25 1863 ho od may 22 july 4 1863 gran siege of vicksburg mississippi t mississippi r arkansas grand gulf chickamauga sept 19 20 1863 champion s hill may 14 1863 july 20 22 28 1864 occupied sept 2 1864 she may 16 1863 jackson south carolina atlanta rma n alabama j e.
johnston georgia pemberton grant savannah captured dec 22 1864 port gibson may 1 1863 mobile bay at l a n t i c ocean aug 5 1864 louisiana 200 miles gulf of mexico florida 200 kilometers union troop movements confederate troop movements union blockade confederate troop retreat union victories confederate victories civil war 1863 1865 in the western theater of war grants victories at port gibson jackson and champions hill cleared the way for his siege of vicksburg.
in the east after the hard won union victory at gettysburg the south never again invaded the north.
in 1864 and 1865 union armies gradually closed in on lees confederate forces in virginia.
leaving atlanta in flames sherman marched to the georgia coast took savannah then moved his troops north through the carolinas.
grants army though suffering enormous losses moved on toward richmond marching into the confederate capital on april 3 1865 and forcing surrender.
chapter 15 secession and the civil war read the document william t sherman the march through georgia this illustration depicts general william tecumseh sherman s successful union army march through georgia from may 1864 to december 1864.
sherman s destruction of almost all valuable military and economic assets in georgia and later in the carolinas during this period broke the will of continued resistance by southern forces.
accomplices one of whom attempted to murder secretary of state seward popular theories that the assassination was the result of a vast conspiracy involving confederate leaders or according to another version radical republicans have never been substantiated.
the man who had advocated sacrifice for the union cause at gettysburg had himself given the last full measure of devotion to the cause of government of the people by the people for the people four days after lincolns death the only remaining confederate force of any significance the troops under joseph e johnston who had been opposing sherman in north carolina laid down its arms.
the union was saved.
effects of the war how did the outcome of the war affect america socially and politically.
the nation that emerged from four years of total war was not the same america that had split apart in 1861.
over 618 000 young men were in their graves victims of enemy fire or the diseases that spread rapidly in military encampments in this era before modern medicine and sanitation.
the widows and sweethearts they left behind temporarily increased the proportion of unmarried women in the population and some members of this generation of involuntary spinsters sought new opportunities for making a living or serving the community that went beyond the purely domestic roles previously prescribed for women.
during the war northern women pushed the boundaries of their traditional roles by participating on the homefront as fund raisers and in the rear lines as army nurses and members of the sanitary commission.
the sanitary commission promoted health in the northern armys camps through attention to cleanliness nutrition and medical care.
however women were not limited to playing roles as nurses and angels of mercy throughout the war they also filled key positions in the administration and organization of patriotic organizations.
women in the north simultaneously utilized their traditional position as nurturers to participate in the war effort while they advanced new ideas about their role in society.
the large number who had served as nurses or volunteer workers during the war were especially responsive to effects of the war watch the video the meaning of the civil war for americans over the past 150 years americans have given many different meanings to the civil war.
for some in the south it was the lost cause a romantic contest of fallen heroes.
even some northerners came to accept this view of the conflict in the decades afterward.
today we celebrate the end of slavery but mourn the terrible loss of life in that bloody war.
calls for broadening the womans sphere some of the northern women who were prominent in wartime service organizations such as louise lee schuyler josephine shaw lowell and mary livermore became leaders of postwar philanthropic and reform movements.
the war did not destroy the barriers to sexual equality that had long existed in american society but the efforts of women during the civil war broadened beliefs about what women could accomplish outside of the home.
the effect on white women in the confederacy was different from the effect of the war on women in the victorious north.
southern women had always been intimately involved in the administration of the farms and plantations of the south but the coming of the war forced them to shoulder even greater burdens.
this was true for wealthy plantation mistresses who took over the administration and maintenance of huge plantations without the benefit of extensive training or the assistance of male relatives.
the wives of small farmers found it hard to survive at all especially at harvest time when they often had to do all the work themselves.
the loss of fathers and brothers the constant advance of union troops and the difficulty of controlling a slave labor force destroyed many southern womens allegiance to the confederate cause.
at the close of the conflict southern women faced the challenge of rebuilding a society that had been chapter 15 secession and the civil war casualties of war 1 556 678 total strength 1 082 119 24 death rate 23 wounded nonmortally died from wounds died from disease union 275 175 100 000 confederacy 110 070 94 000 249 458 164 000 confederate figures represent accepted estimates.
permanently transformed by the experience of war.
as in the north the civil war changed the situation of women in society.
the devastation of the southern economy forced many women to play a more conspicuous public and economic role.
these women responded by forming associations to assist returning soldiers entering the workforce as educators and establishing numerous benevolent and reform societies or temperance organizations.
although these changes created a more visible presence of southern women in public the south remained more conservative in its views about womens proper place than did the north.
at enormous human and economic cost the nation had emancipated four million african americans from slavery but it had not yet resolved that they would be equal citizens.
at the time of lincolns assassination most northern states still denied blacks equality under the law and the right to vote.
whether the north would extend more rights to southern freedmen than it had granted to free negroes was an open question.
the impact of the war on white working people was also unclear.
those in the industrializing parts of the north had suffered and lost ground economically because prices had risen much faster than wages during the conflict.
but republican rhetoric emphasizing equal opportunity and the dignity of labor raised hopes that the crusade against slavery could be broadened into a movement to improve the lot of working people in general.
foreign born workers had additional reason to be optimistic the fact that so many immigrants had fought and died for the union cause had for the moment weakened nativist sentiment and encouraged ethnic tolerance.
what the war definitely decided was that the federal government was supreme over the states and had a broad grant of constitutional authority to act on matters affecting the general welfare the southern principle of state sovereignty and strict construction died at appomattox and the united states was on its way to becoming a true nation state with an effective central government.
but it retained a federal structure although states could no longer claim the right to secede or nullify federal law they still had primary responsibility for most functions of government.
everyone agreed that the constitution placed limits on what the national government could do and questions would continue to arise about where federal authority ended and states rights began.
a broadened definition of federal powers had its greatest impact in the realm of economic policy.
during the war the republican dominated congresses passed a rash of legislation designed to give stimulus and direction to the nations economic development.
taking advantage of the absence of southern opposition republicans rejected the pre civil war tradition of virtual laissez faire and enacted a whiggish program of active support for business and agriculture.
in 1862 congress passed a high protective tariff approved a homestead act intended to encourage settlement of the west by providing free land to settlers granted huge tracts of public land to railroad companies to support the building of a transcontinental railroad and gave the states land for the establishment of agricultural colleges.
the following year congress set up a national banking system that required member banks to keep adequate reserves and invest one third of their capital in government securities.
the notes the national banks issued became the countrys first standardized and reliable circulating paper currency.
these wartime achievements added up to a decisive shift in the relationship between the federal government and private enterprise.
the republicans took a limited government that did little more than seek to protect the marketplace from the threat of monopoly and changed it into an activist state that promoted and subsidized the efforts of the economically ambitious and industrious.
conclusion an organizational revolution the most pervasive effect of the war on northern society was to encourage an organizational revolution aided by government policies venturesome businessmen took advantage of the new national market created by military procurement to build larger firms that could operate across state lines some of the huge corporate enterprises of the postwar era began to take shape.
philanthropists also developed more effective national associations the most notable of these were the sanitary and christian commissions that ministered to the physical and spiritual needs of the troops.
efforts to care for the wounded influenced the development of the modern hospital and the rise of nursing as a female profession.
both the men who served in the army and those men conclusion an organizational revolution and women who supported them on the homefront or behind the lines became accustomed to working in large bureaucratic organizations of a kind that had scarcely existed before the war.
ralph waldo emerson the eras most prominent man of letters revealed in his civil war writings that the conflict encouraged a dramatic shift in american thought about the relationship between the individual and society.
before the war emerson had generally championed the transcendent individual who stood apart from institutions and organizations and sought fulfillment in an inner world of imagination and cosmic intuition.
during the conflict he began to exalt the claims of organization government and civilization over the endeavors of the private man to find fulfillment through self culture he even extolled military discipline and became an official visitor to west point.
in 1837 he had said of young men who aspired to political office wake them up and they shall quit the false good and leap to the true and leave governments to clerks and desks now he affirmed almost the opposite government must not be a parish clerk a justice of the peace.
it has of necessity in any crisis of the state the absolute powers of a dictator in purging his thoughts of extreme individualism and hailing the need to accept social discipline and participate in organized cooperative activity emerson epitomized the way the war affected american thought and patterns of behavior.
the north won the war mainly because it had shown a greater capacity than the south to organize innovate and modernize its victory meant the nation as a whole would now be ready to embrace the conception of progress that the north had affirmed in its war effort not only its advances in science and technology but also its success in bringing together and managing large numbers of men and women for economic and social goals.
the civil war was thus a catalyst for the great transformation of american society from an individualistic society of small producers into the more highly organized and incorporated america of the late nineteenth century.
chapter 15 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 15 secession and the civil war on myhistorylab time line 1860 south carolina secedes from the union december 1861 rest of deep south secedes confederacy is founded january february fort sumter is fired upon and surrenders to confederate forces april upper south secedes april may south wins first battle of bull run july grant captures forts henry and donelson february farragut captures new orleans for the union april mcclellan leads unsuccessful campaign on the peninsula southeast of richmond march july south wins second battle of bull run august mcclellan stops lee at battle of antietam september lincoln issues preliminary emancipation proclamation september lee defeats union army at fredericksburg december 1863 lincoln issues final emancipation proclamation january lee is victorious at chancellorsville may north gains major victories at gettysburg and vicksburg july grant defeats confederate forces at chattanooga november grant and lee battle in northern virginia may june atlanta falls to sherman september lincoln is reelected president defeating mcclellan november sherman marches through georgia november december congress passes thirteenth amendment abolishing slavery january grant captures petersburg and richmond lee surrenders at appomattox april lincoln assassinated by john wilkes booth april remaining confederate forces surrender april may chapter review the storm gathers fight to the finish what developments and events drew the union toward civil war.
how did the union fi nally attain victory and what role did emancipation play in it.
lincolns election prompted the secession of seven states.
in south carolina cooperationism was defeated sparking other states to follow.
republicans rejected compromise on the question of slavery in new states and lincoln resolved to use force should the south strike first.
at fort sumter in 1861 it did.
p 342 lincoln was skeptical of emancipation although he favored it morally.
later he saw the strategic benefit of opposing slavery so he declared the freedom of slaves in unoccupied areas in the january 1863 emancipation proclamation.
many african americans escaped slavery and joined the union army helping to turn the tide of the war.
union victories helped reelect lincoln in 1864.
p 352 adjusting to total war effects of the war atlantic ocean nta a.
union naval blockade to restrict shipping what challenges did total war bring for each side.
total strength 24 death rate total war meant no cease fire until the southern separatists were defeated.
the north with its large population heavy industry and agriculture was better suited for the long conflict.
the south struggled to feed itself and lacked wealth yet put up a strong fight.
meanwhile lincoln maintained northern unity p 346 fla 23 wounded nonmortally how did the outcome of the war affect america socially and politically.
275 175 100 000 the civil war changed the status of many social groups including women who took on new social roles after the death of male family members and blacks who were adjusting to free status in a white society.
new national institutions including benevolent organizations and banks contributed to an organizational revolution the federal government grew stronger than ever.
p 360 died from wounds died from disease 110 070 94 000 249 458 164 000 study resources key terms and definitions cooperationists southerners in 1860 who advocated secession by the south as a whole rather than unilateral secession by each state.
p 343 south had not yet been defeated the proclamation did not immediately free anyone but it made emancipation an explicit war aim of the north.
p 354 crittenden compromise introduced by kentucky senator john crittenden in 1861 in an attempt to prevent secession and civil war it would have extended the missouri compromise line west to the pacific.
p 344 copperheads northern democrats suspected of being indifferent or hostile to the union cause in the civil war.
p 356 greenbacks war.
p 348 paper currency issued by the union during the civil sanitary commission an association chartered by the government during the civil war to promote health in the northern armys camps through cleanliness nutrition and medical care.
p 360 emancipation proclamation on january 1 1863 president abraham lincoln proclaimed that the slaves of the confederacy were free.
since the critical thinking questions 1.
given your knowledge of society and economy in the south and public policy in the north do you think the union could have been preserved through means other than outright warfare.
how did lincolns personal character affect the morale of the north 3.
what were the pros and cons of emancipation for someone like lincoln who supported it personally.
during the course of the war did the american people shape the fate of government or did government shape the lives of its people.
and the outcome of the war.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 15 on myhistorylab the storm gathers watch the video view the map the civil war part ii 1863 1865 p 359 read the document william t sherman the march through georgia p 360 complete the assignment war p 350 soldiering in the civil fight to the finish read the document if it were not for my trust in christ testimony from the new york draft riots 1863 p 357 secession p 344 adjusting to total war black union soldiers p 355 what caused the civil war.
p 342 read the document south carolina declaration of the causes of secession p 343 view the map view the closer look read the document p 354 the emancipation proclamation effects of the war watch the video americans p 361 the meaning of the civil war for indicates study plan media assignment the agony of reconstruction contents and learning objectives the president versus congress pg.
368 retreat from reconstruction pg.
379 what conflicts arose among lincoln johnson and congress during reconstruction.
why did reconstruction end.
reconstructing southern society pg.
374 who benefited and who suffered from the reconciliation of the north and south.
what problems did southern society face during reconstruction.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab reunion and the new south pg.
382 feature essay forty acres and a mule.
chapter 14 the sectional crisis brooks assaults sumner in congress on may 22 1856 representative preston brooks of south carolina erupted onto the floor of the senate with a cane in his hand.
he approached charles sumner the antislavery senator from massachusetts who had recently given a fiery oration condemning the south for plotting to extend slavery to the kansas territory.
what was worse the speech had included insulting references to senator andrew butler of south carolina a kinsman of brooks.
when brooks found sumner seated at his desk brooks proceeded to batter him over the head.
amazed and stunned sumner made a desperate effort to rise and ripped his bolted desk from the floor.
he then collapsed under a continued torrent of blows.
sumner was so badly injured by the assault that he did not return to the senate for three years.
but his home state reelected him in 1857 and kept his seat vacant as testimony against southern brutality and barbarism in parts of the north that were up in arms against the expansion of slavery sumner was hailed as a martyr to the cause of free soil brooks denounced in the north as a bully was lionized by his fellow southerners.
when he resigned from the house after a vote of censure had narrowly failed because of solid southern opposition his constituents reelected him unanimously.
these contrasting reactions show how bitter sectional antagonism had become by 1856.
sumner spoke for the radical wing of the new republican party which was making a bid for national power by mobilizing the north against the alleged aggressions of the slave power southerners viewed the very existence of this party as an insult to their section of the country and a threat to its vital interests.
sumner came closer to being an abolitionist than any other member of congress and nothing created greater fear and anxiety among southerners than their belief that antislavery forces were plotting against their way of life.
to many northerners bully brooks stood for all the arrogant and violent slaveholders who were allegedly conspiring to extend their barbaric labor system.
by 1856 therefore the sectional cleavage that would lead to the civil war had already undermined the foundations of national unity.
he crisis of the mid 1850s came only a few years after the elaborate compromise of 1850 had seemingly resolved the dispute over the future of slavery in the territories acquired as a result of the mexican war.
the kansas nebraska act of 1854 set in motion the renewed agitation over the extension of slavery that led to brooks attack on sumner.
this legislation revived the sectional conflict and led to the emergence of the republican party.
from that point on a dramatic series of events increased sectional t after his constituents learned of preston brooks caning of senator sumner they sent brooks a gold handled cowhide whip to use on other antislavery advocates.
confrontation and destroyed the prospects for a new compromise.
the caning of charles sumner was one of these events and violence on the senate floor foreshadowed violence on the battlefield.
less tangible features of sectionalism emotion and ideology were not as divisive as they would later become.
hence a fragile compromise was achieved through a kind of give and take that would not be possible in the changed environment of the mid 1850s.
the compromise of 1850 the problem of slavery in the mexican cession how did territorial expansion intensify the conflict over slavery.
the irrepressible conflict over slavery in the territories began in the late 1840s.
the positions taken on this issue between 1846 and 1850 established the range of options that would reemerge after 1854.
but during this earlier phase of the sectional controversy the leaders of two strong national parties each with substantial followings in both the north and the south had a vested interest in resolving the crisis.
efforts to create uncompromising sectional parties failed to disrupt what historians call the second party system the vigorous competition between whigs and democrats that had characterized elections since the 1830s.
furthermore the as the price of union between states committed to slavery and those in the process of abolishing it the founders had attempted to limit the role of the slavery issue in national politics.
the constitution gave the federal government the right to abolish the international slave trade but no definite authority to regulate or destroy the institution where it existed under state law.
although many of the founders hoped for the eventual demise of slavery they provided no direct means to achieve this end except voluntary state action.
these ground rules limited the effect of northern attacks on the souths peculiar institution.
it was easy to condemn slavery in principle but very difficult to develop a practical program to eliminate it without defying the constitution.
chapter 14 the sectional crisis radical abolitionists saw this problem clearly and resolved it by rejecting the law of the land in favor of a higher law prohibiting human bondage.
in 1844 william lloyd garrison publicly burned the constitution condemning it as a covenant with death an agreement with hell but garrison spoke for a small minority dedicated to freeing the north at whatever cost from the sin of condoning slavery.
during the 1840s the majority of northerners showed that while they disliked slavery they were not abolitionists.
they were inclined to view slavery as a backward and unwholesome institution much inferior to their own free labor system and could be persuaded that slaveholders were power hungry aristocrats seeking more than their share of national political influence.
but they regarded the constitution as a binding contract between slave and free states and were likely to be prejudiced against blacks and reluctant to accept large numbers of them as free citizens.
consequently they saw no legal or desirable way to bring about emancipation within the southern states.
but the constitution had not predetermined the status of slavery in future states.
since congress had the power to admit new states to the union under any conditions it wished to impose a majority arguably could require the abolition of slavery as the price of admission.
an effort to use this power had led to the missouri crisis of 1819 1820 see chapter 9.
the resulting compromise was designed to decide future cases by drawing a line between slave and free states and extending it westward through the unsettled portions of what was then american soil.
when specific territories were settled organized and prepared for statehood slavery would be permitted south of the line and prohibited north of it.
the tradition of providing both the free north and the slave south with opportunities for expansion and the creation of new states broke down when new territories were wrested from mexico in the 1840s.
when texas was admitted as a slave state northern expansionists could still look forward to the admission of oregon as a counterbalancing free state.
but the mexican war raised the prospect that california and new mexico both south of the missouri compromise line would also be acquired.
since it was generally assumed in the north that congress had the power to prohibit slavery in new territories a movement developed in congress to do just that.
the wilmot proviso launches the free soil movement the free soil crusade began in august 1846 only three months after the start of the mexican american war when congressman david wilmot a pennsylvania democrat proposed an amendment to the military appropriations bill that would ban slavery in any territory acquired from mexico.
wilmot spoke for the large number of northern democrats who felt neglected and betrayed by the partys choice of polk over van buren in 1844 and by the prosouthern policies of the polk administration including a low tariff and lack of federal funding for internal improvements.
democratic expansionists also felt betrayed that polk had gone back on his pledge to obtain all of oregon right before waging a war to win all of texas and the southwest.
like david wilmot they were jealous of the power of the south the pioneer free soilers had a genuine interest in the issue actually at hand the question of who would control and settle the new territories.
combining an appeal to racial prejudice with opposition to slavery as an institution wilmot defined his cause as involving the rights of white freemen to go to areas where they could live without the disgrace which association with negro slavery brings on white labor wilmot proposed that slavery as well as settlement by free african americans be prohibited in the territory obtained in the mexican cession thus enhancing the opportunities of the norths common folk by preventing job competition from slaves and free blacks.
by linking racism with resistance to the spread of slavery wilmot appealed to a broad spectrum of northern opinion.
northern whigs backed the proviso because they shared wilmots concern about the outcome of an unregulated competition between slave and free labor in the territories.
furthermore voting for the measure provided a good outlet for their frustration at being unable to halt the annexation of texas and the mexican american war.
the preferred position of some whig leaders was no expansion at all but when expansion could not be avoided the northern wing of the party endorsed the view that acquisition of mexican territory should not be used to increase the power of the slave states.
in the first house vote on the wilmot proviso party lines crumbled and were replaced by a sharp sectional cleavage.
every northern congressman with the exception of two democrats voted for the amendment and every southerner except two whigs went on record against it.
after passing the house the proviso was blocked in the senate by a combination of southern influence and democratic loyalty to the administration.
when the appropriations bill went back to the house without the proviso the administrations arm twisting succeeded in changing enough northern democratic votes to pass the bill and thus send the proviso down to defeat.
the end of the mexican american war the formal acquisition of new mexico and california and the approaching election of 1848 gave new urgency to a search for politically feasible solutions.
the extreme alternatives the proviso policy of free soil and the radical southern response that slavery could be extended to any territory threatened to destroy the national parties because there was no bisectional support for either of them.
squatter sovereignty and the election of 1848 after a futile attempt was made to extend the missouri compromise line to the pacific a proposal that was unacceptable to northerners because most of the mexican cession lay south of the line a new approach was devised that appealed especially to democrats.
its main proponent was senator lewis cass of michigan an aspirant for the partys presidential nomination.
cass who described his formula as squatter sovereignty would leave the determination of the status of slavery in a territory to the actual settlers.
from the beginning this proposal contained an ambiguity that allowed it to be interpreted differently in the north and the south.
for northern democrats squatter sovereignty or popular sovereignty as it was later called meant the settlers could vote slavery up or down at the first meeting of a territorial legislature.
for the southern wing of the party it meant a decision would be made only at the time a convention drew up a constitution and applied for statehood.
it was in the interest of national democratic leaders to leave this ambiguity unresolved for as long as possible.
the compromise of 1850 the election of 1848 candidate taylor cass van buren party whig democratic free soil popular vote 1 360 967 1 222 342 291 263 electoral vote congress failed to resolve the future of slavery in the mexican cession in time for the election of 1848 and the issue entered the arena of presidential politics.
the democrats nominated cass on a platform of squatter sovereignty.
the whigs evaded the question by running general zachary taylor the hero of the battle of buena vista without a platform.
taylor refused to commit himself on the status of slavery in the territories but northern whigs favoring restriction took heart from the generals promise not to veto any territorial legislation passed by congress.
southern whigs went along with taylor mainly because he was a southerner who owned slaves and would presumably defend the interests of his native region.
northerners who strongly supported the wilmot proviso and felt betrayed that neither the whigs nor the democrats were supporting it were attracted by a third party movement.
in august a tumultuous convention in buffalo nominated former president van buren to carry the banner of the free soil party.
support for the free soilers came from antislavery whigs dismayed by their partys nomination of a slaveholder and its evasiveness on the territorial issue disgruntled democrats who had backed the proviso and resented southern influence in their party and some of the former adherents of the abolitionist liberty party.
van buren himself was motivated less by antislavery zeal than by bitterness at being denied the democratic nomination in 1844 because of southern obstructionism.
the founding of the free soil party was the first significant effort to create a broadly based sectional party addressing itself to voters concerns about the extension of slavery.
after a noisy and confusing campaign taylor came out on top winning a majority of the electoral votes in both the north and the south and a total of 1 360 967 popular votes to 1 222 342 for cass and 291 263 for van buren.
the free soilers failed to carry a single state but did quite well in the north coming in second behind taylor in new york massachusetts and vermont.
taylor takes charge once in office taylor devised a bold plan to decide the fate of slavery in the mexican cession.
a brusque military man who disdained political give and take he tried to engineer the immediate admission of california and new mexico to the union as states thus bypassing the territorial stage entirely and avoiding a congressional debate on the status of slavery in the federal domain.
under the administrations urging california which was filling up rapidly with settlers drawn by the lust for gold convened a constitutional convention and applied for admission to the union as a free state.
instead of resolving the crisis president taylors initiative only worsened it.
once it was clear that california was going to be a free state the administrations plan aroused intense opposition in the south.
fearing that new mexico would also be free because in this cartoon democrats lewis cass and john c calhoun and antislavery radicals horace greeley william lloyd garrison and abby folsom look on as martin van buren the free soil party candidate in the election of 1848 attempts to bridge the chasm between the democratic platform and that of the antislavery whigs.
the free soil influence was decisive in the election it split the new york democratic vote thus allowing whig candidate zachary taylor to win new york and the presidency.
chapter 14 the sectional crisis mexican law had prohibited slavery there southerners of both parties accused the president of trying to impose the wilmot proviso in a new form.
the prospect that only free states would emerge from the entire mexican cession inspired serious talk of secession.
in congress senator john c calhoun of south carolina saw a chance to achieve his long standing goal of creating a southern voting bloc that would cut across regular party lines.
state legislatures and conventions throughout the south denounced northern aggression against the rights of the slave states.
as signs of southern fury increased calhoun rejoiced that the south had never been so united.
bold and decided in the fall and winter of 1849 1850 several southern states agreed to participate in a convention to be held in nashville in june where grievances could be aired and demands made.
for an increasing number of southern political leaders the survival of the union would depend on the norths response to the demands of the southern rights movement.
forging a compromise when it became clear that the president would not abandon or modify his plan in order to appease the south independent efforts began in congress to arrange a compromise.
hoping that he could again play the role of great pacificator as he had in the missouri view the closer look compromise of 1820 senator henry clay of kentucky offered a series of resolutions meant to restore sectional harmony.
he hoped to reduce tension by providing mutual concessions.
on the critical territorial question his solution was to admit california as a free state and organize the rest of the mexican cession with no explicit prohibition of slavery in other words without the wilmot proviso.
noting that mexican law had already abolished slavery there he also pointed to the arid climate of the new mexico region which made it unsuitable for cotton culture and slavery.
he also sought to resolve a major boundary dispute between new mexico and texas by granting the disputed region to new mexico while compensating texas through federal assumption of its state debt.
as a concession to the north on another issue the existence of slavery in the district of columbia he recommended prohibiting the buying and selling of slaves at auction and permitting the abolition of slavery itself with the consent of the districts white inhabitants.
he also called for a more effective fugitive slave law.
these proposals provided the basis for the compromise of 1850.
proposed in february 1850 it took several months for the compromise to get through congress.
one obstacle was president taylors firm resistance to the proposal another was the difficulty of getting congressmen to vote for it in the form of a single package or omnibus bill few politicians from either section the compromise of 1850 british north america canada ke la unorganized territory wis vt n h mich ke la ie er r i conn n j pa md.
california ky n c new mexico territory tenn indian territory s c ark.
texas atlantic ocean ga ala la.
fla free state or territory gulf of mexico slave state or territory opened to slavery by principle of popular sovereignty mass.
n y iowa utah territory pacific ocean lak ron hu minnesota territory lake ontario e oregon territory me.
superior lake michigan mexico 500 miles 500 kilometers the compromise of 1850 the compromise was actually a series of resolutions granting some concessions to the north especially admission of california as a free state and some to the south such as a stricter fugitive slave law.
political upheaval 1852 1856 were willing to go on record as supporting the key concessions to the other section.
the logjam was broken in july by two crucial developments president taylor died and was succeeded by millard fillmore who favored the compromise and a decision was made to abandon the omnibus strategy in favor of a series of measures that could be voted on separately.
after the breakup of the omnibus bill democrats replaced the original whig sponsors as leaders of the compromise movement and some of clays proposals were modified to make them more acceptable to the south and the democrats.
senator stephen a douglas a democrat from illinois was particularly influential.
as the price of democratic support the popular sovereignty principle was included in the bills organizing new mexico and utah.
territorial legislatures in the mexican cession were explicitly granted power over all rightful subjects of legislation abolition of slave auctions and depots in the district of columbia and a new fugitive slave law were also enacted.
the latter was a particularly outrageous piece of legislation suspected fugitives were now denied a jury trial the right to testify in their own behalf and other basic constitutional rights.
as a result there were no effective safeguards against falsely identifying fugitives or kidnapping free blacks.
the compromise passed because its key measures were supported by northern democrats southern whigs and representatives of both parties from the border states.
no single bill was backed by a majority of the congressmen from both sections and few senators or representatives actually voted for the entire package.
read the document the fugitive slave act 1850 both sides doubted the value and workability of a compromise that was really more like an armistice or a cease fire.
yet the compromise of 1850 did serve for a short time as a basis for sectional peace.
probably the greatest challenges to the stability of the compromise came from a few sensational rescues or attempted rescues of fugitive slaves by free blacks in the north.
in boston in 1854 an antislavery mob led by armed abolitionists tried to free fugitive anthony burns from the court house where his extradition hearing was to take place.
one of the men guarding burns was killed but the fugitive himself could not be reached.
after the hearing had declared burns an escaped slave he was escorted by units of the u s army through a hissing and groaning crowd of twenty thousand to a waiting ship.
after this event few efforts were made to apprehend escaped slaves in those parts of the north where antislavery sentiment was deeply rooted.
political upheaval 1852 1856 how did the two party system change during this period.
the second party system democrats versus whigs survived the crisis over slavery in the mexican cession but in the long run the compromise of 1850 may have weakened it.
although both national parties had been careful during the 1840s not to take stands on the slavery issue that would alienate their supporters in either section of the country they had in fact offered voters alternative ways of dealing with the question.
democrats had endorsed headlong territorial expansion with the promise of a fair division of the spoils between slave and free states.
whigs had generally opposed annexations or acquisitions because they were likely to bring the slavery question to the fore and threaten sectional harmony.
with some shifts of emphasis and interpretation each strategy could be presented as either a protection or containment of slavery.
yet the stability of the situation was fragile.
when the democrats sought to revive the manifest destiny issue in 1854 they reopened the explosive issue of slavery in the territories.
the whigs were too weak and divided to respond with a policy of their own and a purely sectional free soil party the republicans gained prominence.
without strong national parties to contain sectionalism the divisions between north and south intensified.
the party system in crisis southerners had long objected to northern states attitudes toward runaway slaves.
in fact many northern states had passed personal liberty laws in an effort to protect free black people from kidnapping and to shield runway slaves from capture by making it more difficult as well as more expensive for slaveholders to recover their property.
nevertheless for the thousands of northerners who wanted to remain neutral passage of the fugitive slave act quashed their comfortable middle ground.
the presidential campaign of 1852 was singularly devoid of major issues.
with the slavery question under wraps some whigs tried to revive interest in the nationalistic economic policies that were the traditional hallmarks of their party.
but convincing arguments in favor of a protective tariff a national bank and internal improvements were hard to make in a period of sustained prosperity.
another tempting issue was immigration.
many evangelical protestant whigs were upset by the massive influx of catholics from europe who voted overwhelmingly for their democratic opponents.
while some whig leaders called for restrictions on immigrant voting rights others wanted to compete with the democrats for the immigrant vote including the whig nominee for president general winfield scott.
the fact that scotts chapter 14 the sectional crisis the election of 1852 candidate pierce scott hale popular vote 1 601 117 1 385 453 155 825 party democratic whig free soil pierce received 254 electoral votes from 27 states while scott carried only 4 states with 42 electoral votes.
this outcome revealed that the whig party was in deep trouble because it lacked a program that would distinguish it from the democrats and would appeal to voters in both sections of the country.
despite their overwhelming victory in 1852 the democrats had reasons for anxiety about the loyalty of their supporters.
because the major parties had ceased to offer clear cut alternatives to the electorate voter apathy or alienation was a growing trend in the early 1850s.
electoral vote daughters were being raised as catholics was publicized to demonstrate his good intentions toward immigrant communities.
this strategy backfired.
for the most part catholic immigrants retained their democratic allegiance and some nativist whigs apparently sat out the election to protest their partys disregard of their cultural prejudices.
but the main cause for scotts crushing defeat was the support he lost in the south when he allied himself with the dominant northern antislavery wing of the party led by senator william seward of new york.
the democratic candidate franklin pierce of new hampshire was a colorless nonentity compared to his rival but he ran up huge majorities in the deep south where whigs stayed home in massive numbers.
he also edged out scott in most of the free states.
in the most one sided election since 1820 view the map the kansas nebraska act raises a storm in january 1854 senator stephen a douglas of illinois proposed a bill to organize the territory west of missouri and iowa.
since this region fell within the area where slavery had been banned by the missouri compromise douglas anticipated objections from southerners concerned about the creation of more free states.
to head off this opposition and keep the democratic party united douglas disregarded the compromise line and sought to set up the territorial government in kansas and nebraska on the basis of popular sovereignty relying on the alleged precedent set in the compromise of 1850.
the compromise of 1850 and the kansas nebraska act british north america canada w lak mich la ke ie er iowa ohio ill utah territory pacific ocean vt n h ind.
pa n and maso ine l dixon r i conn n j del.
va kansas territory mo.
ky missouri compromise line 363 california indian territory new mexico territory n c 0 tenn s c ark.
ala ga atlantic ocean la.
texas fla free state or territory gulf of mexico slave state or territory opened to slavery by principle of popular sovereignty compromise of 1850 mass.
n y ron nebraska territory wis lake ontario hu minnesota territory oregon territory me.
uperior e r er nt to ng hi as s ke la lake michigan mexico opened to slavery by principle of popular sovereignty kansas nebraska act of 1854 the kansas nebraska act of 1854 500 miles 500 kilometers the kansas nebraska act applied the principle of popular sovereignty to voters in the kansas and nebraska territories allowing them to decide for themselves whether to permit slavery in their territories.
the act repudiated the missouri compromise of 1820 which had prohibited slavery in the territory of the louisiana purchase north of 3630 latitude.
political upheaval 1852 1856 douglas wanted to organize the kansas nebraska area quickly.
along with other midwestern promoters of the economic development of the frontier he hoped a railroad would soon be built from chicago to the pacific and did not want controversy over the status of slavery in the new territory to slow down the building of the railroad.
douglas also hoped his kansas nebraska bill would revive the spirit of manifest destiny that had given the democratic party cohesion and electoral success in the mid1840s see chapter 13.
the price of southern support douglas soon discovered was the addition of an amendment explicitly repealing the missouri compromise.
although he realized this would raise a hell of a storm he reluctantly agreed.
in this more provocative form the bill made its way through congress passing the senate by a large margin and the house by a narrow one.
the vote in the house showed that douglas had split his party rather than uniting it exactly half of the northern democrats voted against the legislation.
the democrats who broke ranks created the storm that douglas had predicted but underestimated.
a manifesto of independent democrats denounced the bill as a gross violation of a sacred pledge a memorial from three thousand new england ministers described it as a craven and sinful surrender to the slave power.
for many northerners probably a majority the kansas nebraska act was an abomination because it permitted the possibility of slavery in an area where it had previously been prohibited.
southerners who had not pushed for such legislation or even shown much interest in it now felt obligated to support it lending fuel to northern fears of a conspiracy to extend slavery.
douglass bill had a catastrophic effect on sectional harmony.
it repudiated a compromise that many in the north regarded as a binding sectional compact almost as sacred and necessary to the survival of the union as the constitution itself.
in defiance of the whole compromise tradition it made a concession to the south on the issue of slavery extension without providing an equivalent concession to the north.
from then on northern sectionalists would be fighting to regain what they had lost while southerners would battle to maintain rights already conceded.
the act also destroyed what was left of the second party system.
the already weakened and tottering whig party totally disintegrated when its congressional representation split cleanly along sectional lines on the kansas nebraska issue.
the democratic party survived but now firmly under southern control without the ability to act as a unifying national force.
the congressional elections of 1854 revealed the political chaos douglas had created.
in the north anti nebraska coalitions of whigs dissident democrats and free soilers swept regular vt maine 2 n h 3 wis 2 ill 1 mich 3 pa 9 ohio 12 ind.
1 ala 1 md.
2 n c tenn ark.
r i 3 conn 4 n j 3 del.
1 va 1 ky 1 mo.
2 calif mass.
2 n y 15 iowa texas 1 s c ga la.
fla house of representatives totals party democratic whig republican american other 1852 1853 1854 1855 source congressional quarterly guide to u s.
elections 2nd ed 1985.
congressional election of 1854 bolting ex democratic majority states no majority party states democratic majority states nonvoting territories previously whig majority states or gain in 2 1 loss democratic seats the impact of the kansas nebraska act was immediately felt in the election of 1854.
anti nebraska coalitions and the fledgling republican party made gains in the north the democrats remained dominant in the south.
chapter 14 the sectional crisis democrats out of office.
in some states these anti democratic coalitions would evolve directly into a new and stronger free soil party the republicans.
in the deep south however the democrats routed the remaining whigs and came close to ending two party competition on the state level.
the furor over kansas nebraska also doomed the efforts of the pierce administration to revive an expansionist foreign policy by acquiring cuba from spain.
in october 1854 the american ministers to england france and spain met in ostend belgium and drew up a memorandum for the administration urging acquisition of cuba by any means necessary including force if spain refused to sell the island.
the ostend manifesto became public in the midst of the controversy resulting from the kansas nebraska act.
northerners who were convinced that the administration was trying to extend slavery to the great plains were enraged to discover it was also scheming to fulfill the southern expansionist dream of a caribbean slave empire the resulting storm of protest forced pierce and his cohorts to abandon their scheme.
native born and even some immigrant protestants looked with suspicion on the mostly catholic irish and germans see chapter 13 who clustered in separate communities or neighborhoods in american cities.
nativists expressed their hatred in bloody anti catholic riots in church and convent burnings and in a barrage of propaganda and lurid literature trumpeting the menace of popery to the american way of life.
in 1849 a secret fraternal organization the order of the star spangled banner was founded in new york as a vehicle for anti immigrant attitudes.
when members were asked about the organization they were instructed to reply i know nothing the order grew rapidly in size by 1854 reaching a membership of between 800 000 and 1 500 000.
the political objective of the american party or know nothing party as it became known was to extend the period of naturalization in order to undercut immigrant voting strength and to keep aliens in their place.
much of the partys backing came from whigs looking for a new home but the party also attracted some ex democrats.
in the north knownothing candidates generally opposed the kansas nebraska act and some of their support came from voters who were as anxious about the expansion of slavery as they were about the an appeal to nativism evils of immigration.
the know nothing episode the success of the new party was so dramatic that it was the collapse of the whigs created the opening for a new politicompared to a hurricane.
in 1854 it won complete control in cal party.
the anti nebraska coalitions of 1854 suggested that such massachusetts capturing the governorship most of the seats in a party might be organized on the basis of northern opposition the legislature and the entire congressional delegation.
in 1855 to the extension of slavery to the territories.
instead for a time the know nothings took power in three more new england states it appeared that the whigs would be replaced by a nativist party swept maryland kentucky and texas and emerged as the principal rather than an antislavery one.
opposition to the democrats everywhere else except in the midwest.
by late 1855 the know nothings showed every sign of displacing the whigs as the nations second party.
read the document john gihon kansas begins to bleed yet the know nothing movement quickly collapsed.
its demise in 1856 is one of the great mysteries of american political history.
as an intersectional party its failure is understandable enough.
when the know nothings attempted to hold a national convention in 1856 northern and southern delegates split on the question of slavery in the territories showing that former whigs were still at odds over the same issue that had destroyed their old party.
less clear is why the knownothings failed to become the major opposition party to the democrats in the north.
the most persuasive explanation is that their free soil republican rivals who were seeking to build a party committed to the containment of slavery had an issue with wider appeal.
in 1855 and 1856 the rate of immigration declined the bitter contest over popular sovereignty in kansas erupted into violence between proslavery and antislavery noticeably and the conflict in kansas groups.
the skirmishes including the one at hickory point near leavenworth depicted here resulted in two hundred deaths and heavy property destruction before federal troops were brought in to restore order.
heightened the concern about slavery.
political upheaval 1852 1856 consequently voters who opposed both the expansion of slavery and unrestricted immigration were inclined to give priority to the former threat.
kansas and the rise of the republicans the new republican party was an outgrowth of the anti nebraska coalition of 1854.
the republican name was first used in midwestern states such as wisconsin and michigan where know nothingism failed to win a mass following.
a new political label was required because free soil democrats who were an especially important element in the midwestern coalitions refused to march under the whig banner or even support any candidate for high office who called himself a whig.
when the know nothing party split over the kansas nebraska issue in 1856 most of the northern nativists became republicans.
the republican argument that the slave power conspiracy was a greater threat to american liberty and equality than an alleged popish plot proved to be persuasive.
although republican leaders generally avoided taking anti immigrant positions some out of strong principle and others with an eye to the votes of the foreign born the party showed a clear commitment to the values of native born evangelical protestants.
on the local level republicans generally supported causes that reflected an anti immigrant or anticatholic bias such as prohibition of the sale of alcoholic beverages observance of the sabbath defense of protestant bible reading in schools and opposition to state aid for parochial education.
unlike the know nothings the republican party was led by seasoned professional politicians who had earlier been prominent whigs or democrats.
adept at organizing the grass roots building coalitions and employing all the techniques of popular campaigning they built up an effective party apparatus in an amazingly short time.
by late 1855 the party had won over two thirds of the anti nebraska congressmen elected in 1854.
by early 1856 the new party was well established throughout the north and was preparing to make a serious bid for the presidency.
the republican partys position on slavery in the territories had a strong and growing appeal.
republicans viewed the unsettled west as a land of opportunities a place to which the ambitious and hardworking could migrate in the hope of improving their social and economic position.
free soil would serve as a guarantee of free competition or the right to rise but if slavery was permitted to expand the rights of free labor would be denied.
slaveholders would monopolize the best land use their slaves to compete unfairly with free white workers and block efforts at commercial and industrial development.
they could also use their political control of new western states to dominate the federal government in the interest of the slave power some republicans also pandered to racial prejudice they presented their policy as a way to keep african americans out of the territories thus preserving the new lands for exclusive white occupancy.
the turmoil associated with attempts to implement popular sovereignty in kansas kept the territorial issue alive and enabled the republicans to increase their following throughout the north.
when kansas was organized in the fall of 1854 a bitter contest began for control of the territorial government.
new englanders founded an immigrant aid society to encourage antislavery settlement in kansas but the earliest arrivals came from the neighboring slaveholding state of missouri.
in the first territorial elections proslavery settlers were joined at the polls by thousands of missouri residents who crossed the border to vote illegally.
the result was a decisive victory for the slave state forces.
the legislature then proceeded to pass laws that not only legalized slavery but made it a crime to speak or act against it.
settlers favoring free soil were already a majority of the actual residents of the territory when the fraudulently elected legislature denied them the right to agitate against slavery.
to defend themselves and their convictions they took up arms and established a rival territorial government under a constitution that outlawed slavery.
the pierce administration and its appointed local agents refused to recognize this free state initiative but republicans in congress defended it.
a small scale civil war then broke out between the rival regimes culminating in may 1856 when proslavery adherents raided the free state capital at lawrence.
portrayed in republican propaganda as the sack of lawrence this incursion resulted in substantial property damage but no deaths.
more bloody was the reprisal carried out by the antislavery zealot john brown.
upon hearing of the attack on lawrence brown and a few followers murdered five proslavery settlers in cold blood.
during the next few months until a truce was arranged by an effective territorial governor in the fall of 1856 a hit and run guerrilla war raged between free state and slave state factions.
since the sack of lawrence occurred at about nebraska territory 50 miles 50 kilometers missouri kansas territory k an o miss sas r uri r.
kansas city topeka lawrence may 21 1856 osawatomie aug 31 1856 pottawatomie creek led by john brown may 24 1856 marais des cygnes may 19 1858 attacks by free state forces attacks by pro slavery forces kansas one result of the kansasnebraska act of 1854 was the border war that erupted between proslavery and antislavery forces in bleeding kansas.
chapter 14 the sectional crisis the same time that preston brooks assaulted charles sumner on the senate floor see pp.
314 315 the republicans launched their 1856 campaign under twin slogans bleeding kansas and bleeding sumner the image of an evil and aggressive slave power using violence to deny constitutional rights to its opponents was a potent device for gaining northern sympathies and votes.
alarming and raised grave doubts about the security of slavery within the union.
the continued success of a unified democratic party under southern control was widely viewed as the last hope for the maintenance of sectional balance and southern rights the house divided 1857 1860 sectional division in the election of 1856 the republican nominating convention revealed the strictly sectional nature of the new party.
only a handful of the delegates from the slave states attended and all of these were from the upper south.
the platform called for liberation of kansas from the slave power and for congressional prohibition of slavery in all territories.
the nominee was john c frmont explorer of the west and participant in the conquest of california during the mexican american war.
the democratic convention dumped the ineffectual pierce passed over stephen a douglas and nominated james buchanan of pennsylvania who had a long career in public service.
the democrats platform endorsed popular sovereignty in the territories.
the american party a know nothing remnant that survived mainly as the rallying point for anti democratic conservatives in the border states and parts of the south chose ex president millard fillmore as its standard bearer and received the backing of those northern whigs who refused to become republicans and hoped to revive the tradition of sectional compromise.
the election was really two separate races one in the north between frmont and buchanan and the other in the south between fillmore and buchanan.
the pennsylvania democrat emerged victorious because he outpolled fillmore in all but one of the slave states maryland and edged out frmont in pennsylvania new jersey indiana and illinois.
but the republicans did remarkably well for a party that was scarcely more than a year old.
frmont won eleven of the sixteen free states sweeping the upper north with substantial majorities and winning a larger proportion of the northern popular vote than either of his opponents.
since the free states had a substantial majority in the electoral college a future republican candidate could win the presidency simply by overcoming a slim democratic edge in the lower north.
how did the institution of slavery go beyond political and economic debates.
the sectional quarrel deepened and became virtually irreconcilable in the years between buchanans election in 1856 and lincolns victory in 1860.
a series of incidents provoked one side or the other heightened the tension and ultimately brought the crisis to a head.
behind the panicky reaction to public events lay a growing sense that the north and south were so culturally different and so opposed in basic interests that they could no longer coexist.
president buchanan did little to halt the downward spiral.
a series of scandals emerged in the second half of his presidency and buchanans unwillingness to deal with them revealed his watch the video harriet beecher stowe and the making of uncle toms cabin the election of 1856 candidate buchanan frmont fillmore party democratic republican american know nothing popular vote electoral vote 1 832 955 1 339 932 871 731 in the south where the possibility of a frmont victory had revived talk of secession the results of the election brought momentary relief tinged with deep anxiety about the future.
the very existence of a sectional party committed to restricting the expansion of slavery constituted an insult to the southerners way of life.
that such a party was genuinely popular in the north was profoundly harriet beecher stowes best known novel uncle toms cabin 1852 changed forever how americans viewed slavery the system that treated people as property.
the house divided 1857 1860 weakness.
for example secretary of war john floyd sold land containing an army fort in minnesota for a suspiciously lowprice while at the same time overpaying contractors for munitions.
buchanan rebuffed congressional investigators in part because getting rid of floyd a fellow southern democrat would have damaged his fragile political support.
buchanan hoped to keep the south in the union by maintaining the status quo according to his biographer and hoped that the sectional crisis could be resolved by congress or the supreme court without his having to take action.
but his passivity only hastened the descent into conflict.
cultural sectionalism signs of cultural and intellectual cleavage had appeared well before the triumph of sectional politics.
in the mid 1840s a number of churches split into northern and southern denominations officially as well as informally because of differing attitudes toward slaveholding.
increasingly northern preachers and congregations denounced slaveholding as a sin while most southern church leaders rallied to a biblical defense of the peculiar institution and became influential apologists for the southern way of life.
prominent religious leaders were in the forefront of sectional mobilization.
as men of god they helped to turn political questions into moral issues and reduced the prospects for a compromise.
american literature also became sectionalized during the 1840s and 1850s.
southern men of letters including such notable figures as novelist william gilmore simms and edgar allan poe wrote proslavery polemics.
popular novelists produced a flood of plantation romances that seemed to glorify southern civilization and sneer at that of the north.
the notion that planter cavaliers were superior to money grubbing yankees was the message that most southerners derived from this homegrown literature.
in the north prominent men of letters emerson thoreau james russell lowell and herman melville expressed strong antislavery sentiments in prose and poetry particularly after the outbreak of the mexican american war.
literary abolitionism reached a climax in 1852 when harriet beecher stowe published uncle toms cabin an enormously successful novel it sold more than 300 000 copies in a single year that fixed in the northern mind the image of the slaveholder as a brutal simon legree.
much of its emotional impact came from the books portrayal of slavery as a threat to the family and the cult of domesticity.
when the saintly uncle tom was sold away from his adoring wife and children northerners shuddered with horror and some southerners felt a painful twinge of conscience.
southern defensiveness gradually hardened into cultural and economic nationalism.
northern textbooks were banished from southern schools in favor of those with a prosouthern slant young men of the planter class were induced to stay in the south for higher education rather than going north as had been the custom and a movement developed to encourage southern industry and commerce as a way of reducing dependence on the north.
almost without exception prominent southern educators and intellectuals of the late 1850s rallied behind southern sectionalism and many even endorsed the idea of an independent southern nation.
the dred scott case when james buchanan was inaugurated on march 4 1857 the dispute over the legal status of slavery in the territories allowed sectional fears and hatreds to enter the political arena.
buchanan hoped to close that door by encouraging the supreme court to resolve the constitutional issue once and for all.
the court was then about to render its decision in the case of dred scott v sandford.
see the law and society essay the case of dred and harriet scott pp.
the plaintiff in the case was a missouri slave who sued for his freedom on the grounds that he had lived for many years in an area where slavery had been outlawed by the missouri compromise.
the supreme court could have decided the issue on the narrow ground that a slave was not a citizen and therefore had no right to sue in federal courts.
but president elect buchanan in the days just before the inauguration encouraged the court to render a broader decision that would settle the slavery issue.
watch the video dred scott and the crises that led to the civil war dred scotts legal battle to gain his freedom traveled all the way to the u s supreme court where justice taneys effort to settle once and for all the constitutional questions regarding slavery in a sweeping decision instead incited northerners to vote for the republican party and hastened the coming of the civil war.
chapter 14 the sectional crisis on march 6 chief justice roger b taney announced that the majority had ruled against scott.
taney argued that no african american slave or free could be a citizen of the united states.
but the real bombshell in the decision was the ruling that dred scott would not have won his case even if he had been a legal plaintiff.
his residence in the wisconsin territory established no right to freedom because congress had no power to prohibit slavery there.
the missouri compromise was thus declared unconstitutional and so implicitly was the plank in the republican platform that called for the exclusion of slavery from all federal territories.
in the north and especially among republicans the courts verdict was viewed as the latest diabolical act of the slave power conspiracy the charge that the decision was a political maneuver rather than a disinterested interpretation of the constitution was supported by strong circumstantial evidence.
five of the six judges who voted in the majority were proslavery southerners and their resolution of the territorial issue was close to the extreme southern rights position long advocated by john c calhoun.
republicans denounced the decision as a wicked and false judgment and as the greatest crime in the annals of the republic but they stopped short of openly defying the courts authority.
the decision actually helped the republicans build support it lent credence to their claim that an aggressive slave power was dominating all branches of the federal government and attempting to use the constitution to achieve its own ends.
read the document stephen a douglas debate at galesburg illinois 1858 the lecompton controversy while the dred scott case was being decided leaders of the proslavery faction in kansas concluded that the time was ripe to draft a constitution and seek admission to the union as a slave state.
since settlers with free state views were now an overwhelming majority in the territory supporters of slavery tried to rig the election for convention delegates.
when it became clear the election was fixed the free staters boycotted it and the proslavery forces won complete control.
the resulting constitution drawn up at lecompton was certain to be voted down if submitted to the voters in a fair election and sure to be rejected by congress if no referendum of any kind was held.
to resolve the dilemma supporters of the lecompton constitution decided to permit a vote on the slavery provision alone giving the electorate the narrow choice of allowing or forbidding the future importation of slaves.
since there was no way to vote for total abolition the free state majority again resorted to a boycott thus allowing ratification of a constitution that protected existing slave property and did not restrict importations.
meanwhile however the free staters had finally gained control of the territorial legislature and they authorized a second referendum on the constitution as a whole.
this time the proslavery party boycotted the election and the lecompton constitution was overwhelmingly rejected.
the lecompton constitution was such an obvious perversion of popular sovereignty that stephen a douglas spoke out against it.
but the buchanan administration bowing to southern pressure tried to push it through congress in early 1858 despite overwhelming evidence that the people of kansas did not want to enter the union as a slave state.
while buchanan scored a victory in the senate a stephen douglas the little giant from illinois won election to congress when he was just thirty years old.
four years later he was elected to the senate.
source collection of the new york historical society neg.
number 38219 coalition of republicans and douglas democrats defeated the bill in the house.
a face saving compromise allowed resubmission of the constitution to the kansas voters on the pretext that a change in the provisions for a federal land grant was required.
finally in august 1858 the people of kansas killed the lecompton constitution when they voted it down by a margin of 6 to 1.
the lecompton controversy aggravated the sectional quarrel and made it truly irreconcilable for republicans the administrations frantic efforts to admit kansas as a slave state exposed southern dominance of the democratic party and the lengths to which proslavery conspirators would go to achieve their ends.
among democrats the affair opened a deep rift between the followers of douglas and the backers of the buchanan administration.
because of his anti lecompton stand douglas gained popularity in the north and some republicans even flirted with the idea of the house divided 1857 1860 joining forces with him against the doughfaces prosouthern democrats who stood with buchanan.
for douglas himself however the affair was a disaster it destroyed his hopes of uniting the democratic party and defusing the slavery issue through the application of popular sovereignty.
what had happened in kansas suggested that popular sovereignty in practice was an invitation to civil war.
for his stand against lecompton douglas was denounced as a traitor in the south and his hopes of being elected president were seriously diminished.
read the document abraham lincoln debate at galesburg illinois 1858 debating the morality of slavery douglass more immediate problem was to win reelection to the senate from illinois in 1858.
here he faced surprisingly tough opposition from a republican candidate who in defiance of precedent was nominated by a party convention.
at this time senators were elected by state legislatures.
douglass rival former whig congressman abraham lincoln set out to convince the voters that douglas could not be relied on to oppose the extension of slavery even though he had opposed the admission of kansas under a proslavery constitution.
in the famous speech that opened his campaign lincoln tried to distance himself from his opponent by taking a more radical position.
he argued that the nation had reached the crisis point in the struggle between slavery and freedom a house divided against itself cannot stand i believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free lincoln then described the chain of events between the kansas nebraska act and the dred scott decision as evidence of a plot to extend and nationalize slavery.
he called for defensive actions to stop the spread of slavery and place it where the public mind shall rest in the belief that it is in the course of ultimate extinction he tried to link douglas to this proslavery conspiracy by pointing to his rivals unwillingness to take a stand on the morality of slavery and to his professed indifference about whether slavery was voted up or down in the territories.
for lincoln the only security against the triumph of slavery and the slave power was moral opposition to human bondage.
neutrality on the moral issue would lull the public into accepting the expansion of slavery until it was legal everywhere.
in the subsequent series of debates that focused national attention on the illinois senatorial contest lincoln hammered away at the theme that douglas was a covert defender of slavery because he was not a principled opponent of it.
douglas responded by accusing lincoln of endangering the union by his talk of putting slavery on the path to extinction.
denying that he was an abolitionist lincoln made a distinction between tolerating slavery in the south where it was protected by the constitution and allowing it to expand to places where it could legally be prohibited.
restriction of slavery he argued had been the policy of the founders and it was douglas and the democrats who had departed from the great tradition of containing an evil that could not be immediately eliminated.
in the debate at freeport illinois lincoln questioned douglas on how he could reconcile popular sovereignty with the dred scott decision.
the little giant as douglas was called by his admirers responded that slavery could not exist without supportive abraham lincoln shown here in his first full length portrait.
although lincoln lost the contest for the senate seat in 1858 the lincoln douglas debates established his reputation as a rising star of the republican party.
legislation to sustain it and that territorial legislatures could simply refrain from passing a slave code.
douglass most effective tactic was to charge that lincolns moral opposition to slavery implied a belief in racial equality.
lincoln facing an intensely racist electorate vigorously denied this charge and affirmed his commitment to complete the assignment the enigma of john brown on myhistorylab feature essay o n december 2 1859 an old man with a thick white beard who might have stepped out of the pages of the old testament stood on a scaffold in virginia awaiting execution for attempting to start a slave insurrection.
he was unrepentant and without fear.
defiantly facing the assembled militiamen and other onlookers he handed one of his attendants a prophetic message claiming that he had acted under divine inspiration and that it was gods will that the crimes of this guilty land will never be purged away but with blood his abortive raid on the federal arsenal at harpers ferry virginia had sent a wave of fear through the slaveholding south but the manner of his death and his strong antislavery sentiments made him a hero to many in the north.
no single man did more to heighten the sectional crisis of the late 1850s and increase the probability of civil war.
but who was this man and how did he come to play such an important role in the sectional drama.
controversy surrounded him during his lifetime and has continued to do so ever since.
many african americans have revered him as the rare example of a white man willing to give his life for black freedom.
unlike most white americans he seems to have been totally free of racial prejudice and at times identified with blacks so completely that he and they could almost forget that he was not one of them.
but the means that he used to pursue his ends his willingness to resort to violence even to terrorism has troubled many of those who find his objectives praiseworthy.
the enigma of john brown the obvious impracticality of the plan for a massive slave uprising that he tried to put into effect at harpers ferry also has raised questions about his soundness of mind.
john brown was born in connecticut in 1800 the descendent of an old new england family that may have been represented on the mayflower.
he received little formal education and followed in his fathers occupation as a tanner of leather.
lured westward like so many new englanders of the time he pursued the tanning business first in western pennsylvania and then in ohio.
but unsuccessful land speculations and the hard times following the panic of 1837 drove him into bankruptcy in 1842.
he then became a wool dealer but faced ruin again in 1849 when his attempt to cut out the usual middlemen and make a direct sale of 200 000 pounds of american wool to buyers in england resulted in a huge loss.
such risk taking and the resulting ups and downs were normal experiences for the businessmen of the time.
brown may have been unluckier than some others but the notion that his antislavery zeal was somehow a compensation for business failure makes little sense.
as early as 1834 at a time when his tannery was doing well brown proposed to raise a black boy in his own family as an experiment to show slaveholders that race was no obstacle to the building of character.
he also considered opening a school for black children.
by 1847 however brown had given up on the idea that education and example could end slavery.
while still a successful wool merchant in springfield massachusetts he confided to the black abolitionist frederick douglass the germ of the plan he later tried to put into effect at harpers ferry instigation of guerrilla war against slavery based in the mountains of the south.
in 1851 brown organized springfields blacks into a secret militia to resist enforcement of the fugitive slave act of 1850.
in 1854 he retired from the wool business with the intention of devoting the rest of his life to the cause of black freedom and equality.
from a farm in north elba new york he acted as patron of a struggling black agricultural colony and also served as a conductor on the underground railroad when fugitives heading for canada came his way.
by the fall of 1855 the front line of the struggle against slavery was in kansas see p 323.
following in the wake of his five sons brown went west to join the fray in september.
after proslavery ruffians sacked the free state capital of lawrence in the spring of 1856 brown led a retaliatory raid on proslavery settlers living along pottawatamie creek.
in what can only be described as an act of terrorism brown and his men executed five defenseless men who had been rousted from their beds.
his apparent objective was to instill fear and panic among the proslavery forces possibly driving them to commit outrages of their own and thus further polarize the nation on the slavery question.
perhaps brown already had concluded that a civil war or something like it was the only way to end slavery and he appeared committed to bringing it about by any means necessary.
for the next two years brown operated as a guerrilla fighter in kansas raising money from eastern supporters who were unaware of his role in the pottawatamie massacre.
read the document john browns address before sentencing this painting the last moments of john brown celebrates the passionate abolitionist as a hero and martyr to the antislavery cause.
on his way to the gallows he pauses to greet a slave mother and her child.
source detail from the last moments of john brown.
gift of mr and mrs carl stoeckel 1897.
the metropolitan museum of art new york ny u s a.
image copyright the metropolitan museum of art art resource ny.
volunteers eighteen of whom raided the federal arsenal.
the plan was to seize the arms and distribute them to rebellious slaves.
the raid turned into a debacle when the local militia trapped brown and his men in a fire engine house.
ten of browns men including two of his sons died as a result of the shooting that ensued.
the survivors including brown himself were captured by a force of u s marines sent from washington and commanded by colonel robert e lee.
local slaves did not as brown had hoped rise up spontaneously in rebellion once the violence had commenced.
if brown was certain that his attempt to ignite a slave uprising and a guerrilla war would succeed he was clearly deluded and possibly deranged.
frederick douglass whom brown had invited to join the raiders decided that the plan had no reasonable chance of success and refused to participate.
but the fact that brown seemed to welcome his martyrdom almost rejoicing in it raises another intriguing possibility.
brown may have realized that the odds were against him and that he would probably fail.
but he may also have calculated quite correctly as it turned out that the panic that even an abortive raid would evoke from the south and the sympathy that the punishment of its perpetrators might arouse in the north would push the nation closer to the civil war that he had come to believe was the only way to end slavery.
if the voice he heard in his head was indeed that of an angry god ready to punish the nation for the sin of slavery his logic was irrefutable.
questions for discussion in may 1858 when the threat of the admission of kansas to the union as a slave state had been averted brown started organizing his raid on harpers ferry.
he began by assembling a convention of black fugitives and abolitionists in canada to draw up the constitution for the independent black state that he hoped to establish in the southern mountains as the base for a guerrilla war against the slaveholders.
he then sought financial support from northern abolitionists and gathered a racially integrated force of twenty two 1.
why was john browns attitude toward black people so unusual in antebellum america.
what did brown hope to achieve by raiding harpers ferry.
why did the raid push the nation closer to civil war.
chapter 14 the sectional crisis white supremacy.
he would grant blacks the right to the fruits of their own labor while denying them the privileges of full citizenship.
this was an inherently contradictory position and douglas made the most of it.
although republican candidates for the state legislature won a majority of the popular votes the democrats carried enough counties to send douglas back to the senate.
lincoln lost an office but he won respect in republican circles.
by emphasizing the moral dimension of the slavery question and undercutting any possibility of fusion between republicans and douglas democrats he sharpened his partys ideological focus and stiffened its backbone against any temptation to compromise its free soil position.
the souths crisis of fear after kansas became a free territory in august 1858 the issue of slavery in the territories lost some of its immediacy.
the remaining unorganized areas in the rockies and northern great plains were unlikely to attract slaveholding settlers.
southern expansionists still dreamed of annexations in the caribbean and central america but had little hope of winning congressional approval.
nevertheless southerners continued to demand the right to take their slaves into the territories and republicans persisted in denying it to them.
although the republicans repeatedly promised they would not interfere with slavery where it already existed southerners refused to believe them and interpreted their unyielding stand against the extension of slavery as a threat to southern rights and security.
events in late 1859 and early 1860 turned southern anxiety about northern attitudes and policies into a crisis of fear the events alarmed slaveholders because they appeared to threaten their safety and dominance in a new and direct way.
the first of these incidents was john browns raid on harpers ferry virginia in october 1859.
see the feature essay the enigma of john brown pp.
brown who had the appearance and manner of an old testament prophet thought of himself as gods chosen instrument to purge this land with blood and eradicate the sin of slaveholding.
on october 16 he led eighteen men from his band of twenty two which included five free blacks across the potomac river from his base in maryland and seized the federal arsenal and armory in harpers ferry.
while brown hoped his revolt would spread the neighboring slaves did not rise up to join him.
browns raiders were either killed or captured and put on trial for treason against the state of virginia.
the subsequent investigation produced evidence that several prominent northern abolitionists had approved of browns plan to the extent they understood it and had raised money for his preparations.
this seemed to confirm southern fears that abolitionists were actively engaged in fomenting slave insurrection.
after brown was sentenced to be hanged southerners were further stunned by the outpouring of sympathy and admiration that his impending fate aroused in the north.
as ralph waldo emerson expressed it brown would make the gallows as glorious as the cross his actual execution on december 2 completed browns elevation to the status of a martyred saint of the antislavery cause.
the day of his death was marked in parts of the north by the tolling of bells the firing of cannons and the holding of memorial services.
although republican politicians were quick to denounce john brown for his violent methods southerners interpreted the wave of northern sympathy as an expression of the majority opinion and the republicans real attitude.
according to historian james mcpherson they identified brown with the abolitionists the abolitionists with republicans and republicans with the whole north within the south the raid and its aftermath incited fear repression and mobilization.
witch hunts searched for the agents of a vast imagined conspiracy to stir up slave rebellion vigilance committees were organized in many localities to resist subversion and ensure control of slaves and orators pointed increasingly to secession as the only way to protect southern interests.
brown was scarcely in his grave when another set of events put southern nerves on edge again.
next to abolitionist abetted rebellions the slaveholding souths greatest fear was that the nonslaveholding majority would turn against the master class and the solidarity of southern whites behind the peculiar institution would crumble.
hinton r helper a white southerner published the impending crisis of the south in 1859 calling on lower class whites to resist planter dominance and abolish slavery in their own interest.
slaveholders regarded the book as even more seditious than uncle toms cabin and they feared the spread of helperism among poor whites almost as much as they feared the effect of john brownism on the slaves.
southern suspicion of the republicans grew even more heated when the republican candidate for speaker of the house of representatives john sherman of ohio used helpers book as a campaign manifesto.
southern congressmen threatened secession if sherman was elected and feelings became so heated that some representatives began to carry weapons on the floor of the house.
it became clear that sherman could not be elected and his name was withdrawn in favor of a moderate republican who had refrained from endorsing helpers book.
the contest helped persuade southerners that the republicans were committed to stirring up class conflict among southern whites.
anxiety about the future allegiance of nonslaveholding whites had been growing during the 1850s because of changes in the pattern of slave ownership.
a dramatic rise in the price of slaves meant that fewer whites could own slaves slave ownership was down from 30 to 25 percent of all white households across the south and from 50 to 40 percent in the cotton belt of the lower south.
perceiving in this trend the seeds of class conflict some proslavery extremists had called for the reopening of the atlantic slave trade as a way to reduce the price of slaves and make them more widely available others wanted to preserve the appreciated value of their human property.
either way many planters became convinced that a republican victory in the presidential election of 1860 would be intolerable.
the election of 1860 the republicans sniffing victory and generally insensitive to the depth of southern feeling against them met in chicago on may 16 to nominate a presidential candidate.
the initial front runner the house divided 1857 1860 election of 1860 electoral vote by state popular vote republican abraham lincoln 180 1 865 593 democratic southern john c breckinridge 848 356 democratic northern stephen a douglas 1 382 713 constitutional union john bell 592 906 4 689 568 terr.
g or un wash nebraska terr.
11 13 kansas terr.
indian terr.
new mexico terr.
senator william h seward of new york had two strikes against him he had a reputation for radicalism and a record of strong opposition to the nativist movement.
the majority of the delegates wanted a less controversial nominee who could win two or three of the northern states that had been in the democratic column in 1856.
abraham lincoln met their specifications he was from illinois a state the republicans needed to win he had a more moderate image than seward and he had kept his personal distaste for know nothingism to himself.
in addition he was a selfmade man whose rise from frontier poverty to legal and political prominence embodied the republican ideal of equal opportunity for all.
after trailing seward by a large margin on the first ballot lincoln picked up enough strength on the second to pull virtually even and was nominated on the third.
the platform like the nominee was meant to broaden the partys appeal in the north.
although a commitment to halt the expansion of slavery remained economic matters received more attention than they had in 1856.
with an eye on pennsylvania the delegates called for a high protective tariff other planks included endorsement of free homesteads which was popular in the midwest and among working people and federal aid for internal improvements especially a transcontinental railroad.
the platform was cleverly designed to bring most ex whigs into the republican camp while also accommodating enough renegade democrats to give the party a solid majority in the northern states.
the democrats failed to present a united front.
when the party first met in the sweltering heat of charleston in late april douglas commanded a majority of the delegates but was unable to win the two thirds required for nomination due to unyielding southern opposition.
he did succeed in getting the convention to endorse popular sovereignty as its slavery platform but the price was a walkout by deep south delegates who favored a federal slave code for the territories.
unable to agree on a nominee the convention adjourned to reconvene in baltimore in june.
the next time around a fight developed over whether to seat newly selected pro douglas delegations from some deep south states in place of the bolters from the first convention.
when the douglas forces won most of the contested seats another and more massive southern walkout took place.
the result was a fracture of the democratic party.
the delegates who remained nominated douglas and reaffirmed the partys commitment to popular sovereignty while the bolters convened elsewhere to nominate john breckinridge of kentucky on a platform of federal protection for slavery in the territories.
by the time the campaign was under way four parties were running presidential candidates the republicans the douglas democrats the southern rights democrats and a remnant of conservative whigs and know nothings known as the constitutional union party.
taking no explicit stand on the issue of slavery in the territories the constitutional unionists tried to represent the spirit of sectional accommodation that had led to compromise in 1820 and 1850.
in effect the race became a separate two party contest in each section in the north the real choice was between lincoln and douglas in the south the only candidates with a fighting chance were breckinridge and john bell the constitutional union candidate.
douglas alone tried to carry on a national campaign gaining some support in every state but actually winning only in missouri.
when the results came in the republicans had achieved a stunning victory.
by gaining the electoral votes of all the free states except those from three districts of new jersey that voted for douglas lincoln won a decisive majority 180 to 123 over his combined opponents.
in the north his 54 percent of the popular vote annihilated douglas.
in the south where lincoln was not even on the ballot breckinridge triumphed everywhere except in virginia kentucky and tennessee which went for bell and the constitutional unionists.
the republican strategy of seeking power by trying to win decisively in the majority section was brilliantly successful.
although less than 40 percent of those who went to the polls throughout the nation actually voted for lincoln his support in the north was so solid that he would have won in the electoral college even if his opponents had been unified behind a single candidate.
most southerners saw the result of the election as a catastrophe.
a candidate and a party with no support in their own section had won the presidency on a platform viewed as insulting to southern honor and hostile to vital southern interests.
since the birth of the republic southerners had either sat in the white house or exerted considerable influence over those who did.
those days might now be gone forever.
rather than accepting permanent minority status in american politics and facing the resulting dangers to black slavery and white liberty the political leaders of the lower south launched a movement for immediate secession from the union.
chapter 14 the sectional crisis in this cartoon from the 1860 election candidates lincoln and douglas struggle for control of the country while breckinridge tears away the south.
john bell of the constitutional union party futilely attempts to repair the damage to the torn nation.
conclusion explaining the crisis generations of historians have searched for the underlying causes of the crisis leading to disruption of the union but have failed to agree on exactly what they were.
some emphasize the clash of economic interests between agrarian and industrializing regions.
but this interpretation does not reflect the way people at the time expressed their concerns.
the main issues in the sectional debates of the 1850s were whether slavery was right or wrong and whether it should be extended or contained.
disagreements over protective tariffs and other economic measures benefiting one section or the other were clearly secondary.
furthermore it has never been clear why the interests of northern industry and those of the souths commercial agriculture were irreconcilable.
economically there was no necessity for producers of raw materials to go to war with those who marketed or processed those raw materials.
another group of historians blame the crisis on irresponsible politicians and agitators on both sides of the mason dixon line.
public opinion they argue was whipped into a frenzy over issues that competent statesmen could have resolved.
but this viewpoint has been sharply criticized for failing to acknowledge the depths of feeling that could be aroused by the slavery question and for underestimating the obstacles to a peaceful solution.
the predominating view is that the crisis was rooted in profound ideological differences over the morality and utility of slavery as an institution.
most interpreters now agree that the roots of the conflict lay in the fact that the south was a slave society and determined to stay that way while the north was equally committed to a free labor system.
no other differences divided the regions in this decisive way and it is hard to imagine that secessionism would have developed if the south had followed the norths example and abolished slavery earlier.
nevertheless slavery will not explain why the crisis came when it did and in the way that it did.
why did the conflict become irreconcilable in the 1850s and not earlier or later.
why did it take the form of a political struggle over the future of slavery in the territories.
adequate answers to both questions require an understanding of political developments that were not directly caused by tensions over slavery.
by the 1850s the established whig and democratic parties were in trouble partly because they no longer offered the voters clear cut alternatives on economic issues that had been the bread and butter of politics during the second party systems heyday.
this situation created an opening for new parties and issues.
after the know nothings failed to use attitudes toward immigrants as the basis for a political realignment the republicans used the issue conclusion explaining the crisis of slavery in the territories to build the first successful sectional party in american history.
they were not abolitionists calling for free soil rather than freedom for blacks.
indeed the majority of northerners were committed to white supremacy and to the original constitutional compromise establishing a hands off policy toward slavery in the southern states.
for southerners the republican party now became the main issue and they fought against it from within the democratic party until it ceased to function as a national organization in 1860.
why did the slavery extension issue arouse such strong feelings in the two sections during the 1850s.
the same issue had arisen earlier and had proved adjustable even in 1820 when the second party system with its vested interest in compromise had not yet emerged.
if the expansion of slavery had been as vital and emotional a question in 1820 as it was in the 1850s the declining federalist party presumably would have revived in the form of a northern sectional party adamantly opposed to the admission of slave states to the union.
ultimately therefore the crisis of the 1850s must be understood as having a deep social and cultural dimension as well as a purely political one.
in uncle toms cabin harriet beecher stowe personified the cultural conflict in her depiction of two brothers with similar personalities one of whom settled in vermont to rule over rocks and stones and the other in louisiana to rule over men and women the first became a deacon in the church a member of the local abolition society and despite his natural authoritarianism the adherent of a democratic theory the second became indifferent to religion openly aristocratic a staunch defender of slavery and an extreme racist he considered the negro through all possible gradations of color as the intermediate link between man and animals stowes comparison may have been biased but she showed a good understanding of how the contrasting environments of slavery and freedom could lead very similar men to have sharply conflicting world views.
this divergence in basic beliefs and values had widened and become less manageable between the 1820s and the 1850s.
both sections continued to profess allegiance to the traditional republican ideals of individual liberty and independence and both were strongly influenced by evangelical religion.
but differences in the economic and social development of each region transformed a common culture into two conflicting cultures.
in the north a rising middle class adapted to the new market economy with the help of an evangelical christianity that sanctioned self discipline and social reform see chapter 12.
the south on the other hand embraced slavery as a foundation for the liberty and independence of whites.
its evangelicalism encouraged personal piety but not social reform and gave only limited attention to building the kind of personal character that made for commercial success.
the notion that white liberty and equality depended on resistance to social and economic change and to get to the heart of the matter on continuing to have enslaved blacks to do menial labor became more deeply entrenched.
when politicians appealed to sectionalism during the 1850s therefore they could evoke conflicting views of what constituted the good society.
the south with its allegedly idle masters degraded unfree workers and shiftless poor whites seemed to a majority of northerners to be in flagrant violation of the protestant work ethic and the ideal of open competition in the race of life from the dominant southern point of view the north was a land of hypocritical money grubbers who denied the obvious fact that the virtue independence and liberty of free citizens was possible only when dependent laboring classes especially racially inferior ones were kept under the kind of rigid control that only slavery could provide.
according to the ideology of northern republicans the freedom of the individual depended on equality of opportunity for everyone in the minds of southern sectionalists it required that part of the population be enslaved.
once these contrary views of the world had become the main themes of political discourse sectional compromise was no longer possible.
complete the assignment the case of dred and harriet scott blurring the borders of politics and justice on myhistorylab law and society the case of dred and harriet scott blurring the borders of politics and justice i n 1856 a violent civil war in kansas over the right to bring slaves into the territory along with preston brooks near fatal caning of abolitionist senator charles sumner on the floor of the senate convinced free soil northerners that the slave power had grown impossibly aggressive.
likewise southerners had come to believe that the abolitionists tentacles were everywhere.
it was in this overheated atmosphere that the supreme court decided the case of dred scott in 1857.
chief justice roger taney apparently hoped that his opinion might settle the roiling constitutional controversies over the status of slavery in the territories of fugitive slaves in free states and of congresss power to regulate slavery.
instead he probably hastened the resort to armed conflict.
to understand the dred scott case we must go back to the fall of 1832.
with the black hawk war raging a young physician named john emerson accepted a temporary assignment as surgeon at jefferson barracks an army post in missouri where he acquired his sole slave dred scott.
as the war drew to a close he sought and secured a full time commission at fort armstrong illinois and headed north with scott.
after arriving in illinois scott continued to attend to emersons personal needs and performed most of the work on emersons land claims.
for two years scott functioned as a contradiction in terms a slave laboring in a free state.
scotts status grew even more complicated with emersons next transfer which took the two men farther north.
the pair traveled to fort snelling in what was then wisconsin territory an area where the missouri compromise explicitly forbade the practice of slavery.
while in wisconsin territory scott met and married another transported slave harriet robinson.
their union would last for the remainder of dred scotts life and produce four children two of whom died in infancy.
when john emerson died in december 1843 dred and harriet scott found themselves back in missouri and under the authority of emersons wife irene sanford emerson.
dred scott attempted to purchase his familys freedom but mrs emerson refused his offer.
then in the spring of 1846 the scotts took mrs emerson to court claiming dr emerson had forfeited all rights of ownership a decade earlier when he transported them into free territory.
this relatively common maneuver by the scotts initiated a series of legal struggles that would eventually reach the supreme court of the united states.
to avoid any direct challenge to the logic or legality of slavery legal doctrine in missouri required dred and harriet scott to file a convoluted claim which accused mrs emerson of assault and false imprisonment.
such a claim did not directly argue the case for freedom but in fact forced the court to decide on that very issue.
if the scotts were rightfully the slaves of mrs emerson her abusive behavior toward them would have been perfectly legitimate.
if they were not her slaves the claim of assault and false imprisonment would have been valid.
therefore in order to consider the petitions of the scotts the court would first have to determine whether the scotts were still slaves or whether their lengthy sojourn into free territory had automatically set them free.
suits such as that filed by the scotts were quite commonplace in the 1840s and the typical outcome was freedom for the slave.
missouri courts had repeatedly held that slaves transported into free territory were thereby emancipated.
a decade before the scotts suit came to trial a missouri court had ruled in the slaves favor in a case involving the specific issue of an army transfer.
given such precedents the scotts seemed to have a very strong case.
the scotts also had the misfortune however of bringing their case to court at a time when public opinion in missouri was experiencing a profound shift.
as slavery came under increasing attack from the north and slaveholding became a fundamental element of missourians identity judicial decisions grew steadily more hostile to the petitions of slaves.
missouris precarious position as a border state intensified its preoccupation with any threat to the institution of slavery.
as the premier student of the scotts case has commented the scotts as suitors for freedom would become casualties of the sectional conflict when the trial finally began in june 1846 the scotts attorney brought a series of witnesses before the jury all of whom testified that dred scott had indeed been at forts armstrong and snelling.
all that remained to secure the scotts freedom was the relatively simple task of proving what everyone already knew that they were held as slaves by mrs emerson.
in a surprising legal move mrs emersons lawyers raised doubts as to whether mrs emerson her brother or her father actually claimed ownership of the scotts.
with bizarre logic the jury returned the scotts to mrs emerson because the trial had failed to establish her as their rightful owner.
the peculiar institution required a peculiar brand of law.
undeterred the scotts moved for a retrial.
after a series of complicated moves by both legal teams the case came before the missouri supreme court.
the court handed down its decision in 1852 six years after the scotts originally filed their petitions.
during those six years the slavery issue had reached a boiling point and no state felt its effects more than missouri.
disputes over slavery had divided the state into two hostile factions.
relying heavily on a doctrine of states rights the court held that laws prohibiting slavery in wisconsin territory had no binding effect on the state of missouri.
therefore the court determined the scotts remained slaves.
the decision explicitly referred to the deteriorating political climate arguing that times are not now as they were when the former decisions on this subject were made.
since then.
states have been possessed with a dark and fell spirit in relation to slavery.
under such circumstances it does not behoove the state of missouri to show the least countenance to any measure which might gratify this spirit.
always closely related law and politics had become indistinguishable in the scott case.
despite the ruling neither the scotts nor their supporters were prepared to give up the fight.
the next step was to appeal to the nations highest court but such a move did not seem very promising.
not only did the united states supreme court have a majority of justices from slave states but one year earlier it had refused to hear a similar suit.
in dismissing that case chief justice roger taney followed the same logic that the missouri supreme court had used in rejecting the scotts claims.
laws of federal territories he reasoned could have no effect on the policies of any state.
fearful of appealing to the court that had so recently issued an unfavorable ruling the scotts stalled.
looking for a solution to the dilemma the scotts dropped the case of scott v emerson and filed a new suit scott v sandford.
john sanford the widow emersons brother agreed to bring a collusive suit in federal court.
in a misprint the official court docket rendered his name as sandford.
the terms of the new case would transform the scotts initially modest petition for freedom into a test case on the citizenship status of free african americans and on the extent of federal prerogative in limiting the expansion of slavery.
scott v sandford was tried in the small back room of a st louis store that served as the site of the united states circuit court for the district of missouri.
neither side introduced new evidence or called witnesses the case would be decided on the basis of evidence that had already been well established.
the one new wrinkle was that a federal court could only have jurisdiction of the case if there were diversity of citizenship between the litigants in other words if the plaintiff and defendants were citizens of different states.
but that raised a controversial question that had yet to be resolved in american law to what extent were free blacks entitled to the rights of citizens.
while some northern states such as massachusetts had gone so far as to grant men of color the right to vote some southern state courts had in the previous decade decided cases explicitly holding that even free blacks were not citizens.
in may 1854 with the debate over the kansas nebraska bill reaching a fevered pitch the federal district court ratified the earlier missouri decision on relatively narrow grounds.
with no other recourse the scotts attorney promptly made preparations to take their case to the u s supreme court.
both sides pulled out the big guns for this final battle.
friends of the scotts hired montgomery blair a former u s solicitor general and a prominent figure in washington society.
yet even a character as illustrious as blair was outshone by sanfords attorneys among whom was reverdy johnson a former u s attorney general perhaps the most respected constitutional lawyer in the country and even more importantly the close personal friend of chief justice taney.
both legal teams pursued arguments that promoted their larger political objectives at the expense of their clients.
blair focused on the question of citizenship which had already been de facto decided in scotts favor by the lower court and could have been left alone.
instead of employing the proven strategy of claiming that territorial laws could not affect the policies of a given state sanfords attorneys used the more controversial but more consequential argument that federal antislavery laws were fundamentally unconstitutional.
after four days of such arguments the court surprisingly postponed the remainder of the trial until the next term seven months away.
during the lengthy recess tensions in the country continued to rise at a frightening rate.
in november james buchanan won a tight and acrimonious presidential race in which the extension of slavery had emerged as the preeminent political issue.
the following month with the nation still reeling from the bitter campaign the trial resumed.
the case was now more politicized than ever and the lawyers did not try to hide their respective agendas.
sanfords attorneys in particular frequently indulged in extensive defenses of the southern way of life.
not surprisingly the debate grew hostile.
the supreme court had become the showcase for a nation coming apart at the seams.
following the closing arguments the justices gathered in early february to consider the scott case.
in addition to the specific question of the scotts freedom the court debated the two weighty questions that had arisen from the trial were free african americans citizens.
did congress have the authority to prohibit slavery in the federal territories.
the justices considered options that would have allowed them to decide on the scotts fate and still avoid the controversial issues but there was immense public and political pressure for the court to answer the broader questions once and for all.
chief justice taney was determined to do just that.
roger taneys presence on the bench loomed as the greatest single obstacle to the scotts freedom.
in his late seventies when the scott case was heard taney was a sickly man described by a colleague as exceedingly feeble and broken he had a stark courtroom demeanor and despite his age and ill health presided over the court with firmness.
taney spent most of his life in maryland and his views on slavery and on just about everything else were shaped by his experiences in that border state.
a staunch democrat and an unapologetic southerner taney doggedly defended states rights against all federal encroachments.
as the friction between north and south grew the aged chief justice had become personally and emotionally embroiled in the issue.
by the time the scott case came before the court taney was a bitter sectionalist anxious to put an end to northern insult and aggression on march 6 1857 taney addressed the packed courtroom and read the courts official opinion which he himself had composed.
from start to finish taney read for two full hours.
as his tired voice concluded the scotts had lost their fight for freedom.
in rejecting the scotts claims taney tackled the issue of citizenship head on.
the chief justice argued that the constitution failed to afford blacks slave or free the rights of citizenship.
taney insisted that the framers of the constitution considered people of african descent as a subordinate and inferior class of beings who had been subjugated by the dominant race and whether emancipated or not yet remained subject to their authority and had no rights or privileges but such as those who held the power.
might choose to grant them emancipation therefore did not confer the rights of citizenship on blacks.
their race constituted a permanent mark of civil inferiority.
in making the claim taney conspicuously failed to note that four new england states had already offered african americans basic citizenship rights.
yet despite this omission the chief justice had actually been fairly accurate in gauging the eras prevailing mood.
while taneys racial doctrine seems extreme and even obscene by todays standards it was representative of social attitudes of the time even among many who opposed the institution of slavery.
it would take a war of unprecedented carnage before the nation was prepared to accept the citizenship of black americans.
having established that free blacks did not hold the rights of u s citizenship taney should have stopped.
if dred scott was not entitled to bring a suit in federal court the case was closed.
but taney was determined to issue an opinion on the second major question of the case congressional authority to prohibit slavery in the territories.
the second half of taneys ruling denied such congressional authority and declared the missouri compromise unconstitutional.
taney relied on two highly questionable arguments to support this position first that the constitution allowed congress to legislate only on issues relating to the disposal of land not on those affecting the legal status of the people living on that land and second that congress only held such authority for land already claimed when the constitution was drafted excluding all territory acquired after 1787.
such arguments contradicted years of policy and precedent including some of taneys own rulings.
the supreme courts decision had four immediate effects.
it outraged committed abolitionists delighted apprehensive southerners invalidated the principal plank of the new republican party and relieved worried moderates who believed the decision would lay the national controversy to rest.
but despite the tremendous emotion the ruling evoked many of its predicted effects proved illusory.
it invited slavery to expand into the territories but that never actually happened.
it denied the scotts their freedom but they were shortly emancipated by new owners.
and it claimed to answer fundamental questions of national importance but those same questions continued to be debated until ultimately resolved by powder and shot.
the rulings actual effects were quite different from those taney expected.
the emerging republican party for instance used the decision as a rallying point decrying the slave power conspiracy that clearly controlled the highest court in the land.
the party realized that it could overturn the decision only by changing the composition of the court and set its sights even more firmly on winning the presidency in 1860.
by sparking intense political reactions and giving the republican party a needed boost the decision catalyzed sectional tensions speeding the nation along the path to war.
long after the civil war had faded into history scott v sandford continued to leave its imprint on american law.
the decision marked the first time the supreme court had actually struck down a major piece of federal legislation paving the way for more aggressive judicial review in the future.
it also signaled the development of a defining characteristic of american governance a reliance on the courts to settle controversies that the normal processes of democracy cannot resolve.
ironically scott v sandford may have served as precedent for brown v board of education.
although the legacy of the decision lives to this day the major figures of this story did not long survive the momentous events.
john sanford died in an asylum two months after the court handed down its decision.
dred and harriet scott remained in st louis after their emancipation where they worked as a hotel porter and a laundress both died shortly before the onset of the civil war.
roger taney continued to serve as chief justice during the war but he faced bitter animosity from the northern public who considered him a traitor to the very government he claimed to serve.
taney died in 1864 not living to see the conclusion of the conflict he had helped start.
as one contemporary noted the hon.
old roger b taney has earned the gratitude of his country by dying at last.
better late than never questions for discussion 1.
what made the dred scott decision so important in american history.
what does the decision tell us about the status of african americans in the united states on the eve of the civil war.
chapter 14 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 14 the sectional crisis on myhistorylab time line 1846 david wilmot introduces proviso banning slavery in the mexican cession free soil party is founded zachary taylor whig elected president defeating lewis cass democrat and martin van buren free soil california seeks admission to the union as a free state congress debates sectional issues and enacts compromise of 1850 1856 preston brooks assaults charles sumner on senate floor james buchanan wins presidency despite strong challenge in the north from john c frmont supreme court decides dred scott case and legalizes slavery in all territories congress refuses to admit kansas to union under the proslavery lecompton constitution lincoln and douglas debate slavery issue in illinois 1852 harriet beecher stowe publishes uncle toms cabin 1859 john brown raids harpers ferry is captured and franklin pierce democrat elected president by a large majority over winfield scott whig 1854 congress passes kansas nebraska act repealing missouri compromise republican party founded in several northern states anti nebraska coalitions score victories in congressional elections in the north 1854 1855 know nothing party achieves stunning successes in state politics 1854 1856 free state and slave state forces struggle for control of kansas territory executed 1859 1860 fierce struggle takes place over election of a republican as speaker of the house december february 1860 republicans nominate abraham lincoln for presidency may democratic party splits into northern and southern factions with separate candidates and platforms june lincoln wins the presidency over douglas breckinridge and bell chapter review the compromise of 1850 how did territorial expansion intensify the conflict over slavery.
manifest destiny raised questions about states rights.
the constitution did not permit the federal government to override state slavery laws but the wilmot proviso attempted and failed to ban slavery in the mexican cession.
despite that defeat california was admitted as a free state under the compromise of 1850 while the fugitive slave law appeased the south.
p 315 political upheaval 1852 1856 how did the two party system change during this period.
the whig candidate lost in 1852 for supporting the antislavery cause while the kansas nebraska act sought to repeal the missouri compromise a move most northerners and some southerners considered abominable.
this gave rise to republicanism which adhered to native protestant values while supporting development in the west and opposing slavery.
the 1856 election was largely a choice between rivals one northern and one southern.
p 319 the house divided 1857 1860 how did the institution of slavery go beyond political and economic debates.
slavery divided american society culturally legally and morally.
religious congregations broke up while literature expressed increasingly the sentiments surrounding slaveholding.
the dred scott decision stripped american blacks free and slave alike of most legal rights.
finally lincoln chose to oppose slavery on moral grounds making freedom a human and not simply legal right.
p 324 study resources key terms and definitions wilmot proviso in 1846 shortly after outbreak of the mexicanamerican war congressman david wilmot of pennsylvania introduced this amendment banning slavery in any lands won from mexico.
p 316 fugitive slave law passed in 1850 this federal law made it easier for slaveowners to recapture runaway slaves it also made it easier for kidnappers to take free blacks.
the law became an object of hatred in the north.
p 319 popular sovereignty the concept that the settlers of a newly organized territory had the right to decide through voting whether to accept slavery.
p 318 kansas nebraska act this 1854 act repealed the missouri compromise split the louisiana purchase into two territories and allowed its settlers to accept or reject slavery by popular sovereignty.
p 321 compromise of 1850 five federal laws that temporarily calmed the sectional crisis.
the compromise made california a free state ended the slave trade in the district of columbia and strengthened the fugitive slave law.
p 318 ostend manifesto written by american diplomats in 1854 this secret memorandum urged acquiring cuba by any means necessary.
when it became public northerners claimed it was a plot to extend slavery and the manifesto was disavowed.
p 322 critical thinking questions 1.
how did popular sovereignty reemerge as a definitive concept in the debates on slavery in new and existing states.
how did cultural divisions affect the political compromises made over slavery.
which qualities did the whig and republican parties share.
which did they not.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 14 on myhistorylab the compromise of 1850 read the document view the closer look stephen a douglas debate at galesburg illinois 1858 p 326 the compromise of 1850 p 318 read the document read the document the fugitive slave act 1850 p 319 political upheaval 1852 1856 view the map the compromise of 1850 and the kansas nebraska act p 320 read the document abraham lincoln debate at galesburg illinois 1858 p 327 john gihon kansas begins to bleed p 322 the house divided 1857 1860 watch the video harriet beecher stowe and the making of uncle toms cabin p 324 watch the video dred scott and the crises that lead to the civil war p 325 complete the assignment the enigma of john brown p 328 read the document john browns address before sentencing p 329 complete the assignment the case of dred and harriet scott blurring the borders of politics and justice p 334 indicates study plan media assignment secession and the civil war contents and learning objectives the storm gathers pg.
342 effects of the war pg.
360 what developments and events drew the union toward civil war.
how did the outcome of the war affect america socially and politically.
adjusting to total war pg.
346 feature essay soldiering in the civil war what challenges did total war bring for each side.
fight to the finish pg.
353 how did the union finally attain victory and what role did emancipation play in it.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 19 toward an urban society 1877 1900 the overcrowded city one day around 1900 harriet vittum a settlement house worker in chicago went to the aid of a young polish girl who lived in a nearby slum.
the girl aged 15 had discovered she was pregnant and had taken poison.
an ambulance was on the way and vittum told of the poisoning rushed over to do what she could.
quickly she raced up the three flights of stairs to the floor where the girl and her family lived.
pushing open the door she found the father several male boarders and two or three small boys asleep on the kitchen floor.
in the next room the mother was on the floor among several women boarders and one or two small children.
glancing out the window vittum saw the wall of another building so close she could reach out and touch it.
there was a third room in it lay the 15 year old girl along with two more small children who were asleep.
looking at the scene vittum thought about the girls life in the crowded tenement.
should she try to save her.
vittum asked herself.
should she even try to bring the girl back to the misery and hopelessness of the life she was living in that awful place.
the young girl died and in later years vittum often told her story.
it was easy to see why.
the girls life in the slum the children on the floor the need to take in boarders to make ends meet the way the mother and father collapsed at the end of a workday that began long before sunup all reflected the experiences of millions of people living in the nations cities.
ittum and people like her were attempting to respond to the overwhelming challenges of the nations burgeoning cities.
people poured into cities in the last part of the nineteenth century lured by glitter and excitement by friends and relatives who were already there and above all by the greater opportunities for jobs and higher wages.
between 1860 and 1910 the rural population of the united states almost doubled the number of people living in cities increased sevenfold.
little of the increase came from natural growth since urban families had high rates of infant mortality a declining fertility rate and a high death rate from injury and disease.
many of the newcomers came from rural america and many more came from europe latin america and asia.
in one of the most significant migrations in american history thousands of african americans began in the 1880s to move from the rural south to northern cities.
by 1900 there were large black communities in new york baltimore chicago washington d c and other cities.
yet to come was the even greater black migration during world war i.
two major forces reshaped american society between 1870 and 1920.
one was industrialization the other was urbanization the headlong rush of people from their rural roots into the modern urban environment.
in these years cities grew upward and outward v read the document charles loring brace the life of the street rats 1872 the kitchen of a tenement apartment was often a multipurpose room.
here the tenement dwellers prepared and ate their meals the room might also serve as a workroom and it might be used as sleeping quarters for one or more members of the family.
source the museum of the city of new york the byron collection.
attracting millions of newcomers and influencing politics education entertainment and family life.
by 1920 they had become the center of american economic social and cultural life.
the lure of the city why did cities in the united states grow between 1880 and 1900.
between 1870 and 1900 the city like the factory became a symbol of a new america.
drawn from farms small towns and foreign lands newcomers swelled the population of older cities and created new ones almost overnight.
at the beginning of the civil war only one sixth of the american people lived in cities of eight thousand people or more.
by 1900 one third did by 1920 one half.
we live in the age of great cities wrote the reverend samuel lane loomis in 1887.
each successive year finds a stronger and more irresistible current sweeping in towards the centers of life the current brought growth of an explosive sort.
thousands of years of history had produced only a handful of cities with more than a half million in population.
in 1900 the united states had six such cities including three new york chicago and philadelphia with populations greater than one million.
chapter 19 toward an urban society 1877 1900 which concealed the steel framework were no longer load bearing they were pierced by many windows that let in fresh air and light.
completed in 1885 the home insurance building in chicago was the countrys first metal frame structure.
to a group of talented chicago architects the new trends served as a springboard for innovative forms.
the leaders of the movement were john root and louis h sullivan both of whom were attracted by the chance to rebuild chicago after the great fire of 1871.
noting that the fire had fed on fancy exterior ornamentation root developed a plain stripped down style bold in mass and form the keynotes of modern architecture.
he had another important insight too.
in an age of business root thought the office tower more than a church or a government building symbolized the society and he designed office buildings that carried out as he said the ideas of modern business life simplicity stability breadth dignity sullivan had studied at the massachusetts institute of technology mit and in paris before settling in chicago.
in 1886 at the age of thirty he began work on the chicago auditorium one of the last great masonry buildings.
then came the flash of imagination which saw the single thing he later said.
the trick was turned and there swiftly came into being something new under the sun sullivans skyscrapers that flash of imagination changed the urban skyline.
in the wainwright building in st louis 1890 the schiller building 1892 and the carson pirie and scott department store 1899 in chicago and the prudential building in buffalo 1895 sullivan developed the new forms.
architects must discard the wainwright building 1890 in st louis missouri was designed by chicago architect louis sullivan.
books rules precedents he announced the 10 story red brick office building was one of the first skyscrapers in the world and had many of the responding to the new they should design modern design features found in sullivan s buildings of this period.
for a buildings function.
form follows function sullivan believed and he passed the idea on to a talented disciple frank lloyd wright.
the modern skyscrapers and suburbs city should stretch to the sky.
like so many things in these years the city was transformed by electric elevators first used in 1871 carried passengers upward a revolution in technology.
beginning in the 1880s the age of in the new skyscrapers.
during the same years streetcars another steel and glass produced the skyscraper the streetcar produced innovation carried the people outward to expanded boundaries the suburbs and new residential patterns.
that transformed urban life.
on the eve of the change american cities were a crowded cities were no longer largely walking cities confined to a jumble of small buildings.
church steeples stood out on the skyline radius of two or three miles the distance an individual might walk.
clearly visible above the roofs of factories and office buildings.
streetcar systems extended the radius and changed the urban map.
buildings were usually made of masonry and since the massive cable lines electric surface lines and elevated rapid transit brought walls had to support their own weight they could be no taller than shoppers and workers into central business districts and sped them a dozen or so stories.
steel frames and girders ended that limitation home again.
offering a modest five cent fare with a free transfer and allowed buildings to soar higher and higher.
curtain walls the mass transit systems fostered commuting and widely separated the lure of the city business and residential districts sprang up.
the middle class moved farther and farther out to the leafy greenness of the suburbs.
as the middle class moved out of the cities the immigrants and working class poured in.
they took over the older brownstones row houses and workers cottages turning them under the sheer weight of numbers into the slums of the central city.
in the cities of the past classes and occupations had been thrown together without streetcars and subways there was no other choice.
the streetcar city sprawling and specialized became a more fragmented and stratified society with middle class residential rings surrounding a business and working class core.
tenements and the problems of overcrowding in the shadow of the skyscrapers grimy rows of tenements filled the central city.
tenement houses on small city lots crowded people into cramped apartments.
in the late 1870s architect james e ware won a competition for tenement design with the dumbbell tenement rising seven or eight stories in height the dumbbell tenement packed about thirty four room apartments on a lot only 25 by 100 feet.
between four and sixteen families lived on a floor two toilets in the hall of each floor served their needs.
narrowed at the middle the tenement resembled a giant dumbbell in shape.
the indented middle created an air shaft between adjoining buildings that provided a little light and ventilation.
in case of fire it also carried flames from one story to the next making the buildings notorious firetraps.
in 1890 nearly half the dwellings in new york city were tenements.
that year more than 1 4 million people lived on manhattan island one of whose wards had a population density of 334 000 people per square mile.
many people lived in alleys and basements so dark they could not be photographed until flashlight photography was invented in 1887.
exploring the city william dean howells the prominent author inhaled the stenches of the neglected street.
and the yet fouler and dreadfuller poverty smell which breathes from the open doorways howells smelled more than poverty.
in the 1870s and 1880s cities stank.
one problem was horse manure hundreds of tons of it a day in every city.
another was the privy a single one of which said a leading authority on public health may render life in a whole neighborhood almost unendurable in the summer said one new york city resident the stench is something terrible another wrote that the stink is enough to knock you down in 1880 the chicago times said that a solid stink pervaded the city.
no other word expresses it so well as stink.
a stench means something finite.
stink reaches the infinite and becomes sublime in the magnitude of odiousness in 1892 one neighborhood of chicago covering one third of a square mile had only three bathtubs.
cities dumped their wastes into the nearest body of water then drew drinking water from the same site.
many built modern purified waterworks but could not keep pace with spiraling growth.
in 1900 fewer than one in ten city dwellers drank filtered water.
factories the pride of the era polluted the urban air.
at night pittsburgh looked and sounded like hell with the lid off according to contemporary observers.
smoke poured from seventy three glass factories forty one iron and steel mills and twenty nine oil refineries.
the choking air helped prevent lung diseases and malaria or so the citys advertising claimed.
crime was another growing problem.
the nations homicide rate nearly tripled in the 1880s much of the increase coming in the cities.
after remaining constant for many decades the suicide rate rose steadily between 1870 and 1900 according to a study of philadelphia.
alcoholism also rose especially among men though recent studies have shown that for working class men the urban saloon was as much a gathering spot as it was a place to drink.
nonetheless a 1905 survey of chicago counted as many saloons as grocery stores meat markets and dry goods stores combined.
strangers in a new land while some of the new city dwellers came from farms and small towns many more came from abroad.
most came from europe where unemployment food shortages and increasing threats of war sent millions fleeing across the atlantic to make a fresh start.
often they knew someone already in the united states a friend or relative who had written them about prospects for jobs and freer lives in a new land.
italians first came in large numbers to escape an 1887 cholera epidemic in southern italy tens of thousands of jews sought refuge from the anti semitic massacres that swept russia and czarist ruled poland after 1880.
view the closer look group of emigrants women and children from eastern europe on deck of the s s amsterdam francis eastman johnston the photographer of group emigrants women and children from eastern europe on deck of the s s amsterdam 1899 was one of the earliest female photographers and photojournalists.
her photograph above captures the productive promise of eastern european immigrants coming to the united states during this era seeking economic opportunity religious freedom and an escape from deadly epidemics in europe.
complete the assignment ellis island isle of hope isle of tears on myhistorylab feature essay ellis island isle of hope isle of tears watch the video ellis island immigrants from 1892 to 1924 ellis island in new york harbor was americas largest and most active immigration station where over 12 million immigrants mostly from europe were processed.
the review process included a personal health inspection and proof of minimal funds.
in exceptional cases an immigrant would be sent home if he or she failed the inspection and could not be treated in the hospital for any medical problems.
t en years after he left selo his small bulgarian village for the united states michael gurkin returned to tell of the wonders he had seen including buildings that scratched the sky rooms in them that moved up and down buttons that pushed lit a house or a street.
stoyan christowe thirteen listened intently caught up in the americamania as he called it that swept through his village.
soon he was on his way to the new land his pockets stuffed with walnuts because he was too young to drink the farewell toast.
unknowingly he had joined a flood of people who were making their way to the united states.
between 1880 and 1920 a period of just forty years the remarkable total of 23 5 million immigrants arrived in the country.
they came from around the world though mostly from europe driven from their homelands by economic religious or other troubles lured across the ocean by the chance for a better life.
they entered the country through several ports but by far the most about seven out of every ten landed in the city of new york.
until 1892 they landed at a depot known as castle garden a sprawling building on the tip of manhattan island.
when it could no longer handle the flow the entry site was moved to ellis island close to the statue of liberty.
contractors erected a wooden structure which opened in 1892 and burned down five years later.
they then put up the current edifice an imposing red brick building with triple arch entrances and corner steeples.
a small city it had dormitories a hospital a post office and showers that could bathe eight thousand people a day.
it opened in 1900.
the change to ellis island represented more than just a shift in site.
entrance at castle garden had been fairly informal since control over immigration still rested largely in the hands of the states.
officials merely registered newcomers a process that took about thirty seconds.
in 1891 worried about the growing numbers of people who wanted in congress acted to bring immigration under federal control.
ellis island was given tasks castle garden had never had including mandates to keep out people some americans considered undesirable.
it became one observer said the nearest earthly likeness to the final day of judgement when we have to prove our fitness to enter heaven many of those who sailed into the harbor it should be remembered never passed through the island at all.
arriving in first or second class they had a fast on board examination and went ashore monied enough it was assumed not to become wards of the state.
but those in third class steerage as it was known had a very different experience and they faced it chock full of fear they would fail some test and be sent back home.
the day they docked in 1910 christowe and others washed thoroughly hoping to look clean enough to pass inspection.
crowding the ships rails they gazed in wonder at the statue in the harbor its arm lifted in the air.
it was a saint some guessed christopher columbus others said.
it was a monument to freedom christowe was told with emma lazaruss inviting poem at its base give me your tired your poor your huddled masses yearning to breathe free once on the island those huddled masses were under scrutiny from the moment they landed.
officials watched them climb the stairs looking for heart problems or lameness.
physicians administered the sixsecond exam checking quickly for disabilities or contagious diseases.
if anything seemed out of sort they put a chalk mark on the immigrants coat calling for closer examination.
the next exam was the most feared a doctor using a tailors buttonhook to pull back eyelids to look for signs of diseases such as trachoma a highly contagious bacterial eye infection that could lead to blindness.
most immigrants had never heard of trachoma nor even knew they had the disease but it alone could strand them in the islands hospital or put them on a boat back home.
no one who went through the exam ever forgot it as an immigrant poet wrote a stranger receives us harshly and asks and your health he examines us.
his look assesses us like dogs.
he studies in depth eyes and mouth.
no doubt that if hed probed our hearts he would have seen the wound.
immigrants with chalk marks were herded to the left while most went to the right filing by a matron who searched the faces of women for evidence of loose character with so many languages among the arrivals there were few written signs and officials used metal barricades to guide people along like puppets on conveyor belts christowe later recalled.
last there were the inspectors seated behind desks asking name age occupation among dozens of other questions.
on a busy day the inspectors had two minutes to decide the fate of a newcomer.
those who failed went before a feared board of special inquiry for final decision.
for most immigrants the whole process took less than five hours many others held for proof of funds or further examination spent days in the dormitories or hospital.
despite the harsh rumors no more than 3 percent in a given year were turned away.
still it was becoming harder to get in.
people who feared the effect of immigrants on the nation clamored to keep them out.
some worried about the numbers of people who were arriving others about disease or radical political views.
some did not like the shift in immigration after 1890 from largely protestant northern and western europe to catholics jews and others from southern and eastern europe.
reflecting such concerns congress passed laws to keep certain types of people out.
in 1875 it prohibited the entrance of criminals and prostitutes.
in 1882 it barred convicts and lunatics and excluded laborers from china the first measure aimed directly at a racial group.
in 1885 it banned the entry of laborers under contract imported by industries to work at low wages in 1891 polygamists and people with loathsome diseases in 1903 anarchists.
in 1917 it passed over woodrow wilsons veto a literacy test that required immigrants to read a passage in their native tongue.
the great burst of immigration halted during world war i ended with the adoption of restrictive legislation in the 1920s.
ellis island became a detention center for radicals and other people awaiting deportation.
once the gateway to the united states the famous island had become an exit.
ellis island closed in 1954 and in 1965 recognizing its historic importance the government made it a national monument.
it reopened in 1990 as a museum of american immigration attracting more than two million tourists a year many of whom retrace the footsteps of their ancestors who had landed there.
stoyan christowes name is in the records.
starting with a miserable job in a railroad yard in st louis he went to college served in military intelligence during world war ii wrote several books and became a member of the vermont legislature.
his experience on ellis island blended into the nations experience.
more than one hundred million americans about four in every ten trace their ancestry to those who found a new home through its gates.
questions for discussion 1.
what arguments did americans use to justify limiting immigration during this era.
how did the experience on arrival in the u s of those who traveled in first or second class differ from that of steerage passengers.
chapter 19 toward an urban society 1877 1900 foreign born parentage two thirds of bostons and one half of philadelphias.
new york city where most immigrants arrived and many stayed had more italians than lived in naples immigration to the united states 1870 1900 more germans than lived in hamburg and twice as many irish as lived in dublin.
four immigrants northern and western europe out of five new york city residents in 1890 thousands southern and eastern europe were of foreign birth or foreign parentage.
asia africa and america beginning in the 1880s the sources of immigration shifted dramatically away from northern and western europe the chief source of immigration for more than two centu400 ries.
more and more immigrants came from southern and eastern europe italy greece austria hungary poland and russia.
between 1880 and 1910 approximately 8 4 million people came from these lands.
the new immigrants tended to be catholics or jews rather than protestants.
like their predeces100 sors most were unskilled rather than skilled and they often spoke strange languages.
most were poor and uneducated sticking together in close knit communities they clung to their year of arrival native customs languages and religions.
more than any previous group the sonote for purposes of classification northern and western europe includes great britain ireland called new immigrants troubled the mainscandinavia the netherlands belgium luxembourg switzerland france and germany.
southern and stream society.
could they be assimilated.
did eastern europe includes poland austria hungary russia and the baltic states romania bulgaria they share american values.
such questions european turkey italy spain portugal and greece.
asia africa and america includes asian turkey china japan india canada the caribbean latin america and all of africa.
preoccupied such groups as the american protective association a midwestern antisource u s bureau of the census historical statistics of the united states colonial times to 1970 bicentennial edition washington dc 1975.
catholic organization that expanded in the 1890s and worked to limit or end immigration.
all told the immigration figures were staggering.
between 1877 sneering epithets became part of the national vocabulary wop and and 1890 more than 6 3 million people entered the united states.
in dago for italians bohunk for bohemians hungarians and other one year alone 1882 almost 789 000 people came.
by 1890 about slavs greaseball for greeks and kike for jews.
you dont call.
15 percent of the population nine million people were foreign born.
an italian a white man a congressman asked a railroad construcmost newcomers were job seekers.
nearly two thirds were tion boss in 1890.
no sir the boss replied.
an italian is a dago males and the majority were between the ages of fifteen and forty.
anti catholicism and anti semitism flared up again as they most were unskilled laborers.
most settled on the eastern seaboard.
had in the 1850s.
the immigration restriction league founded in in 1901 the industrial relocation office was established to relieve 1894 demanded a literacy test for immigrants from southern and overcrowding in the eastern cities opening galveston texas as eastern europe.
congress passed such a law in 1896 but president a port of entry it attracted many russian jews to texas and the cleveland vetoed it.
but most immigrants preferred the shorter more familiar journey to new york.
entering through ellis island in new york immigrants and the city harbor as four in every ten immigrants did most tended to crowd into northern and eastern cities settling in areas where others of industrial capitalism the world of factories and foremen and their nationality or religion lived.
see the feature essay ellis grimy machines tested the immigrants and placed an enormous island isle of hope isle of tears pp.
strain on their families.
many immigrants came from peasant socithey were often dazzled by what they saw.
they stared at eties where life proceeded according to outdoor routine and age old electric lights indoor plumbing soda fountains streetcars plush tradition.
in their new city homes they found both new freedoms train seats for all classes ice cream lemons and bananas.
relatives and new confinements a different language and a novel set of whisked them off to buy new american clothes and showed them customs and expectations.
historians have only recently begun to the teeming markets department stores and woolworths new fivediscover the remarkable ways in which they learned to adjust.
and ten stores.
it seemed quite advanced compared with our home like native born families most immigrant families were in khelm said a polish girl.
there was a sense of safety and hope nuclear in structure they consisted of two parents and their that we had never felt in poland children.
though variations occurred from group to group men cities had increasingly large foreign born populations.
in and women occupied roles similar to those in native families 1900 four fifths of chicagos population was foreign born or of men were wage earners women were housekeepers and mothers.
view the map immigration 1880 1920 the lure of the city canada washington maine north dakota montana vt n h minn south dakota idaho mass.
new york oregon wis r i mich wyoming penn.
iowa nebraska ohio ill nevada w va colorado kansas del.
utah conn n j va md.
ky missouri n c tenn california oklahoma arizona pacific ocean s c ark.
new mexico miss.
ala georgia at l a n t i c ocean la.
texas percent of total population florida 34 or more mexico 10 34 1 10 1 or less 400 miles gulf of mexico 400 kilometers not reported foreign born population 1890 immigrants tended to settle in regions where jobs were relatively plentiful or conditions were similar to those they had left in their homelands.
cities of the northeast midwest and west offered job opportunities while land available for cultivation drew immigrant farmers to the plains and prairies of the nations midsection.
margaret byington who studied steelworkers homes in homestead in the early 1900s learned that the father played a relatively small role in child rearing or managing the familys finances.
his part of the problem is to earn and hers to spend in chicago social reformer jane addams discovered that immigrant women made it a standard of domestic virtue that a man must not touch his pay envelope but bring it home unopened to his wife although patterns varied among ethnic groups and between economic classes within ethnic groups immigrants tended to marry within the group more than did the native born.
immigrants also tended to marry at a later age than natives and they tended to have more children a fact that worried nativists opposed to immigration.
immigrants shaped the city as much as it shaped them.
most of them tried to retain their traditional culture for themselves and their children while at the same time adapting to life in their new country.
to do this they spoke their native language practiced their religious faith read their own newspapers and established special parochial or other schools.
they observed traditional holidays and formed a myriad of social organizations to maintain ties among members of the group.
immigrant associations there were many of them in every city offered fellowship in a strange land.
they helped newcomers find jobs and homes they provided important services such as unemployment insurance and health insurance.
in a massachusetts textile town the irish benevolent society said we visit our sick and bury our dead some groups were no larger than a neighborhood others spread nationwide.
in 1914 the deutsch amerikanischer nationalbund the largest of the associations had more than two million members in dozens of cities and towns.
many women belonged to and participated in the work of the immigrant associations in addition there were groups exclusively for women such as the polish womens alliance the jednota ceskyck dam society of czech women and the national council of jewish women.
the polish national alliance pna a typical immigrant association was founded in 1880.
like other organizations it helped new immigrants on their arrival offered insurance plans established libraries and museums sponsored youth programs fielded baseball teams and organized trips back to poland.
each year the pna published a sought after calendar filled with polish holidays information and proverbs.
extolling poles contributions to their new country it erected monuments to distinguished americans of polish descent.
every major city had dozens of foreign language newspapers with circulations large and small.
the first newspaper published in the lithuanian language appeared in the united states not in lithuania.
eagerly read the papers not only carried news of events chapter 19 toward an urban society 1877 1900 in the homeland but also reported on local ethnic leaders told readers how to vote and become citizens and gave practical tips on adjusting to life in the united states.
the swedes poles czechs and germans established ethnic theaters that performed national plays and music.
the most famous of these the yiddish jewish theater started in the 1880s in new york city and lasted more than fifty years.
the church and the school were the most important institutions in every immigrant community.
eastern european jews established synagogues and religious schools wherever they settled they taught the hebrew language and raised their children in a heritage they did not want to leave behind.
among such groups as the irish and the poles the roman catholic church provided spiritual and educational guidance.
in the parish schools polish priests and nuns taught polish american children about polish as well as american culture in the polish language.
church school and fraternal societies shaped the way in which immigrants adjusted to life in america.
by preserving language religion and heritage they also shaped the country itself.
watch the video democracy and corruption the rise of political machines the house that tweed built closely connected with explosive urban growth was the emergence of the powerful city political machine.
this political cartoon skewers the success of political bosses such as the depicted boss william tweed as cities grew lines of responsibility of new york to manipulate the political process and use patronage to enrich themselves and retain political in city governments became hope power in various cities during this period.
lessly confused increasing the opportunity for corruption and greed.
burgeoning populations required william m tweed head of the famed tweed ring in new streets buildings and public services immigrants needed even york provided the model for them all.
nearly six feet tall weighmore services.
in this situation political party machines played an ing almost three hundred pounds tweed rose through the ranks important role.
of tammany hall.
he served in turn as city alderman member the machines traded services for votes.
loosely knit they of congress and new york state assemblyman.
a man of culture were headed by a strong influential leader the boss who tied and warmth he moved easily between the rough back alleys of together a network of ward and precinct captains each of whom new york and the parlors and clubs of the citys elite.
behind the looked after his local constituents.
in new york honest john scenes he headed a ring that plundered new york for tens of milkelly richard croker and charles f murphy led tammany hall lions of dollars.
the famous democratic party organization that dominated city the new york county courthouse the house that tweed politics from the 1850s to the 1930s.
other bosses included hinky built was his masterpiece.
nestled in city hall park in downdink kenna and bathhouse john coughlin in chicago james town manhattan the three story structure was designed to mcmanes in philadelphia and christopher a buckley the notocost 250 000 but the bills ran a bit higher.
andrew garvey the rious blind boss who used an exceptional memory for voices to prince of plasterers charged 500 000 for plasterwork and make up for failing eyesight in san francisco.
then 1 million to repair the same work.
his total bill came to social and cultural change 1877 1900 2 870 464 06.
the new york times suggested that the six cents be donated to charity.
in the end the building cost more than 13 million and in 1872 when tweed fell it was still not finished.
the role of the political bosses can be overemphasized.
power structures in the turn of the century city were complex involving a host of people and institutions.
banks real estate investors insurance companies architects and engineers among others played roles in governing the city.
viewed in retrospect many city governments were remarkably successful.
with populations that in some cases doubled every decade city governments provided water and sewer lines built parks and playgrounds and paved streets.
when it was over boston had the worlds largest public library and new york city had the brooklyn bridge and central park two of the finest achievements in city planning and architecture of any era.
by the 1890s new york also had 660 miles of water lines 464 miles of sewers and 1 800 miles of paved streets far more than comparable cities in europe.
bosses moreover differed from city to city.
buckley stayed in power in san francisco by keeping city tax rates low.
honest john kelly earned his nickname serving as a watchdog over the new york city treasury.
tweed was one of the early backers of the brooklyn bridge.
some bosses were plainly corrupt others believed in honest graft a term tammanys george washington plunkitt coined to describe legitimate profits made from advance knowledge of city projects.
why did voters keep the bosses in power.
the answers are complex but two reasons were skillful political organization and the fact that immigrants and others made up the bosses constituency.
most immigrants had little experience with democratic government and proved easy prey for well oiled machines.
for the most part however the bosses stayed in power because they paid attention to the needs of the least privileged city voters.
they offered valued services in an era when neither government nor business lent a hand.
if an immigrant tired and bewildered after the long crossing came looking for a job bosses like tweed plunkitt or buckley found him one in city offices or local businesses.
if a familys breadwinner died or was injured the bosses donated food and clothing and saw to it that the family made it through the crisis.
if the winter was particularly cold they provided free coal to heat tenement apartments.
they ran picnics for slum children on hot summer days and contributed to hospitals orphanages and dozens of worthy neighborhood causes.
most bosses became wealthy they were not robin hoods who took from the rich to give to the poor.
they took for themselves as well.
reformers occasionally ousted them.
tweed fell from power in 1872 blind boss buckley in 1891 croker in 1894.
but the reformers rarely stayed in power long.
drawn mainly from the middle and upper classes they had little understanding of the needs of the poor.
before long they returned to private concerns and the bosses who had known that they would all along cheerily took power again.
what tells in holdin your grip on your district the engaging plunkitt once said is to go right down among the poor families and help them in the different ways they need help.
its philanthropy but its politics too mighty good politics.
the poor are the most grateful people in the world social and cultural change 1877 1900 how did the growth of american cities affect social cultural and political life.
the rise of cities and industry between 1877 and the 1890s affected all aspects of american life.
mores changed family ties loosened.
factories turned out consumer goods and the newly invented cash register rang up record sales.
public and private educational systems burgeoned illiteracy declined life expectancy increased.
while many people worked harder and harder just to survive others found they had a greater amount of leisure time.
the roles of women and children changed in a number of ways and the family took on functions it had not had before.
thanks to advancing technology news flashed quickly across the oceans and for the first time in history people read of the days events in distant lands when they opened their daily newspapers.
we are in a period president rutherford b hayes said in 1878 when old questions are settled and the new ones are not yet brought forward old questions questions of racial social and economic justice and of federal state relations were not settled but people wanted new directions.
political issues lost the sharp focus of the civil war and reconstruction.
for men and women of middle age in 1877 the issues of the union and slavery had been the overriding public concerns throughout their adult lives.
now with the end of reconstruction it seemed time for new concerns.
in 1877 the country had 47 million people.
in 1900 it had nearly 76 million.
nine tenths of the population was white just under one tenth was black.
there were 66 000 american indians 108 000 chinese and 148 japanese.
the bulk of the white population urban and rural population 1870 1900 in millions millions urban rural source u s bureau of the census historical statistics of the united states colonial times to 1970 bicentennial edition washington dc 1975.
chapter 19 toward an urban society 1877 1900 most of whom were protestant came from the so called anglosaxon countries of northern europe.
wasps white anglo saxon protestants were the dominant members of american society.
though the rush to the cities was about to begin most people of 1877 still lived on farms or in small towns.
their lives revolved around the farm the church and the general store.
in 1880 nearly 75 percent of the population lived in communities of fewer than 2 500 people.
in 1900 in the midst of city growth 60 percent still did.
the average family in 1880 had three children dramatically fewer than at the beginning of the century and life expectancy was about 43 years.
by 1900 it had risen to 47 years a result of improved health care.
for blacks and other minorities who often lived in unsanitary rural areas life expectancy was substantially lower 33 years.
meals tended to be heavy and so did people.
even breakfast had several courses and could include steak eggs fish potatoes toast and coffee.
food prices were low.
families ate fresh homegrown produce in the summer and put up their fruits and vegetables for the long winters.
toward the end of the century eating habits changed.
new packaged breakfast cereals became popular fresh fruit and vegetables came in on fast trains from florida and california and commercially canned food became safer and cheaper.
the newfangled icebox cooled by blocks of ice kept food fresher and added new treats such as ice cream.
medical science was in the midst of a major revolution.
louis pasteurs recent discovery that germs cause infection and disease created the new science of microbiology and led the way to the development of vaccines and other preventive measures.
but tuberculosis typhoid diphtheria and pneumonia all now curable were still the leading causes of death.
infant mortality declined between 1877 and 1900 but the decline was gradual a great drop did not come until after 1920.
there were few hospitals and no hospital insurance.
most patients stayed at home although medical practice especially surgery expanded rapidly.
once brutal and dangerous surgery in these years became relatively safe and painless.
anesthetics ether and chloroform eliminated pain and antiseptic practices helped prevent postoperative infections.
antiseptic practices at childbirth also cut down on puerperal fever an infection that for centuries had killed many women and newborn infants.
the new science of psychology began to explore the mind hitherto uncharted.
william james a leading american psychologist and philosopher laid the foundations of modern behavioral psychology which emphasized the importance of the environment on human development.
the bottle they puffed cigarettes behind the barn.
counterbalancing such youthful exuberance was strong pride in virtue and self control.
thank heaven i am absolutely pure theodore roosevelt the future president wrote in 1880 after proposing to alice lee.
i can tell alice everything i have ever done gentlemen of the middle class dressed in heavy black suits derby hats and white shirts with paper collars.
women wore tight corsets long dark dresses and black shoes reaching well above the ankles.
as with so many things styles changed dramatically toward the end of the century spurred in part by new sporting fads such as golf tennis and bicycling which required looser clothing.
by the 1890s a middle class woman wore a tailored suit or a dark skirt and a blouse called a shirtwaist modeled after mens shirts.
her skirts still draped about the ankles but more and more she removed or loosened the corset the dread device that squeezed skin and internal organs into fashionable 18 inch waistlines.
religious and patriotic values were strong.
a center of community life the church often set the tenor for family and social relationships.
in the 1880s eight out of ten church members were protestants most of the rest were roman catholics.
evangelists such as dwight l moody a former chicago shoe salesman and ira b sankey an organist and singer conducted mass revival meetings across the country.
enormously successful moody preached to millions and sparked a spiritual awakening on american college campuses.
with slavery abolished reformers turned their attention to new moral and political issues.
one group known as the mugwumps worked to end corruption in politics.
drawn mostly from the educated and upper class they included thomas nast the famous political cartoonist george william curtis editor of harpers weekly and e l godkin editor of the influential nation.
other zealous reformers campaigned for prohibition of the sale of intoxicating liquors hoping to end the social evils that stemmed from drunkenness.
in 1874 women who advocated total abstinence from alcoholic beverages formed the womens christian temperance union wctu.
their leader frances e willard served as president of the group from 1879 until her death in 1898.
by then the wctu had ten thousand branches and five hundred thousand members.
in new york city anthony comstock formed the society for the suppression of vice which supervised public morality.
at his request congress passed the comstock law 1873 prohibiting the mailing or transporting of obscene lewd or lascivious articles.
the law was not successful within a few years comstock reported finding 64 094 articles for immoral use 700 pounds of lead moulds for making obscene matter 202 679 obscene photographs and 26 obscene pictures framed on walls of saloons manners and mores the code of victorian morality its name derived from the british queen who reigned throughout the period set the tone for the era.
the code prescribed strict standards of dress manners and sexual behavior.
it was both obeyed and disobeyed and it reflected the tensions of a generation that was undergoing a change in moral standards.
in 1877 children were to be seen and not heard.
they spoke when spoken to listened rather than chattered or at least that was the rule.
older boys and girls were often chaperoned although they could always find moments alone.
they played post office and spin leisure and entertainment in the 1870s people tended to rise early.
on getting up they washed from the pitcher and bowl in the bedroom first breaking the layer of ice if it was winter.
after dressing and eating they went off to work and school.
without large refrigerators housewives marketed almost daily.
in the evening families gathered in the second parlor or living room where the children did their lessons played games sang around the piano and listened to that days verse from the bible.
popular games included cards dominoes backgammon chess and checkers.
many homes had a packet of author cards that social and cultural change 1877 1900 required knowledge of books authors and noted quotations.
the latest fad was the stereopticon or magic lantern which brought three dimensional life to art history and nature.
like author cards and other games it was instructional as well as entertaining.
sentimental ballads such as silver threads among the gold 1873 remained the most popular musical form but the insistent syncopated rhythms of ragtime were being heard reflecting the influence of the new urban culture.
by the time the strains of scott joplins maple leaf rag 1899 popularized ragtime critics complained that a wave of vulgar filthy and suggestive music has inundated the land classical music flourished.
the new england conservatory 1867 the cincinnati college of music 1878 and the metropolitan opera 1883 were new sources of civic pride new york boston and chicago launched first rate symphony orchestras between 1878 and 1891.
in the hamlets and small towns of america traveling circuses were enormously popular.
hamlin garland an author who grew up in small iowa villages recalled how the circus came trailing clouds of glorified dust and filling our minds with the color of romance.
it brought to our ears the latest band pieces and taught us the popular songs.
it furnished us with jokes.
it relieved our dullness.
it gave us something to talk about larger circuses run by entrepreneurs such as p t barnum and james a bailey played the cities but every town attracted its own smaller version.
fairs horse races balloon ascensions bicycle tournaments and football and baseball contests attracted avid fans.
the years between 1870 and 1900 saw the rise of organized spectator sports a trend reflecting both the rise of the city and the new uses of leisure.
baseballs first professional team the cincinnati red stockings appeared in 1869 and baseball soon became the preeminent national sport.
fans sang songs about it take me out to the ballgame wrote poems about it casey at the bat and made up riddles about it what has eighteen feet and catches flies.
modern rules were adopted.
umpires were designated to call balls and strikes catchers wore masks and chest protectors and moved closer to the plate instead of staying back to catch the ball on the bounce.
fielders had to catch the ball on the fly rather than on one bounce in their caps.
by 1890 professional baseball teams were drawing crowds of sixty thousand daily.
in 1901 the american league was organized and two years later the boston red sox beat the pittsburgh pirates in the first modern world series.
in 1869 princeton and rutgers played the first intercollegiate football game.
soon other schools picked up the sport and by the early 1890s crowds of fifty thousand or more attended the most popular contests.
basketball invented in 1891 gained a large following.
boxing a popular topic of conversation in saloons and schoolyards was outlawed in most states.
for a time championship prizefights were held in secret with news of the result spread rapidly by word of mouth.
matches were long and bloody fought with bare knuckles until the invention in the 1880s of the 5 ounce boxing glove.
john l sullivan the boston strong boy and the eras most popular champion won the heavyweight title in 1889 in a brutal 75 round victory over the stubborn jake kilrain.
as gas and electric lights brightened the night and streetcars crisscrossed city streets leisure habits changed.
delighted with the new technology people took advantage of an increasing variety of things to do.
they stayed home less often.
new york citys first electric sign manhattan beach swept by ocean breezes appeared in 1881 and people went out at night filling the streets on their way to the theater vaudeville shows and dance halls or just out for an evening stroll.
changes in family life under the impact of industrialization and urbanization family relationships were changing.
on the farm parents and children worked more or less together and the family was a producing unit.
in factories and offices family members rarely worked together.
in working class families mothers fathers and children separated at dawn and returned ready for sleep at dark.
morris rosenfeld a clothing presser lamenting that he was unable to spend more time with his son wrote a poem titled my boy i have a little boy at home a pretty little son i think sometimes the world is mine in him my only one.
ere dawn my labor drives me forth tis night when i am free a stranger am i to my child and stranger my child to me.
working class families of the late nineteenth century like the family of the young polish girl that harriet vittum saw often lived in complex household units taking in relatives and boarders to pay the rent.
as many as one third of all households contained people who were not members of the immediate family.
although driven apart by the daily routine family ties among the working class tended to remain strong cemented by the need to join forces in order to survive in the industrial economy.
the middle class wife and children however became increasingly isolated from the world of work.
turning inward the middle class family became more self contained.
older children spent more time in adolescence and periods of formal schooling were lengthier.
families took in fewer apprentices and boarders.
by the end of the century most middle class offspring continued to live with their parents into their late teens and their twenties a larger proportion than today.
fewer middle class wives participated directly in their husbands work.
as a result they and their children occupied what contemporaries called a separate sphere of domesticity set apart from the masculine sphere of income producing work.
the family home became a walled garden a place to retreat from the crass materialism of the outside world.
middle class fathers began to move their families out of the city to the suburbs commuting to work on the new streetcars and leaving wives and children at home and school.
the middle class family had once functioned in part to transmit a craft or skill arrange marriages and offer care for dependent kin.
now as these functions declined the family took on new emotional and ideological responsibilities.
in a society that worried about the weakening hold of other institutions the family became more and more important as a means of social control.
it also placed new burdens on wives.
chapter 19 toward an urban society 1877 1900 in the old days said a woman in 1907 a married woman was supposed to be a frump and a bore and a physical wreck.
now you are supposed to keep up intellectually to look young and well and be fresh and bright and entertaining magazines such as the ladies home journal which started in 1889 glorified motherhood and the home but its articles and ads featured women as homebound child oriented consumers.
while societys leaders spoke fondly of the value of homemaking the status of housewives declined under the factory system which emphasized money rewards and devalued household labor.
underlying all these changes was one of the modern worlds most important trends a major decline in fertility rates that lasted from 1800 to 1939.
though blacks immigrants and rural dwellers continued to have more children than white native born city dwellers the trend affected all classes and races among white women the birthrate fell from seven in 1800 to just over four in 1880 to about three in 1900.
people everywhere tended to marry later and have fewer children.
since contraceptive devices were not yet widely used the decline reflected abstinence and a conscious decision to postpone or limit families.
some women decided to devote greater attention to a smaller number of children others to pursue their own careers.
there was a marked increase in the number of young unmarried women working for wages or attending school an increase in the number of women delaying marriage or not marrying at all and a gradual decline in rates of illegitimacy and premarital pregnancy.
in large part the decline in fertility stemmed from peoples responses to the social and economic forces around them the rise of cities and industry.
in a host of individual decisions they decided to have fewer children and the result reshaped some of the fundamental attitudes and institutions of american society.
changing views a growing assertiveness among women in and out of the family there was growing recognition of selfsufficient working women employed in factory telephone exchange or business office who were entering the workforce in increasing numbers.
in 1880 2 6 million women were gainfully employed in 1890 4 million.
in 1882 the census bureau took the first census of working women most were single and worked out of necessity rather than choice.
many regarded this new woman as a corruption of the ideal vision of the american woman in which man worshiped a diviner self than his own innocent helpless and good.
women were to be better than the world around them.
they were brought up said ida tarbell a leading political reformer as if wrongdoing were impossible to them views changed albeit slowly.
one important change occurred in the legal codes pertaining to women particularly in the common law doctrine of femme couverte.
under that doctrine wives were chattel of their husbands they could not legally control their own earnings property or children unless they had drawn up a specific contract before marriage.
by 1890 many states had substantially revised the doctrine to allow wives control of their earnings and inherited property.
see the legal rights of married women reforming the law of coverture pp.
in cases of divorce the new laws also recognized womens rights to custody or joint custody of their children.
although divorce was still far from being socially acceptable divorce rates more than doubled during the last third of the century.
by 1905 one in twelve marriages was ending in divorce.
in the 1870s and 1880s a growing number of women were asserting their own humanness.
they fought for the vote lobbied for equal pay and sought self fulfillment.
the new interest in psychology and medicine strengthened their causes.
charlotte perkins gilman author of women and economics 1898 joined other women in questioning the ideal of womanly innocence which she argued actually meant ignorance.
in medical and popular literature menstruation sexual intercourse and childbirth were becoming viewed as natural functions instead of taboo topics.
edward bliss footes plain home talk of love marriage and parentage a best seller that went through many editions between the 1880s and 1900 challenged victorian notions that sexual intercourse was unhealthy and intended solely to produce children.
in plain facts for old and young 1881 dr john h kellogg urged parents to recognize the early awakening of sexual feelings in their children.
still such matters were avoided in many american homes.
rheta childe dorr a journalist remembered that when a girl reached the age of fourteen new rules were introduced and when you asked for an explanation you met only embarrassed silence women espoused causes with new fervor.
susan b anthony a veteran of many reform campaigns tried to vote in the 1872 presidential election and was fined 100 which she refused to pay.
in 1890 she helped form the national american woman suffrage association to work for the enfranchisement of women.
on new yorks lower east side the ladies anti beef trust association which formed to protest increases in the price of meat established a boycott of butcher shops.
when their demands were ignored the women invaded the shops poured kerosene on the meat and set fire to it.
we dont riot rebecca ablowitz told the judge.
but if all we did was to weep at home nobody would notice it so we have to do something to help ourselves educating the masses continuing a trend that stretched back a hundred years childhood was becoming an even more distinct time of life.
there was still only a vague concept of adolescence the special nature of the teenage years but the role of children was changing.
less and less were children perceived as little adults valued for the additional financial gain they might bring into the family.
now children were to grow and learn and be nurtured rather than rushed into adulthood.
as a result schooling became more important and american children came closer than ever before to universal education.
by 1900 thirty one states and territories out of fifty one had enacted laws making school attendance compulsory though most required attendance only until the age of fourteen.
in 1870 there were only 160 public high schools in 1900 there were 6 000.
in the same years public school budgets rose from 63 million to 253 million illiteracy declined from 20 percent to just over 10 percent of the population.
still even as late as 1900 the average adult had only five years of schooling.
educators saw the school as the primary means to train people for life and work in an industrializing society.
hence social and cultural change 1877 1900 teachers focused on basic skills reading and mathematics and on values obedience and attentiveness to the clock.
most schools had a highly structured curriculum built around discipline and routine.
in 1892 joseph rice a pediatrician toured twelve hundred classrooms in thirty six cities.
in a typical classroom he reported the atmosphere was damp and chilly the teacher strict.
the unkindly spirit of the teacher is strikingly apparent the pupils being completely subjugated to her will are silent and motionless one teacher asked her pupils how can you learn anything with your knees and toes out of order many children dropped out of school early and not just to earn money.
helen todd a factory inspector in chicago found a group of young girls working in a hot stuffy attic.
when she asked why they were not in school tillie isakowsky who was 14 said school.
school is de fiercest ting youse kin come up against.
factories aint no cinch but schools is worst a few blocks away todd stumbled on a 13 year old boy hiding in a basement.
he cried when she said he would have to go to school blurting that they hits ye if yer dont learn and they hits ye if ye whisper and they hits ye if ye have string in yer pocket and they hits ye if yer seat squeaks and they hits ye if ye dont stan up in time and they hits ye if yer late and they hits ye if ye ferget the page curious todd asked 500 children whether they would go to school or work in a factory if their families did not need the money 412 preferred the factory.
school began early boys attended all day but girls often stayed home after lunch since it was thought they needed less in the way of learning.
on the teachers command students stood and recited from websters spellers and mcguffeys eclectic readers the periods most popular textbooks.
the work of william holmes mcguffey a professor of languages at miami university in ohio mcguffeys eclectic readers had been in use since 1836 100 million copies were sold in the last half of the nineteenth century.
nearly every child read them they taught not only reading but also ethics values and religion.
in the readers boys grew up to be heroes girls to be mothers and hard work always meant success shall birds and bees and ants be wise while i my moments waste.
o let me with the morning rise and to my duty haste.
the south lagged far behind in education.
the average family size there was about twice as large as in the north and a greater proportion of the population lived in isolated rural areas.
state and local authorities mandated fewer weeks in the average school year and many southern states refused to adopt compulsory education laws.
even more important was the effect of southern jim crow laws passed in the 1890s and after to keep african americans from voting serving on juries and participating in other aspects of southern life.
southerners used these laws to maintain separate school systems to segregate the races.
supported by the u s supreme court decision of 1896 in plessy v ferguson see plessy v ferguson the shaping of jim crow pp.
460 463 segregated schooling added a devastating financial burden to education in the south.
north carolina and alabama mandated segregated schools in 1876 south carolina and louisiana in 1877 mississippi in 1878 and virginia in 1882.
a series of supreme court decisions in the 1880s and 1890s upheld the concept of segregation.
in the civil rights cases 1883 the court ruled that the fourteenth amendment barred state governments from discriminating on account of race but did not prevent private individuals or organizations from doing so.
plessy v ferguson 1896 established the doctrine of separate but equal and upheld a louisiana law requiring different railroad cars for whites and blacks.
the court applied the doctrine directly to schools in cumming v county board of education 1899 which approved the creation of separate schools for whites even if there were no comparable schools for blacks.
southern school laws often implied that the schools would be separate but equal and they were often separate but rarely equal.
black schools were usually dilapidated and black teachers were paid considerably less than white teachers.
in 1890 only 35 percent of black children attended school in the south 55 percent of white children did.
that year nearly two thirds of the countrys black population was illiterate.
educational techniques changed after the 1870s.
educators paid more attention to early elementary education a trend that placed young children in school and helped the growing number of mothers who worked outside the home.
the kindergarten movement started in st louis in 1873 spread across the country.
in kindergartens four to six year old children learned by playing not by keeping their knees and toes in order.
for older children social reformers advocated practical courses in manual training and homemaking.
we are impatient with the schools which lay all stress on reading and writing jane addams said for they fail to give the child any clew to the life about him for the first time education became a field of university study.
european theorists such as johann friedrich herbart a german educator argued that learning occurred best in an atmosphere of freedom and confidence between teachers and pupils.
teacher training became increasingly professional.
only ten normal schools or teacher training institutions existed in the united states before the civil war.
by 1900 there were 345 and one in every five elementary teachers had graduated from a professional school.
higher education nearly one hundred fifty new colleges and universities opened in the twenty years between 1880 and 1900.
the morrill land grant act of 1862 gave large grants of land to the states for the establishment of colleges to teach agriculture and the mechanic arts the act fostered sixty nine land grant institutions including the great state universities of wisconsin california minnesota and illinois.
private philanthropy born of the large fortunes of the industrial age also spurred growth in higher education.
leland stanford gave 24 million to endow stanford university on his california ranch and john d rockefeller founder of the standard oil company gave 34 million to found the university of chicago.
other industrialists established cornell 1865 vanderbilt 1873 and tulane 1884.
as colleges expanded their function changed and their curriculum broadened.
no longer did they exist primarily to train young men for the ministry.
they moved away from the classical curriculum of rhetoric mathematics latin and greek toward reality and practicality as president david starr jordan of stanford university said.
the massachusetts institute of technology mit founded in 1861 focused on science and engineering.
chapter 19 toward an urban society 1877 1900 courses rather than following a rigidly prescribed curriculum.
lectures and discussions replaced rote recitation and courses in the natural and social sciences fine arts and modern languages multiplied.
in the 1890s eliots harvard moved to the forefront of educational innovation.
women still had to fight for educational opportunities.
some formed study clubs an important movement that spread rapidly between 1870 and 1900.
groups such as the decatur illinois art class the boston history class and the barnesville georgia shakespeare club aimed to enlarge the mental horizon as well as the knowledge of our members club members read virgil and chaucer studied history and architecture and discussed womens rights.
clubs sprang up almost everywhere there were women in caribou maine tyler texas and leadville colorado as well as san francisco new york and boston.
although they were usually small study clubs sparked a greater interest in education among women and their daughters and contributed to a rapid rise in the number of women entering college in the early 1900s.
before the civil war only three private colleges admitted women to study with men.
after the war educational opportunities increased for women.
a number of womens colleges opened including vassar 1865 wellesley 1875 smith 1875 bryn mawr 1885 barnard 1889 and radcliffe 1893.
the land grant colleges of the midwest open to women from the outset spurred a nationwide trend toward coeducation although some physicians such as harvard medical schools dr edward h clarke in his popular sex in education 1873 continued to argue that the strain of learning made women sterile.
by 1900 women made up about 40 percent of college students and four out of five colleges admitted them.
fewer opportunities existed for african americans and other minorities.
jane stanford encouraged the chinese who had worked on her husbands central pacific railroad to apply to stanford university but her policy was unusual.
most colleges did not accept minority students and only a few applied.
du bois the brilthe morrill land grant act of 1862 gave large grants of land to the states for the establishment of liant african american sociologist and civil rights colleges to teach agriculture and the mechanic arts the act sponsored by u s representative leader attended harvard in the late 1880s but found justin smith morrill of vermont facilitated the creation of sixty nine land grant institutions the society of harvard yard closed against him.
including the state universities of wisconsin california minnesota massachusetts and illinois.
disdained and disdainful he asked no fellowship influenced by the new german universities which emphasized of my fellow students chosen as one of the commencement speakspecialized research johns hopkins university in baltimore opened ers du bois picked as his topic jefferson davis treating it said an the nations first separate graduate school in 1876.
under president onlooker with an almost contemptuous fairness daniel coit gilman johns hopkins stressed the seminar and laboblack students turned to black colleges such as the hampton ratory as teaching tools bringing together student and teacher in normal and industrial institute in virginia and the tuskegee close association.
institute in alabama.
these colleges were often supported by whites charles w eliot who became president of harvard in 1869 at who favored manual training for blacks.
booker t washington an the age of thirty five moved to end as an admirer said the old ex slave put into practice his educational ideas at tuskegee which fogyism that marked the institution.
revising the curriculum opened in 1881.
washington began tuskegee with limited funds four eliot set up the elective system in which students chose their own run down buildings and only thirty students by 1900 it was a model read the document the morrill act 1862 social and cultural change 1877 1900 industrial and agricultural school.
spread over forty six buildings it offered instruction in thirty trades to fourteen hundred students.
washington emphasized patience manual training and hard work.
the wisest among my race understand he said in a widely acclaimed speech at the atlanta exposition in 1895 that the agitation of questions of social equality is the extremest folly blacks should focus on economic gains they should go to school learn skills and work their way up the ladder.
no race he said at atlanta can prosper till it learns that there is as much dignity in tilling a field as in writing a poem.
it is at the bottom of life we must begin and not at the top southern whites should help out because they would then have the most patient faithful law abiding and unresentful people that the world has seen outlined most forcefully in washingtons speech in atlanta the philosophy became known as the atlanta compromise and many whites and some blacks welcomed it.
acknowledging white domination it called for slow progress through self improvement not through lawsuits or agitation.
rather than fighting for equal rights blacks should acquire property and show they were worthy of their rights.
but washington did believe in black equality.
often secretive in his methods he worked behind the scenes to organize black voters and lobby against harmful laws.
in his own way he bespoke a racial pride that contributed to the rise of black nationalism in the twentieth century.
du bois wanted a more aggressive strategy.
born in massachusetts in 1868 the son of poor parents he studied at fisk university in tennessee and the university of berlin before listen to the audio file he went to harvard.
unable to find a teaching job in a white college he took a low paying research position at the university of pennsylvania.
he had no office but did not need one.
du bois used the new discipline of sociology which emphasized factual observation in the field to study the condition of blacks.
notebook in hand he set out to examine crime in philadelphias black seventh ward.
he interviewed five thousand people mapped and classified neighborhoods and produced the philadelphia negro 1898.
the first study of the effect of urban life on blacks it cited a wealth of statistics all suggesting that crime in the ward stemmed not from inborn degeneracy but from the environment in which blacks lived.
change the environment and people would change too education was a good way to go about it.
in the souls of black folk 1903 du bois openly attacked booker t washington and the philosophy of the atlanta compromise.
he urged african americans to aspire to professional careers to fight for the restoration of their civil rights and wherever possible to get a college education.
calling for integrated schools with equal opportunity for all du bois urged blacks to educate their talented tenth a highly trained intellectual elite to lead them.
du bois was not alone in promoting careers in the professions.
throughout higher education there was increased emphasis on professional training particularly in medicine dentistry and law.
enrollments swelled even as standards of admission tightened.
the number of medical schools in the country rose from 75 in 1870 to 160 in 1900 and the number of medical students including more and more women almost tripled.
schools of nursing grew from address at the atlanta exposition by booker t washington booker t washington who served as the first president of tuskegee institute advocated work efficiency and practical skills as keys to advancement for african americans.
students like these at tuskegee studied academic subjects and received training in trades and professions.
chapter 19 toward an urban society 1877 1900 only 15 in 1880 to 432 in 1900.
doctors lawyers and others became part of a growing middle class that shaped the concerns of the progressive era of the early twentieth century.
although less than 5 percent of the college age population attended college during the 1877 1890 period the new trends had great impact.
a generation of men and women encountered new ideas that changed their views of themselves and society.
courses never before offered such as philosophy ii at harvard the ethics of social reform which students called drainage drunkenness and divorce heightened interest in social problems and the need for reform.
some graduating students burned with a desire to cure societys ills.
my life began.
at johns hopkins university frederic c howe an influential reformer recalled.
i came alive i felt a sense of responsibility to the world i wanted to change things the spread of jim crow why did jim crow laws spread across the south after the end of reconstruction.
though washington and du bois differed widely in their views both of them fought the growing restrictions on black civil rights known as jim crow laws see chapter 16.
while segregation and disfranchisement began as informal arrangements in the immediate aftermath of the civil war they soon culminated in a legal regime of separation and exclusion that took firm hold in the 1890s.
throughout the south the new measures lent the sanction of law to a racial ostracism that included voting booths churches schools housing and jobs.
touching virtually all parts of life they affected public transportation hospitals prisons and asylums even funeral homes and cemeteries.
a number of influences lay behind their rapid growth.
by the 1870s many northerners had lost interest in guarding the rights of blacks.
weariness with civil war issues played a role in this trend as did beliefs in anglo saxon superiority and after the spanishamerican war of 1898 the acquisition of colonial subjects called revealingly the white mans burden in hawaii guam puerto rico and the philippines.
as a result the north and the federal government did little to stem the tide.
supreme court decisions between 1878 and 1898 gutted the reconstruction amendments and the legislation passed to enforce them leaving blacks virtually defenseless against political and social discrimination.
see table 19 1.
most visible in areas like voting jim crow laws soon penetrated nearly every aspect of southern life.
in 1915 a south carolina code banned textile factories from allowing laborers of different races to work together in the same room or to use the same entrances exits toilets and drinking water.
that year oklahoma required telephone companies to maintain separate phone booths for whites and blacks.
north carolina and florida ordered separate textbooks for black and white children.
florida even required that the books be segregated while they were in storage.
a new orleans ordinance placed black and white prostitutes in separate districts of the city.
there were jim crow bibles for african american witnesses in atlanta courts and jim crow elevators in atlanta buildings.
perhaps no event better expresses the cruel and barbaric nature of the racism and white supremacy that swept the south after reconstruction than lynching.
although lynchings were not confined to the south most occurred there and african american men were the most frequent victims.
here two men lean out of a barn window above a black man who is about to be hanged.
others below prepare to set on fire the pile of hay at the victims feet.
lynchings were often public events drawing huge crowds to watch the victims agonizing death.
jim crow laws expanded during the 1920s and 1930s.
mississippi segregated white and black patients in hospitals and mandated that nurses could tend only the sick of their own race.
city ordinances required jim crow taxis in jacksonville florida in 1929 birmingham alabama in 1930 and atlanta georgia in 1940.
in 1930 a birmingham ordinance forbade blacks and whites from playing each other at dominoes or checkers.
lynchings also spread.
between 1889 and 1899 an average of 187 blacks were lynched every year for alleged offenses against white supremacy.
many blacks and whites convicted of petty crimes were leased out to private contractors whose brutality rivaled that of the most sadistic slaveholders.
the convict lease system enabled entrepreneurs such as mine owners and lumber companies to rent prisoners the stirrings of reform supreme court decisions affecting black civil rights 1875 1900 case hall v decuir 1878 effects of courts decisions struck down louisiana law prohibiting racial discrimination by common carriers railroads steamboats buses.
declared the law a burden on interstate commerce over which states had no authority.
united states v declared federal laws to punish crimes harris 1882 such as murder and assault unconstitutional.
declared such crimes to be the sole concern of local government.
ignored the frequent racial motivation behind such crimes in the south.
civil rights struck down civil rights act of 1875.
cases 1883 declared that congress may not legislate on civil rights unless a state passes a discriminatory law.
declared the fourteenth amendment silent on racial discrimination by private citizens.
plessy v upheld louisiana statute requiring ferguson separate but equal accommodations on 1896 railroads.
declared that segregation is not necessarily discrimination.
williams v upheld state law requiring a literacy test mississippi to qualify for voting.
refused to find any 1898 implication of racial discrimination in the law although it permitted illiterate whites to vote if they understood the constitution.
using such laws southern states rapidly disfranchised blacks.
from the state and treat them as they saw fit.
unlike slaveowners they suffered no loss when a forced laborer died from overwork.
racism of course was not limited to the south as race riots in east st louis illinois 1917 and chicago 1919 among other events attested.
in 1903 the new york public school system banned uncle toms cabin from its reading lists saying that harriet beecher stowes depiction of antebellum slavery does not belong to today but to an unhappy period of our countrys history the memory of which it is not well to revive in our children encountering the racism of the north far less brutal but racism nonetheless blacks who had migrated there called it james crow.
the stirrings of reform how did life in the growing cities lead to ideas of reform.
when henry george one of the eras leading reformers asked a friend what could be done about the problem of political corruption in american cities his friend replied nothing.
you and i can do nothing at all.
we can only wait for evolution.
perhaps in four or five thousand years evolution may have carried men beyond this state of things this emphasis on the slow pace of change reflected the doctrine of social darwinism based on the writings of english social philosopher herbert spencer.
in several influential books spencer took the evolutionary theories of charles darwin and applied darwinian principles of natural selection to society combining biology and sociology in a theory of social selection that tried to explain human progress.
like animals society evolved slowly by adapting to the environment.
the survival of the fittest a term that spencer not darwin invented preserved the strong and weeded out the weak.
if they are sufficiently complete to live they do live and it is well they should live.
if they are not sufficiently complete to live they die and it is best they should die social darwinism had a number of influential followers in the united states including william graham sumner a professor of political and social science at yale university.
one of the countrys best known academic figures sumner was forceful and eloquent.
in writings such as what social classes owe to each other 1883 and the absurd effort to make the world over 1894 he argued that government action on behalf of the poor or weak interfered with evolution and sapped the species.
reform tampered with the laws of nature.
it is the greatest folly of which a man can be capable to sit down with a slate and pencil to plan out a new social world sumner said.
the influence of social darwinism on american thinking has been exaggerated but in the powerful hands of sumner and others it did influence some journalists ministers and policy makers.
between 1877 and the 1890s however it came under increasing attack.
in fields such as religion economics politics literature and law thoughtful people raised questions about established conditions and suggested the need for reform.
progress and poverty read and reread passed from hand to hand henry georges nationwide best seller progress and poverty 1879 led the way to a more critical appraisal of american society in the 1880s and beyond.
the book jolted traditional thought.
it was responsible one historian has said for starting along new lines of thinking an amazing number of the men and women who became leaders of reform.
born in 1839 the child of a poor philadelphia family george had little formal schooling.
as a boy he went to sea he also worked as a prospector printer and journalist.
self educated as an economist he moved to san francisco in the late 1850s and began to study the fierce struggle of our civilized life disturbed by the depression of the 1870s and labor upheavals such as the great railroad strikes of 1877 george saw modern society rich complex with material goods hitherto unknown as sadly flawed.
the present century he wrote has been marked by a prodigious increase in wealth producing power.
it was natural to expect and it was expected that.
real poverty would become a thing of the past instead he argued it becomes no easier for the masses of our people to make a living.
on the contrary it is becoming harder.
the wealthy class is becoming more wealthy but the poorer class is becoming more dependent.
the gulf between the employed and the employer is growing wider social contrasts are becoming sharper as liveried carriages appear so do barefooted children.
chapter 19 toward an urban society 1877 1900 read the document edward bellamy from looking backward solution simplistic and unappealing had much less impact than his analysis of the problem itself.
he raised questions a generation of readers set out to answer.
new currents in social thought georges emphasis on deprivation in the environment excited a young country lawyer in ashtabula ohio clarence darrow.
unlike the social darwinists darrow was sure that criminals were made and not born.
they grew out of the unjust condition of human life in the mid 1880s he left for chicago and a forty year career working to convince people that poverty lay at the root of crime.
there is no such thing as crime as the word is generally understood he told a group of startled prisoners in the cook county jail.
if every man woman and child in the world had a chance to make a decent fair honest living there would be no jails and no lawyers and no courts as darrow rejected the implications of social darwinism in similar fashion richard t ely and a group of young economists poked holes in traditional economic thought.
fresh from graduate study in germany ely in 1884 attacked classical economics for its dogmatism simple faith in laissez faire and reliance on self interest as a guide for human conduct.
the younger economics he said must no longer be a tool in the hands of the greedy and the avaricious for keeping down and oppressing the laboring classes.
it does not acknowledge laissez faire as an excuse for doing nothing while people starve accepting a post at johns hopkins university ely assigned graduate students to study labor conditions in baltimore and other cities one of them john r commons went on to publish a massive four volume study history of labour in the united states.
in 1885 ely led a small band of rebels in founding the american economic association which linked economics to social problems and urged government intervention in economic affairs.
social critic thorstein veblen saw economic edward bellamy was the author in 1887 of looking backward 2000 1887.
the book laws as a mask for human greed.
in the theory envisioned a nation cured of its social problems through the creation of a socialist utopia of the leisure class 1899 veblen analyzed the including the elimination of private competition and government ownership of industry.
predatory wealth and conspicuous consumption of the business class.
george proposed a simple solution.
land he thought formed edward bellamy dreamed of a cooperative society in which the basis of wealth and a few people could grow wealthy just poverty greed and crime no longer existed.
a lawyer from western because the price of their land rose.
since the rise in price did not massachusetts bellamy published looking backward 2000 1887 in result from any effort on their part it represented an unearned 1887 and became a national reform figure virtually overnight.
the increment which george argued should be taxed for the good novels protagonist julian west falls asleep in 1887 and awakes in the of society.
a single tax on the increment replacing all other year 2000.
wide eyed he finds himself in a socialist utopia the govtaxes would help equalize wealth and raise revenue to aid the poor.
ernment owns the means of production and citizens share the mate single tax clubs sprang up around the country but georges rial rewards.
cooperation rather than competition is the watchword.
the stirrings of reform the world of looking backward had limits it was regimented paternalistic and filled with the gadgets and material concerns of bellamys own day.
but it had a dramatic effect on many readers.
the book sold at the rate of ten thousand copies a week and its followers formed nationalist clubs to work for its objectives.
by 1890 there were such clubs in twenty seven states all calling for the nationalization of public utilities and a wider distribution of wealth.
walter rauschenbusch a young baptist minister read widely from the writings of bellamy and george along with the works of other social reformers.
when he took his first church post in hells kitchen a blighted area of new york city he soon discovered the weight of the slum environment.
one could hear he said human virtue cracking and crushing all around in the 1890s rauschenbusch became a professor at the rochester theological seminary and he began to expound on the responsibility of organized religion to advance social justice.
some protestant sects emphasized individual salvation and a better life in the next world not in this one.
poverty was evidence of sinfulness the poor had only themselves to blame.
god has intended the great to be great and the little to be little said henry ward beecher the countrys best known pastor.
wealth and destitution suburbs and slums all formed part of gods plan.
challenging those traditional doctrines a number of churches in the 1880s began establishing missions in the city slums.
william dwight porter bliss an episcopal clergyman founded the church of the carpenter in a working class district of boston.
lewis m pease worked in the grim five points area of new york alexander irvine a jewish missionary lived in a flophouse in the bowery.
irvine walked his skid row neighborhood every afternoon to lend a hand to those in need.
living among the poor and homeless the urban missionaries grew impatient with religious doctrines that endorsed the status quo.
many of the new trends were reflected in an emerging religious philosophy known as the social gospel.
as the name suggests the social gospel focused on society as well as individuals on improving living conditions as well as saving souls.
sermons in social gospel churches called on church members to fulfill their social obligations and adults met before and after the regular service to discuss social and economic problems.
children were excused from sermons organized into age groups and encouraged to make the church a center for social as well as religious activity.
soon churches included dining halls gymnasiums and even theaters.
the most active social gospel leader was washington gladden a congregational minister and prolific writer.
linking christianity to the social and economic environment gladden spent a lifetime working for social salvation he saw christianity as a fellowship of love and the church as a social agency.
in applied christianity 1886 and other writings he denounced competition urged an industrial partnership between employers and employees and called for efforts to help the poor.
the settlement houses a growing number of social reformers living in the urban slums shared gladdens concern.
like tweed and plunkitt they appreciated the dependency of the poor unlike them they wanted to eradicate the conditions that underlay it.
to do so they formed settlement houses in the slums and went to live in them to experience the problems they were trying to solve.
youthful idealistic and mostly middle class these social workers took as their model toynbee hall founded in 1884 in the slums of east london to provide community services.
stanton coit a moody and poetic graduate of amherst college was the first american to borrow the settlement house idea in 1886 he opened the neighborhood guild on the lower east side of new york.
the idea spread swiftly.
by 1900 there were more than a hundred settlements in the country five years later there were more than two hundred and by 1910 more than four hundred.
the settlements included jane addamss famous hull house in chicago 1889 robert a woodss south end house in boston 1892 and lillian walds henry street settlement in new york 1893.
the reformers wanted to bridge the socioeconomic gap between rich and poor and to bring education culture and hope to the slums.
they sought to create in the heart of the city the values and sense of community of small town america.
of settlement workers wald said in the house on henry street 1915 we were to live in a neighborhood.
identify ourselves with it socially and in brief contribute to it our citizenship many of the settlement workers were women some of them college graduates who found that society had little use for their talents and energy.
jane addams a graduate of rockford college in illinois opened hull house on south halsted street in the heart of the chicago slums.
twenty nine years old endowed with a forceful and winning personality she intended to share the lives of the poor and humanize the industrial city.
american ideals she said crumbled under the overpowering poverty of the overcrowded city occupying an old rundown house hull house focused on education offering classes in elementary english and shakespeare lectures on ethics and the history of art and courses in cooking sewing and manual skills.
a pragmatist addams believed in investigating a problem and then doing something to solve it.
noting the lack of medical care in the area she established an infant welfare clinic and free medical dispensary.
because the tenements lacked bathtubs she installed showers in the basement of the house and built a bathhouse for the neighbors.
because there was no local library she opened a reading room.
gradually hull house expanded to occupy a dozen buildings sprawling over more than a city block.
like settlement workers in other cities addams and her colleagues studied the immigrants in nearby tenements.
laboriously they identified the background of every family in a one thirdsquare mile area around hull house.
finding people of eighteen different nationalities they taught them american history and the english language yet addams also encouraged them through folk festivals and art to preserve their own heritage.
in boston robert woods of south end house focused on the problem of school dropouts.
he offered manual training formed clubs to get young people off the streets and established a cheap restaurant where the hungry could eat.
lillian wald the daughter of a middle class family and herself a graduate nurse concentrated on providing health care for the poor.
in 1898 the first catholic run settlement house opened in new york and in 1900 bronson house opened in los angeles to work in the mexican american community.
florence kelley an energetic graduate of cornell university taught night school one winter in chicago.
watching children chapter 19 toward an urban society 1877 1900 read the document jane addams from twenty years at hull house 1910 jane addams founded chicagos hull house in 1889.
the settlement house provided recreational and day care facilities offered extension classes in academic vocational and artistic subjects and above all sought to bring hope to poverty stricken slum dwellers.
break under the burden of poverty she devoted her life to the problem of child labor.
convinced of the need for political activism she worked with addams and others to push through the illinois factory act of 1893 which mandated an eight hour day for women in factories and for children under the age of fourteen.
the settlement house movement had its limits.
hull house one of the best attracted two thousand visitors a week still just a fraction of the seventy thousand people who lived within six blocks.
immigrants sometimes resented the middle class strangers who told them how to live.
dressed always in a brown suit and dark stockings harriet vittum the head resident of chicagos northwestern university settlement who told the story of the suicide victim at the beginning of this chapter was known in the neighborhood as the police lady in brown she once stopped a dance because it was too wild and then watched in disgust as the boys responded by making vulgar sounds with their lips though her attempts to help were sincere in private vittum called the people she was trying to help ignorant foreigners who live in an atmosphere of low morals.
surrounded by anarchy and crime although addams tried to offer a few programs for blacks most white reformers did not and after 1900 a number of black reformers opened their own settlements.
like the whites they offered employment information medical care and recreational facilities along with concerts lectures and other educational events.
white and black the settlement workers made important contributions to urban life.
crisis in social welfare the depression of 1893 jarred the young settlement workers many of whom had just begun their work.
addams and the hull house workers helped form the chicago bureau of charities to coordinate emergency relief.
kelley recently appointed the chief factory inspector of illinois worked even harder to end child labor and in conclusion the pluralistic society 1899 she moved to new york city to head the national consumers league which marshaled the buying power of women to encourage employers to provide better working conditions.
in cities and towns across the country traditional methods of helping the needy foundered in the crisis.
churches charity organization societies and community chests did what they could but their resources were limited and they functioned on traditional lines.
many of them still tried to change rather than aid individual families and people were often reluctant to call on them for help.
gradually a new class of professional social workers arose to fill the need.
unlike the church and charity volunteers these social workers wanted not only to feed the poor but to study their condition and alleviate it.
revealingly they called themselves case workers and daily collected data on the income housing jobs health and habits of the poor.
prowling tenement districts they gathered information about the number of rooms number of occupants ventilation and sanitation of the buildings putting together a fund of useful data.
studies of the poor popped up everywhere.
walter wyckoff a graduate of princeton university embarked in 1891 on what he called an experiment in reality for eighteen months he worked as an unskilled laborer in jobs from connecticut to california.
i am vastly ignorant of the labor problems and am trying to learn by experience he said as he set out.
after working as a ditchdigger farmhand and logger wyckoff summarized his findings in the workers 1897 a book immediately hailed as a major contribution to sociology.
so many others followed wyckoff s example that sometimes it seemed the observers outnumbered those being observed.
du bois did his pioneering study of urban blacks lillian pettengill took a job as a domestic servant to see the ups and downs of this particular dog life from the dogs end of the chain others became street beggars miners lumberjacks and factory laborers.
bessie and marie van vorsts the woman who toils being the experiences of two gentlewomen as factory girls 1903 studied female workers as did helen campbells women wage earners their past their present and their future 1893 which suggested that the conditions of factory employment prepared women mainly for the hospital the workhouse and the prison william t stead a prominent british editor visited the chicago worlds fair in 1893 and stayed to examine the city.
he roamed the flophouses and tenements and dropped in at hull house to drink hot chocolate and talk over conditions with jane addams.
later he wrote an influential book if christ came to chicago 1894 and in a series of mass meetings during 1893 he called for a civic revival.
in response chicagoans formed the civic federation a group of forty leaders who aimed to make chicago the best governed the healthiest city in this country setting up task forces for philanthropy moral improvement and legislation the new group helped spawn the national civic federation 1900 a nationwide organization devoted to the reform of urban life.
conclusion the pluralistic society the united states was born in the country and moved to the city historian richard hofstadter said.
much of that movement occurred during the nineteenth century when the united states was the most rapidly urbanizing nation in the western world.
american cities bustled with energy they absorbed millions of migrants who came from europe and other distant and not so distant parts of the world.
that migration and the urban growth that accompanied it reshaped american politics and culture.
by 1920 the census showed that for the first time most americans lived in cities.
by then too almost half the population was descended from people who had arrived after the american revolution.
as european african and asian cultures met in the american city a culturally pluralistic society emerged.
dozens of nationalities produced a culture whose members considered themselves polish americans african americans and irish americans.
the melting pot sometimes softened distinctions between the various groups but it only partially blended them into a unified society.
ah vera said a character in israel zangwills popular play the melting pot 1908 what is the glory of rome and jerusalem where all nations and races come to worship and look back compared with the glory of america where all races and nations come to labour and look forward critics scorned the play as romantic claptrap and indeed it was.
but the metaphor of the melting pot clearly depicted a new national image.
in the decades after the 1870s a jumble of ethnic and racial groups struggled for a place in society.
that society it is clear experienced a crisis between 1870 and 1900.
together the growth of cities and the rise of industrial capitalism brought jarring change the exploitation of labor ethnic and racial tensions poverty and for a few wealth beyond the imagination.
at homestead pullman and a host of other places there was open warfare between capital and labor.
as reformers struggled to mediate the situation they turned more and more to state and federal government to look after human welfare a tendency the supreme court stoutly resisted.
in the midst of the crisis the depression of the 1890s struck adding to the turmoil and straining american institutions.
tracing the changes wrought by waves of urbanization and industrialization henry george described the country as the house of have and the house of want almost in paraphrase of lincolns earlier metaphor of the house divided the question was could this house unlike that one stand.
complete the assignment plessy v ferguson the shaping of jim crow on myhistorylab law and society i n a nation of laws the interpretation of law can profoundly change peoples lives.
plessy v ferguson 1896 one of the most important cases ever to reach the supreme court changed the lives of millions of black and white americans.
interpreting law in a way that lasted for more than a half century it permitted the segregation of blacks in public facilities throughout the land.
given the significance of the case we know surprisingly little about homer a plessy the man who figured in it.
he was young we know that and apparently worked as a carpenter in louisiana.
according to the court records he was seveneighths caucasian which perhaps was a reason he was chosen to test the constitutionality of a louisiana law requiring railroad companies to segregate whites and blacks on trains in the state.
it seemed a good law to test.
louisianas own constitution forbade such discrimination so did the federal civil rights act of 1875 which guaranteed blacks full and equal enjoyment of public conveyances.
whatever the details of his life plessy lived in a post reconstruction south in which racism was widespread but segregation was not.
where segregation did exist it usually was not enacted into law.
during the 1870s and 1880s blacks and whites often ate together rode together and worked together.
i can ride in first class cars on the railroads and in the streets a delighted black visitor wrote home from south carolina in 1885.
i can stop in and drink a glass of soda and be more plessy v ferguson the shaping of jim crow politely waited upon than in some parts of new england that situation changed near the end of the century.
the courts often reflect trends in the society and whites in both north and south in the 1890s had little enthusiasm for civil rights or racial equality.
in addition economic depression heightened racial tensions and the spread of colonial imperialism in africa and asia led to talk about inferior people both at home and abroad.
beginning in the 1870s the supreme court handed down a series of decisions that overturned much reconstruction legislation limited federal protection for blacks and encouraged racial segregation.
in the slaughterhouse cases of 1873 the supreme court narrowed the scope of the fourteenth amendment protecting blacks a decade later in the civil rights cases 1883 it said that congress could not punish private individuals for acts of racial discrimination.
emboldened by such decisions southern states passed many segregation laws including laws requiring railroad companies to separate white and black riders.
in the summer of 1890 louisiana passed an act to promote the comfort of passengers that made railroads in the state provide equal but separate cars for the white and colored races segregationists were delighted.
the southern whites a new orleans newspaper said had passed the law in no spirit of hostility to the negroes but to make sure that the two races shall live separate and distinct from each other in all things with separate schools separate hotels and separate cars new orleans more than most southern cities had a group of talented african american leaders educated aggressive and experienced in politics and the judicial system.
outraged by the new law they thought first of boycotting the railroads that obeyed it but then decided to contest it in the courts.
led by louis a martinet a well known lawyer and physician and rodolphe l desdunes an important reconstruction republican they formed the citizens committee to test the constitutionality of the separate car law raised money for the cause and enlisted the aid of albion w tourge of new york a prominent white lawyer novelist and longtime crusader for african american rights.
tourge did not hesitate to join in the fight for which he charged no fee.
submission to such outrages he angrily wrote his new orleans friends tends only to their multiplication and exaggeration.
it is by constant resistance to oppression that the race must ultimately win equality of right as a first step citizens committee members went to various railroad officials to ask for aid in establishing a case that could test the law.
disliking the cost of the extra cars the law forced them to buy the officials were sympathetic but reluctant.
one railroad already refused to enforce the law officials on two other railroads said it was a bad and mean one they would like to get rid of it but were afraid of public opinion.
at last the east louisiana railway agreed to help.
and so on june 7 1892 to test the law homer a plessy boarded an east louisiana railway train in new orleans for the 30 mile trip to covington.
he took a seat in the car reserved for whites refused to move when a conductor asked him to and was arrested by a detective who was standing by for the occasion.
john h ferguson a local judge ruled against plessys argument that the law violated his rights and plessy appealed to the state supreme court arguing that the law violated the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment to the constitution.
that court too promptly ruled against him.
delighted louisiana segregationists hoped as one of their newspapers said that the two decisions would knock some sense into the silly negroes who are trying to fight this law.
the sooner they drop their socalled crusade against the jim crow car and stop wasting their money in combating so well established a principle the right to separate the races in cars and elsewhere the better for them it took three more years before the united states supreme court heard the case.
tourge himself was pleased with the delay hoping that time might improve racial feelings in the country and bring popular support to his cause.
those hopes did not bear out nor did his arguments before the court.
in an unusual approach tourge began by arguing that homer a plessy who was light skinned in color had been deprived of property without due process of law contrary to the fourteenth amendment.
able to pass for white he had been identified by the railroad conductor as black.
he had been robbed therefore of his property tourge said the sense of being white and thus barred from association with white people who in the united states controlled the avenues to advancement.
probably most white persons if given a choice tourge argued would prefer death to life in the united states as colored persons.
under these conditions is it possible to conclude that the reputation of being white is not property.
indeed is it not the most valuable sort of property being the master key that unlocks the golden door of opportunity the remainder of tourges brief was straightforward emphasizing the incompatibility of the separate car law with the intent of the thirteenth and fourteenth amendments the inequities it fostered and its basis in claims of white superiority.
unless the court stopped it now enforced segregation would soon spread everywhere through life.
why may a law not require all red headed people to ride in a separate car.
why not require all colored people to walk on one side of the street and the whites on the other why not houses of different color or clothes or carriages.
laws might make blacks and whites or protestants and catholics natives and foreign born or anyone else for that matter sit on opposite sides of a courtroom or use different playgrounds.
deciding the case was simple tourge concluded suppose you the members of the court were suddenly ordered into a jim crow car of your own.
what humiliation once owned slaves.
but accepting what rage would then fill the judicial mind finally on may 18 1896 the court handed down its decision in plessy v ferguson.
by a vote of 7 to 1 it decided against plessy.
upholding the doctrine of separate but equal it held that the louisiana law did not violate plessys rights.
it did not violate them the court said because the law was reasonable it had been passed with reference to the established usages customs and traditions of the people it was precisely those usages and customs race prejudice in short that tourge had argued against.
they were contrary to the reconstruction amendments to the constitution he had argued but the majority of the court would have none of it.
the authors of those amendments they said could not have meant to do away with racial distinctions or institute social equality that simply could not be done.
laws did not create race prejudice and they could not change it.
enforced segregation did not label anyone as inferior.
we consider the court said the underlying fallacy of the plaintiffs argument to consist in the assumption that the enforced separation of the two races stamps the colored race with a badge of inferiority.
if this be so it is not by reason of anything found in the act but solely because the colored race chooses to put that construction upon it there was irony in the courts vote.
justice henry billings brown a son of massachusetts and michigan wrote the opinion for the majority a measure of changing opinion in the north.
the single dissenter in the case justice john marshall harlan of kentucky on the other hand was not only from the south he had once owned slaves.
but accepting the changed requirements of the reconstruction amendments he became the great dissenter in a court and a country fast fleeing its important responsibilities.
dissenting in plessy he scoffed at the majoritys reasoning.
the louisiana law he said was clearly prejudicial designed to keep blacks from railroad cars occupied by whites and as such was in clear conflict with both the thirteenth and fourteenth amendments.
it was a badge of servitude inconsistent with the equality before the law established by the constitution.
it cannot be justified upon any legal grounds our constitution is color blind and neither knows nor tolerates classes among citizens.
in respect of civil rights all citizens are equal before the law.
the humblest is the peer of the most powerful.
the law regards man as man and takes no account of his surroundings or of his color when his civil rights as guaranteed by the supreme law of the land are involved in my opinion harlan concluded the judgment this day rendered will in time prove to be quite as pernicious as the decision made by this tribunal in the dred scott case it was.
after plessy jim crow laws spread swiftly through the south.
more and more public conveyances schools and restaurants were segregated.
signs saying whites only or colored appeared on entrances and exits restrooms and water fountains waiting rooms and even elevators.
in 1905 georgia passed the first law requiring separate public parks.
in 1909 mobile alabama enacted a curfew requiring blacks to be off the streets by 10 p m.
in 1915 south carolina forbade blacks and whites to work in the same rooms in textile factories.
the oklahoma legislature required separate telephone booths new orleans segregated white and black prostitutes.
atlanta had separate bibles for black witnesses in the city courts.
harlan had in general terms predicted it all in words still worth reading today the destinies of the two races in this country are indissolubly linked together and the interests of both require that the common government of all shall not permit the seeds of race hate to be planted under the sanction of law.
what can more certainly arouse race hate what more certainly create and perpetuate a feeling of distrust between these races than state enactments which in fact proceed on the ground that colored citizens are so inferior and degraded that they cannot be allowed to sit in public coaches occupied by white citizens.
that as all will admit is the real meaning of such legislation as was enacted in louisiana plessy v ferguson set a pattern of court supported segregation that lasted sixty years.
generations of blacks and whites children and adults alike were deeply affected sometimes traumatized by it.
the practice became a major focus of grievance in the growing movement for civil rights during the 1930s and 1940s.
justice tourge had written in his original brief is pictured blind and her daughter the law ought at least to be color blind harlan had used the same word color blind a welcome concept to those fighting for civil rights in the 1890s.
but history takes interesting and different turns as does the law and the word would come up again decades later in arguments against affirmative action programs that helped african americans get into colleges and professional schools.
see discussion of bakke v regents of the university of california p.
plessy by then was no more.
at last exactly fifty eight years after the decision had been announced on may 17 1954 in the case of brown v board of education of topeka see chapter 29 the supreme court reversed itself and overturned plessy.
ruling that segregated schools are inherently unequal the courts stand toppled segregation of many kinds and changed lives once again.
questions for discussion 1.
what did the majority of the supreme court give as its reasons in deciding plessy v ferguson.
what do you think of these reasons.
how do you think the majority reflected the climate of their times.
what changes in public opinion have occurred since.
what are some of the factors that contributed to increased segregation in the south and north after 1890.
do you think tourge established an effective defense in arguing that the light skinned plessy had been deprived of his valuable property the reputation of being white.
why or why not.
chapter 19 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 19 toward an urban society 1877 1900 on myhistorylab time line 1862 morrill land grant gives land to states for establishment of colleges rutgers and princeton play in nations first intercollegiate football game cincinnati red stockings baseballs first professional team organized comstock law bans obscene articles from u s mail nations first kindergarten opens in st louis missouri womens christian temperance union formed to crusade against evils of liquor johns hopkins university opens first separate graduate school henry george analyzes problems of urbanizing america in progress and poverty salvation army arrives in united states polish national alliance formed to help polish immigrants adjust to life in america booker t washington opens tuskegee institute in alabama dr john h kellogg advises parents to teach their children about sex in plain facts for old and young 1883 metropolitan opera opens in new york 1885 home insurance building countrys first metal frame structure erected in chicago american economic association formed to advocate government intervention in economic affairs edward bellamy promotes idea of socialist utopia in looking backward 2000 1887 jane addams opens hull house in chicago national woman suffrage association and the american woman suffrage association both formed in 1869 merge to consolidate the woman suffrage movement immigration restriction league formed to limit immigration from southern and eastern europe supreme court decision in plessy v ferguson establishes constitutionality of separate but equal facilities john deweys laboratory school for testing and practice of new educational theory opens at university of chicago chapter review the lure of the city the spread of jim crow why did cities expand in the united states between 1880 and 1900.
why did jim crow laws spread across the south after end of the reconstruction.
american cities grew by leaps and bounds between 1880 and 1900.
among the reasons for the growth were the needs of an industrializing society technological change in the form of electricity elevators steel beams and other advances and the arrival of millions of immigrants.
politically city bosses retained power by responding to the needs of immigrants and other urban voters.
p 439 after reconstruction ended in 1877 northern weariness with civil war issues a series of supreme court decisions and growing racism led the federal government to stop trying to uphold civil rights legislation in the south.
this enabled southern states and cities to pass and enforce jim crow laws that mandated rigid separation between blacks and whites.
p 454 the stirrings of reform social and cultural change 1877 1900 rural how did the growth of american cities affect social cultural and political life.
the rapid growth of cities changed how americans thought and acted.
cities opened up new areas of entertainment employment and behavior.
they reshaped the family brought more women into the workforce and emphasized education.
p 447 how did life in the growing cities lead to ideas of reform.
urban life which forced many people close together made social problems unprecedentedly visible.
the city could not hide the contrasts between rich and poor the dirtiness and dangers of factory life and the woeful lot of millions of immigrants.
reformers argued for change.
some of them like jane addams opened urban settlement houses where they lived among the poor.
p 455 study resources key terms and definitions new immigrants starting in the 1880s immigration into the united states began to shift from northern and western europe to southern and eastern europe.
these new immigrants were mostly poor non protestant and unskilled they tended to stay in close knit communities and retain their language customs and religions.
between 1880 and 1910 approximately 8 4 million of these so called new immigrants came to the united states.
p 444 mugwumps educated and upper class reformers who crusaded for lower tariffs limited federal government and civil service reform.
they were best known for helping elect grover cleveland president in 1884 p 448 womens christian temperance union wctu this organization campaigned to end drunkenness and the social ills that accompanied it.
by 1898 it had 10 000 branches and 500 000 members.
the wctu illustrated the role women played in politics and reform long before they won the right to vote.
p 448 national american woman suffrage association founded by susan b anthony in 1890 this organization worked to secure women the right to vote.
it stressed careful organization and peaceful lobbying.
p 450 plessy v ferguson a supreme court case in 1896 that established the doctrine of separate but equal the court applied it to schools in cumming v county board of education 1899.
the doctrine was finally overturned in 1954 in brown v board of education of topeka.
p 451 civil rights cases a group of cases in 1883 in which the supreme court ruled that the fourteenth amendment barred state governments from discriminating on the basis of race but did not prevent private individuals or organizations from doing so.
the ruling dealt a major blow to efforts to protect african americans.
p 451 social darwinism adapted by english social philosopher herbert spencer from charles darwins theory of evolution this theory held that the laws of evolution applied to human life that change or reform therefore took centuries and that the fittest would succeed in business and social relationships.
it promoted competition and individualism saw government intervention into human affair as futile and was used by the economic and social elite to oppose reform.
p 455 social gospel preached by urban protestant ministers the social gospel focused as much on improving the conditions of life on earth as on saving souls for the hereafter.
its adherents worked for child labor laws and measures to alleviate poverty.
p 457 settlement houses located in poor districts these community centers tried to soften the impact of urban life for immigrant and other families.
often run by young educated women they provided social services and a political voice for their neighborhoods.
chicagos hull house founded by jane addams in 1889 was the most famous of them.
p 457 critical thinking questions 1.
what were the main economic social and political characteristics of 3.
how did reform minded critics try to meet the challenges of the new urban society.
urban growth.
in what ways did the social and cultural changes of urban society affect fundamental outlooks on the family the role of women and education and lead to demands for reform.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 19 on myhistorylab the lure of the city social and cultural change 1877 1900 read the document read the document charles loring brace the life of the street rats 1872 p 439 view the closer look group of emigrants women and children from eastern europe on deck of the s s amsterdam p 441 watch the video view the map complete the assignment isle of tears p 442 watch the video ellis island isle of hope democracy and corruption the rise of political machines p 446 listen to the audio file address at the atlanta exposition by booker t washington p 453 the stirrings of reform read the document ellis island immigrants 1903 p 442 immigration 1880 1920 p 444 the morrill act 1862 p 452 edward bellamy from looking backward p 456 read the document jane addams from twenty years at hull house 1910 p 458 complete the assignment shaping of jim crow p 460 plessy v ferguson the indicates study plan media assignment political realignments in the 1890s contents and learning objectives politics of stalemate pg.
468 changing attitudes pg.
479 why was there a stalemate between republicans and democrats until the mid 1890s.
what changes in outlook did the panic and depression of the 1890s bring about.
republicans in power the billiondollar congress pg.
470 the presidential election of 1896 pg.
481 how did the republican partys vision shape the billiondollar congress.
why was the presidential election of 1896 so important.
the rise of the populist movement pg.
472 what did mckinley accomplish that placed the results of the 1896 election on a solid basis.
what factors led to the formation and growth of the farmers alliance and peoples party.
the mckinley administration pg.
485 feature essay the wonderful wizard of oz the crisis of the depression pg.
476 what were the main political and labor effects of the panic and depression of the 1890s.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 18 the industrial society a machine culture in 1876 americans celebrated their first century of independence.
survivors of a recent civil war they observed the centenary proudly and rather self consciously in song and speech and above all in the grand centennial exposition held in philadelphia pennsylvania.
spread over several hundred acres the exposition occupied 180 buildings and attracted nine million visitors about one fifth of the countrys population at the time.
significantly it focused more on the present than the past.
fairgoers strolled through exhibits of life in colonial times then hurried off to see the main attractions machines inventions and products of the new industrial era.
they saw linoleum a new easy to clean floor covering.
for the first time they tasted root beer supplied by a young druggist named charles hires and the exotic banana wrapped in foil and selling for a dime.
they saw their first bicycle an awkward highwheeled contraption with solid tires.
a japanese pavilion generated widespread interest in the culture of japan.
there was also a womens building the first ever in a major exposition.
inside were displayed paintings and sculpture by women artists along with rows of textile machinery staffed by female operators.
in the entire exposition machinery was the focus and machinery hall was the most popular building.
here were the products of an ever improving civilization.
long lines of the curious waited to see the telephone alexander graham bells new device.
my god it talks the emperor of brazil exclaimed.
thomas a edison displayed several recent inventions while nearby whirring machines turned out bricks chewing tobacco and other products.
fairgoers saw the first public display of the typewriter elisha otiss new elevator and the westinghouse railroad air brake.
but above all they crowded around the mighty corliss engine the focal point of the exposition.
a giant steam engine it dwarfed everything else in machinery hall its twin vertical cylinders towering almost four stories in the air.
alone it supplied power for the eight thousand other machines large and small on the exposition grounds.
poorly designed the corliss was soon obsolete but for the moment it captured the nations imagination.
it symbolized swift movement toward an industrial and urban society.
john greenleaf whittier the aging rural poet likened it to the snake in the garden of eden and refused to see it.
the corliss engine a mechanical marvel at the centennial exposition was a prime example of the giantism so admired by the public.
chapter 18 the industrial society s whittier feared the united states was fast becoming an industrial society.
developments earlier in the century laid the basis but the most spectacular advances in industrialization came during the three decades after the civil war.
at the start of the war the country lagged well behind industrializing nations such as great britain france and germany.
by 1900 it had vaulted far into the lead with a manufacturing output that exceeded the combined output of its three european rivals.
over the same years cities grew technology advanced and farm production rose.
developments in manufacturing mining agriculture transportation and communications changed society.
in this change railroads steel oil and other industries all shaped by the hands of labor played a leading role.
many americans eagerly welcomed the new directions.
william dean howells a leading novelist visited the centennial exposition and stood in awe before the corliss.
comparing it to the paintings and sculpture on display howells preferred the machine it is in these things of iron and steel he said that the national genius most freely speaks a industrial development what enabled the united states to build an industrial economy.
american industry owed its remarkable growth to several considerations.
it fed on an abundance of natural resources coal iron timber petroleum and waterpower.
an iron manufacturer likened the nation to a gigantic bowl filled with treasure labor was also abundant drawn from american farm families and the hosts of european immigrants who flocked to american mines cities and factories.
nearly eight million immigrants arrived in the 1870s and 1880s another fifteen million came between 1890 and 1914 large figures for a nation whose total population in 1900 was about seventy six million people.
the burgeoning population led to expanded markets which new devices such as the telegraph and telephone helped to exploit.
the swiftly growing urban populations devoured goods and the railroads spreading pell mell across the land linked the cities together and opened a national market.
within its boundaries the united states had the largest free trade market in the world while tariff barriers partially protected its producers from outside competition.
expansive market and labor conditions buoyed the confidence of investors european and american who provided large amounts of capital.
technological progress so remarkable in these years doomed some older industries tallow for example but increased productivity in others such as the kerosene industry and created entirely new industries as well.
through inventions such as the harvester and the combine it also helped foster a firm agricultural base on which industrialization depended.
eager to promote economic growth government at all levels federal state and local gave manufacturers money land and other resources.
other benefits too flowed from the american system of government stability commitment to the concept of private property and initially at least a reluctance to regulate industrial activity.
unlike their european counterparts american manufacturers faced few legal or social barriers and their main domestic rivals the southern planters had lost political power in the civil war.
in this atmosphere entrepreneurs flourished.
taking steps crucial for industrialization they organized managed and assumed the financial risks of the new enterprises.
admirers called them captains of industry foes labeled them robber barons.
to some degree they were both creative and acquisitive.
if sometimes they seemed larger than life it was because they dealt in concepts distances and quantities often unknown to earlier generations.
industrial growth it must be remembered was neither a simple nor steady nor inevitable process.
it involved human decisions and brought with it large social benefits and costs.
growth varied from industry to industry and from year to year.
it was concentrated in the northeast where in 1890 more than 85 percent of americas manufactured goods originated.
the more sparsely settled west provided raw materials while the south although making major gains in iron textiles and tobacco had to rebuild after wartime devastation.
in 1890 the industrial production of the entire south amounted in value to about half that of the state of new york.
still industrial development proceeded at an extraordinary pace.
between 1865 and 1914 the real gross national product the total monetary value of all goods and services produced in a year with prices held stable grew at a rate of more than 4 percent a year increasing about eightfold overall.
as robert higgs an economic historian noted never before had such rapid growth continued for so long an empire on rails how and why did the railroad system grow.
genuine revolutions happen rarely but a major one occurred in the nineteenth century a revolution in transportation and communications.
when the nineteenth century began people traveled and communicated much as they had for centuries before when it ended the railroad the telegraph the telephone and the oceangoing steamship had wrought enormous changes.
the steamship sliced in half the time of the atlantic crossing and not dependent on wind and tide introduced new regularity in the movement of goods and passengers.
the telegraph flashing messages almost instantaneously along miles of wire four hundred thousand miles of it in the early 1880s transformed communications as did the telephone a little later.
but the railroad worked the largest changes of all.
along with bessemer steel it was the most significant technical innovation of the century.
emblem of motion and power the railroad dramatically affected economic and social life.
economic growth would have occurred without it of course canals inland steamboats and the countrys superb system of interior waterways already provided the outlines of an effective transportation network.
but the railroad added significantly to the network and contributed advantages all its own.
those advantages included more direct routes greater speed greater safety and comfort than other modes of land travel more dependable schedules a larger volume of traffic and year round an empire on rails service.
a days land travel on stagecoach or horseback might cover fifty miles.
the railroad covered fifty miles in about an hour seven hundred miles in a day.
it went where canals and rivers did not go directly to the loading platforms of great factories or across the arid west.
as construction crews pushed tracks onward vast areas of the continent opened for settlement.
consequently american railroads differed from european ones.
in europe railroads were usually built between cities and towns that already existed they carried mostly the same goods that earlier forms of transportation had.
in the united states they did that and more they often created the very towns they then served and they ended up carrying cattle from texas fruit from florida and other goods that had never been carried before.
linking widely separated cities and villages the railroad ended the relative isolation and self sufficiency of the countrys island communities it tied people together brought in outside products fostered greater interdependence and encouraged economic specialization.
under its stimulus chicago supplied meat to the nation minneapolis supplied grain and st louis beer.
for these and other communities the railroad made possible a national market and in so doing pointed the way toward mass production and mass consumption two of the hallmarks of twentieth century society.
it also pointed the way toward later business development.
the railroad as alfred d chandler a historian of business has written was the nations first big business it worked out the modern ways of finance management labor relations competition and government regulation a railroad corporation far flung and complex was a new kind of business.
it stretched over thousands of miles employed thousands of people dealt with countless customers and required a scale of organization and decision making unknown in earlier business.
railroad managers never met most customers or even many employees thus arose new problems in marketing and labor relations.
year by year railroad companies consumed large quantities of iron steel coal lumber and glass stimulating growth and employment in numerous industries.
no wonder then that the railroad captured so completely the countrys imagination.
walt whitman a poet who celebrated american achievement chanted the locomotives praises thy black cylindric body golden brass and silvery steel thy great protruding head light fixd in front thy knitted frame thy springs and valves the tremulous twinkle of thy wheels type of the modern emblem of motion and power pulse of the continent fierce throated beauty.
watch the video railroads and expansion like no form of transportation before it the railroad could meet the challenge presented by the varied topography of the land west of the mississippi river from the great plains to the vast deserts from the deep gorges to the rocky mountains.
chapter 18 the industrial society almost 90 percent of the federal land grants lay in twenty states west of the mississippi river.
federal land grants helped build 18 738 miles of track less than 8 percent of the system.
the land was frequently distant and difficult to market.
railroad companies sometimes sold it to raise cash but more often they used it as security for bonds or loans.
beyond doubt the grants of cash and land promoted waste and corruption.
the companies built fast and wastefully eager to collect the subsidies that went with each mile of track.
wanting quick profits some owners formed separate construction companies to which they awarded lavish contracts.
in this way the notorious crdit mobilier a construction company controlled by an inner ring on the union pacific enriched its owners in the 1860s while the contract and finance company did the same on the central pacific.
the crdit mobilier bribed congressmen and state legislators to avoid investigation of its activities.
the grants also enabled railroads to build into territories that were pledged to the indians thus contributing to the wanton destruction of indian life.
yet on balance the grants probably worked more benefits than evils.
as congress had hoped the grants were the lure for railroad building across the rugged unsettled west where it would be years before the railroads revenues would repay their construction.
farmers ranchers and merchants poured into the newly opened areas settling the country and boosting the value of government and private land nearby.
the grants seemed necessary in a nation which unlike europe expected private enterprise to build the railroads.
in return for government aid congress required the railroads to carry government freight troops and for nearly a hundred years the railroad era lasted through the 1940s children gathered at depots paused in the fields to wave as the fast express flashed by listened at night to far off whistles and wondered what lay down the tracks.
they lived in a world grown smaller.
building the empire when lee surrendered at appomattox in 1865 the country already had thirty five thousand miles of track and much of the railroad system east of the mississippi river was in place.
farther west the rail network stood poised on the edge of settlement.
although southern railroads were in shambles from the war the united states had nearly as much railroad track as the rest of the world.
after the civil war rail construction increased by leaps and bounds.
from 35 000 miles in 1865 the network expanded to 93 000 miles in 1880 166 000 in 1890 and 193 000 in 1900 more than in all europe including russia.
mileage peaked at 254 037 miles in 1916 just before the industry began its long decline into the mid twentieth century.
to build such an empire took vast amounts of capital more than 4 5 billion by 1880 before even half of it was complete.
american and european investors provided some of the money government supplied the rest.
in all local governments gave railroad companies about 300 million and state governments added 228 million more.
the federal government loaned nearly 65 million to a half dozen western railroads and donated millions of acres of the public domain.
between 1850 and 1871 some eighty railroads received more than 170 million acres of land.
south er n pacific wash terr.
maine montana territory ic acif minn vt northern p oregon idaho territory wyoming territory n h mass.
wis dakota territory n y pa nebraska calif union pac ific central pacific nevada r he ut so n pacific utah territory colorado territory ill kans.
r i conn mich mo.
w va n j del.
washington d c va ky santa fe n c atlantic an i d pac fic okla tenn ark.
arizona new mexico territory territory s c miss.
texas land reserved for grants to railroads fla.
approximate area of land actually received by railroads area forfeited by railroads 400 miles 400 kilometers federal land grants to railroads as of 1871 besides land the government provided loans of 16 000 for each mile built on level ground 32 000 for each mile built on hilly terrain and 48 000 for each mile in high mountain country.
an empire on rails and its owner cornelius vanderbilt the commodore a crusty old multimillionaire from the shipping business.
1830 1840 nearly seventy years old when he first entered railroading vanderbilt wasted no 1841 1850 time.
in 1867 he took over the new york central and merged it with other lines to pro1851 1860 vide a track from new york city to buffalo and chicago.
when he died in 1877 his central 1861 1870 operated more than 4 500 miles of track.
j edgar thomson and thomas a scott 1871 1880 built the fourth trunk line the pennsylvania railroad which initially ran from philadelphia 1881 1890 to pittsburgh.
restless and energetic they dreamed of a rail empire stretching through 1891 1900 the south and west.
an aggressive business leader scott expanded the pennsylvania sys1901 1910 tem to cincinnati indianapolis st louis and chicago in 1869 new york city in 1871 and 1911 1920 baltimore and washington soon thereafter.
in the war damaged south consolidation 10 000 20 000 30 000 40 000 50 000 60 000 70 000 took longer.
as reconstruction waned northmiles of track ern and european capital rebuilt and intesource u s bureau of the census historical statistics of the united states colonial times to 1970 bicentennial grated the southern lines especially during the edition washington dc 1975.
1880s when rail construction in the south led the nation.
by 1900 the south had five large mail at substantially reduced rates resulting in savings to the systems linking its major cities and farming and industrial regions.
government of almost 1 billion between 1850 and 1945.
in no four decades after the secession crisis these systems tied the south other cases of federal subsidies to carriers canals highways and into a national transportation network.
airlines did congress exact specific benefits in return.
over that rail system passengers and freight moved in relative speed comfort and safety.
automatic couplers 1867 air brakes 1869 refrigerator cars 1867 dining cars heated cars electric linking the nation via trunk lines switches and stronger locomotives transformed railroad service.
george pullmans lavish sleeping cars became popular.
handsome the early railroads may seem to have linked different regions but depots such as new yorks grand central and washingtons union in fact they did not.
built with little regard for through traffic they station were erected at major terminals.
passenger miles per year were designed more to protect local interests than to tap outside increased from five billion in 1870 to sixteen billion in 1900 markets.
many extended less than fifty miles.
to avoid cooperin november 1883 the railroads even changed time.
ending ating with other lines they adopted conflicting schedules built the crazy quilt jumble of local times that caused scheduling difseparate depots and above all used different gauges.
gauges the ficulties the american railway association divided the country distance between the rails ranged from 4 feet 8 inches which into four time zones and adopted the modern system of standard became the standard gauge to 6 feet.
without special equipment time.
congress took thirty five years longer it adopted standard trains of one gauge could not run on tracks of another.
time in 1918 in the midst of world war i.
the civil war showed the value of fast long distance transportation and after 1865 railroad managers worked to provide it.
in a burst of consolidation the large companies swallowed the small integrated rails across the continent rail networks became a reality.
railroads also adopted standard schedules signals and equipment and finally in 1886 the standard gauge.
the dream of a transcontinental railroad linking the atlantic and in 1866 in a dramatic innovation to speed traffic railroad companies pacific oceans stretched back many years but had always been introduced fast freight lines that pooled cars for service between cities.
lost to sectional quarrels over the route.
in 1862 and 1864 with in the northeast four great trunk lines took shape all the south out of the picture congress moved to build the first intended to link eastern seaports with the rich traffic of the great transcontinental railroad.
it chartered the union pacific railroad lakes and western rivers.
like a massive river system trunk lines company to build westward from nebraska and the central pacific drew traffic from dozens of tributaries feeder lines and carried railroad company to build eastward from the pacific coast.
for each it to major markets.
the baltimore and ohio b o which mile built the two companies received from congress 20 square reached chicago in 1874 was one the erie railroad which ran miles of land in alternate sections along the track.
for each mile from new york to chicago was another.
the erie competed bitthey also received a thirty year loan of 16 000 32 000 or 48 000 terly with the new york central railroad the third trunk line depending on the difficulty of the terrain over which they built.
railroad construction 1830 1920 chapter 18 the industrial society pacific time mountain time central time eastern time seattle portland boston st paul tral cen sacramento fic paci detroit promontory point union p acific indianapolis denver san francisco cincinnati kansas city kansas pacific missouri pacific a fe eka sant washington d c st louis memphis hi so n top new york pittsburgh omaha salt lake city los angeles philadelphia chicago c at birmingham wilmington atlanta charleston savannah fort worth el paso new orleans railroads in operation by 1870 500 miles 500 kilometers by 1890 railroads 1870 and 1890 in the last quarter of the nineteenth century railroads expanded into texas the far southwest and the northwest carrying settlers businesses and government to the far flung areas.
construction began simultaneously at omaha and sacramento in 1863 lagged during the war and moved vigorously ahead after 1865.
it became a race each company vying for land loans and potential markets.
general grenville m dodge a tough union army veteran served as construction chief for the union pacific while charles crocker a former sacramento dry goods merchant led the central pacific crews.
dodge organized an army of ten thousand workers many of them ex soldiers and irish immigrants.
pushing rapidly westward he encountered frequent attacks from native americans defending their lands but he had the advantage of building over flat prairie.
crocker faced more trying conditions in the high sierra nevada along californias eastern border.
after several experiments he decided that chinese laborers worked best and he hired six thousand of them most brought directly from china.
i built the central pacific crocker enjoyed boasting but the chinese crews in fact did the awesome work.
under the most difficult conditions they dug blasted and pushed their way slowly east.
on may 10 1869 the two lines met at promontory utah near the northern tip of the great salt lake.
dodges crews had built 1 086 miles of track crockers 689.
the union pacific and central pacific presidents hammered in a golden spike both missed it on the first try and the dreamed of connection was made.
the telegraph flashed the news east and west setting off wild celebrations.
a photograph was taken but it included none of the chinese who had worked so hard to build the road they were all asked to step aside.
the transcontinental railroad symbolized american unity and progress.
along with the suez canal completed the same year it helped knit the world together.
three more railroads reached the coast in 1883 the northern pacific running from minnesota to oregon the atchison topeka and santa fe connecting kansas city and los angeles and the powerful southern pacific running from san francisco and los angeles to new orleans.
ten years later james j hills superbly built great northern railway extended from minneapolis st.
paul to seattle washington.
problems of growth overbuilding during the 1870s and 1880s caused serious problems for the railroads.
lines paralleled each other and where they did not speculators such as jay gould often laid one down to force a rival line to buy it at inflated prices.
while many managers an industrial empire worked to improve service gould and others bought and sold railroads like toys watered their stock and milked their assets.
by 1885 almost one third of railroad stock represented water that is stock distributed in excess of the real value of the assets.
competition was severe and managers fought desperately for traffic.
they offered special rates and favors free passes for large shippers low rates on bulk freight carload lots and long hauls and above all rebates secret privately negotiated reductions below published rates.
fierce rate wars broke out frequently convincing managers that ruthless competition helped no one.
rebates made more enemies than friends.
managers such as albert fink the brilliant vice president of the louisville nashville tried first to arrange pooling agreements a way to control competition by sharing traffic.
fink directed the eastern trunk line association 1877 which divided westbound traffic among the four trunk lines.
similar associations pooled traffic in the south and west but none survived the intense pressures of competition.
legally unenforceable pools were handshake agreements among individuals who did not always keep their word.
customers grew adept at bargaining for rebates and other privileges and railroads rarely felt able to refuse them.
failing to cooperate railroad owners next tried to consolidate.
through purchase lease and merger they gobbled up competitors and built self sustaining systems that dominated entire regions.
but many of the systems expensive and unwieldy collapsed in the panic of 1893.
by mid 1894 a quarter of the railroads were bankrupt.
the victims of the panic included such legendary names as the erie b o santa fe northern pacific and union pacific.
needing money railroads turned naturally to bankers who finally imposed order on the industry.
j pierpont morgan head of the new york investment house of j p morgan and company took the lead.
massively built with eyes so piercing they seemed like the headlights of an onrushing train morgan was the most powerful figure in american finance.
he liked efficiency combination and order.
he disliked wasteful competition.
in 1885 during a bruising rate war between the new york central and the pennsylvania morgan invited the combatants to a conference aboard his palatial steam yacht corsair.
cruising on long island sound he arranged a trafficsharing agreement and collected a million dollar fee.
bringing peace to an industry could be profitable.
it also satisfied morgans passion for stability.
after 1893 morgan and a few other bankers refinanced ailing railroads and in the process they took control of the industry.
their methods were direct fixed costs and debt were ruthlessly cut new stock was issued to provide capital rates were stabilized rebates and competition were eliminated and control was vested in a voting trust of handpicked trustees.
between 1894 and 1898 morgan reorganized critics said morganized the southern railway the erie the northern pacific and the b o.
in addition he took over a half dozen other important railroads.
by 1900 he was a dominant figure in american railroading.
as the new century began the railroads had pioneered the patterns followed by most other industries.
seven giant systems controlled nearly two thirds of the mileage and they in turn answered to a few investment banking firms such as the house of morgan.
for good and ill a national transportation network centralized and relatively efficient was now in place.
an industrial empire what were the main characteristics of the new steel and oil industries.
the new industrial empire was based on a number of dramatic innovations including steel oil and inventions of all kinds that transformed ordinary life.
in this process steel was as important as the railroads.
harder and more durable than other kinds of iron steel wrought changes in manufacturing agriculture transportation and architecture.
it permitted construction of longer bridges taller buildings stronger railroad track deadlier weapons better plows heavier machinery and faster ships.
made in great furnaces by strong men it symbolized the tough often brutal nature of industrial society.
from the 1870s onward steel output became the worldwide accepted measure of industrial progress and nations around the globe vied for leadership.
the bessemer process developed in the late 1850s by henry bessemer in england and independently by william kelly in the united states made increased steel production possible.
both bessemer and kelly discovered that a blast of air forced through molten iron burned off carbon and other impurities resulting in steel of a more uniform and durable quality.
the discovery transformed the industry.
while earlier methods produced amounts a person could lift a bessemer converter handled 5 tons of molten metal at a time.
the mass production of steel was now possible.
carnegie and steel bessemer plants demanded extensive capital investment abundant raw materials and sophisticated production techniques.
using chemical and other processes the plants required research international steel production 1880 1914 millions of tons germany france great britain russia united states chapter 18 the industrial society departments which became critical components of later american industries.
costly to build they limited entry into the industry to the handful who could afford them.
great steel districts arose in pennsylvania ohio and alabama in each case around large coal deposits that fueled the huge furnaces.
pittsburgh became the center of the industry its giant mills employing thousands of workers.
output shot up.
in 1874 the united states produced less than half the amount of pig iron produced in great britain.
by 1890 it took the lead and in 1900 it produced four times as much as britain.
iron ore abounded in the fabulous deposits near lake superior the greatest deposits in the world.
in the mines of the mesabi range in minnesota giant steam shovels loaded ore onto railroad cars for transport to ships on the great lakes.
powered lifts self loading devices and other innovations sped the process.
by the turn of the century historian peter temin noted the transport of lake ores had become an intricate ballet of large and complex machines like the railroads steel companies grew larger and larger.
in 1880 only nine companies could produce more than 100 000 tons a year.
by the early 1890s several companies exceeded 250 000 tons and two including the great carnegie steel company produced more than one million tons a year.
as operations expanded managers needed more complex skills.
product development marketing and consumer preferences became important.
competition was fierce and steel companies like the railroads tried secret agreements pools and consolidation.
during the 1880s and 1890s they moved toward vertical integration a type of organization in which a single company owns and controls the entire process from the unearthing of the raw materials to the manufacture and sale of the finished product.
such companies combined coal and iron mines transportation companies blast furnaces and rolling mills into integrated networks.
andrew carnegie emerged as the undisputed master of the industry.
born in scotland he came to the united states in 1848 at the age of twelve.
settling near pittsburgh he went to work as a bobbin boy in a cotton mill earning 1 20 a week.
he soon took a job in a telegraph office where in 1852 his hard work and skill caught the eye of thomas a scott of the pennsylvania railroad.
starting as scotts personal telegrapher carnegie spent a total of twelve years on the pennsylvania a training ground for company managers.
by 1859 he had become a divisional superintendent.
he was twenty four years old.
soon rich from shrewd investments carnegie plunged into the steel industry in 1872.
on the monongahela river south of pittsburgh he built the giant j edgar thomson steel works named after the president of the pennsylvania railroad his biggest customer.
with his warmth and salesmanship he attracted able partners and subordinates such as henry clay frick and charles m schwab whom he drove hard and paid well.
although he had written magazine articles defending the rights of workers carnegie kept the wages of the laborers in his mills low and disliked unions.
with the help of frick he crushed a violent strike at his homestead works in 1892 see p 434.
in 1878 he won the steel contract for the brooklyn bridge.
during the next decade as city building boomed he converted the huge homestead works near pittsburgh to the manufacture of structural beams and angles which went into the new york city elevated railway the first skyscrapers and the washington read the document andrew carnegie wealth 1889 the machinery dwarfs the workers in this colored engraving of steel making using the bessemer process at andrew carnegies pittsburgh steel works.
men worked twelve hours a day in the blazing heat and deafening roar of the machines.
carnegie profits mounted from 2 million in 1888 to 40 million in 1900.
that year carnegie steel alone produced more steel than great britain.
employing twenty thousand people it was the largest industrial company in the world.
in 1901 carnegie sold it.
believing that wealth brought social obligations he wanted to devote his full time to philanthropy.
he found a buyer in j pierpont morgan who in the late 1890s had put together several steel companies including federal steel carnegies chief rival.
carnegie steel had blocked morgans well known desire for control and in mid 1900 when a war loomed between the two interests morgan decided to buy carnegie out.
in early january 1901 morgan told charles m schwab go and find his price schwab cornered carnegie on the golf course carnegie listened and the next day he handed schwab a note scribbled in blunt pencil asking almost a half billion dollars.
morgan glanced at it and said i accept this price an industrial empire drawing other companies into the combination on march 3 1901 morgan announced the creation of the united states steel corporation.
the new firm was capitalized at 1 4 billion the first billion dollar company.
it absorbed more than 200 other companies employed 168 000 people and produced 9 million tons of iron and steel a year.
it controlled three fifths of the countrys steel business.
soon there were other giants including bethlehem steel republic steel and national steel.
as the nineteenth century ended steel products rare just thirty years before had altered the landscape.
huge firms investment bankers and professional managers dominated the industry.
rockefeller and oil petroleum worked comparable changes in the economic and social landscape although mostly after 1900.
distilled into oil it lubricated the machinery of the industrial age.
there seemed little use for gasoline the internal combustion engine had only just been developed but kerosene another major distillate brought inexpensive illumination into almost every home.
whale oil cottonseed oil and even tallow candles were expensive to burn consequently many people went to bed at nightfall.
kerosene lamps opened the evenings to activity altering the patterns of life.
like other changes in these years the oil boom happened with surprising speed.
in the mid 1850s petroleum was a bothersome smelly fluid that occasionally rose to the surface of springs and streams.
clever entrepreneurs bottled it in patent medicines a few scooped up enough to burn.
other entrepreneurs soon found that drilling reached pockets of oil beneath the earth.
in 1859 edwin l drake drilled the first oil well near titusville in northwest pennsylvania and the black gold fever struck.
chemists soon discovered ways to transform petroleum into lubricating oil grease paint wax varnish naphtha and paraffin.
within a few years there was a world market in oil.
at first growth of the oil industry was chaotic.
early drillers and refiners produced for local markets and since drilling wells and even erecting refineries cost little competition flourished.
output fluctuated dramatically prices rose and fell with devastating effect.
refineries usually a collection of wooden shacks and tanks were centered in cleveland and pittsburgh near the original oilproducing regions.
a young merchant from cleveland named john d rockefeller imposed order on the industry.
i had an ambition to build he later recalled and beginning in 1863 at the age of twenty four he built the standard oil company soon to become one of the titans of corporate business.
like morgan rockefeller considered competition wasteful small scale enterprise inefficient and consolidation the path of the future.
consolidation revolutionized the way of doing business all over the world he said.
the time was ripe for it.
it had to come though all we saw at the moment was the need to save ourselves from wasteful conditions methodically rockefeller absorbed or destroyed competitors in cleveland and elsewhere.
as ruthless in his methods as carnegie he lacked the steel masters spontaneous charm.
he was distant and taciturn a man of deep religious beliefs who taught bible classes at clevelands erie street baptist church.
like carnegie he demanded efficiency relentless cost cutting and the latest technology.
he attracted exceptional lieutenants although as one said he could see farther ahead than any of them and then see around the corner nothing in haste nothing ill done rockefeller often said to himself.
your future hangs on every day that passes paying careful attention to detail he counted the stoppers in barrels shortened barrel hoops to save metal and in one famous incident reduced the number of drops of solder on kerosene cans from forty to thirty nine.
in large scale production rockefeller realized even small reductions meant huge savings.
research uncovered other ways of lowering costs and improving products and herman frasch a brilliant standard oil chemist solved problem after problem in the refining of oil.
in the end rockefeller triumphed over his competitors by marketing products of high quality at the lowest unit cost.
but he employed other less savory methods as well.
he threatened rivals and bribed politicians.
he employed spies to harass the customers of competing refiners.
above all he extorted railroad rebates that lowered his transportation costs and undercut competitors.
by 1879 he controlled 90 percent of the countrys entire oil refining capacity.
vertically integrated standard oil owned wells timberlands barrel and chemical plants refineries warehouses pipelines and fleets of tankers and oil cars.
its marketing organization served as the model for the industry.
standard exported oil to asia africa and south america its five gallon kerosene tin like coca cola bottles and cans of a later era was a familiar sight in the most distant parts of the world.
to manage it all the company developed a new plan of business organization the trust which had profound significance for american business.
in 1881 samuel c t dodd standards attorney set up the standard oil trust with a board of nine trustees empowered to hold control and manage all standards properties.
stockholders exchanged their stock for trust certificates on which dividends were paid.
on january 2 1882 the first of the modern trusts was born.
as dodd intended it immediately centralized control of standards far flung empire.
competition almost disappeared profits soared.
a trust movement swept the country as industries with similar problems whiskey lead and sugar among others followed standards example.
the word trust became synonymous with monopoly amid vehement protests from the public.
antitrust became a watchword for a generation of reformers from the 1880s through the era of woodrow wilson.
but rockefellers purpose had been management of a monopoly not monopoly itself which he had already achieved.
during the 1890s rockefeller helped pioneer another form of industrial consolidation the holding company.
taking advantage of an 1889 new jersey law that allowed companies to purchase other companies he moved standard oil to new jersey and bought up his own subsidiaries to form a holding company.
the trust he had learned was somewhat cumbersome and it was under attack in congress and the courts.
holding companies offered the next step in industrial management.
they were simply large scale mergers in which a central corporate organization purchased the stock of the member companies and established direct formal control.
chapter 18 the industrial society some of the inventions transformed communications.
in 1866 cyrus w field improved the transatlantic cable linking the telegraph networks of europe and the united states.
by the early 1870s land and submarine cables ran to brazil japan and the china coast in the next two decades they reached africa and spread across south america.
diplomats and business leaders could now talk to their counterparts in berlin or hong kong.
even before the telephone the cables quickened the pace of foreign affairs revolutionized journalism and allowed businesses to expand and centralize.
the typewriter 1867 stock ticker 1867 cash register 1879 calculating machine 1887 and adding machine 1888 helped business transactions.
high speed spindles automatic looms and electric sewing machines transformed the clothing industry which for the first time in history turned out ready made clothes for the masses.
in 1890 the census bureau first used machines to sort and tabulate data on punched cards a portent of a new era of informathe business of invention tion storage and processing.
in 1879 george eastman patented a process for coating gelatin america has become known the world around as the home of on photographic dry plates which led to celluloid film and motion invention boasted the commissioner of patents in 1892.
it had pictures.
by 1888 he was marketing the kodak camera which not always been so until the last third of the nineteenth cenweighed 35 ounces took 100 exposures and cost 25.
even though tury the country had imported most of its technology.
then an early kodaks had to be returned to the factory camera and all for extraordinary group of inventors and tinkerers specialists in film developing they revolutionized photography.
now almost anyinvention thomas a edison called them began to study the one could snap a picture.
world around them.
some of their inventions gave rise to new other innovations changed the diet.
there were new processes industries a few actually changed the quality of life.
for flour canned meat vegetables condensed milk and even beer in the very act of inventing edison and others drew on a from an offshoot of louis pasteurs discoveries about bacteria.
deeper invention a realization that people could mold nature packaged cereals appeared on breakfast tables.
refrigerated railroad to their own ends.
they could create out of first nature as one cars ice cooled brought fresh fruit from florida and california to environmental historian has noted a second nature shaped as they wished.
all parts of the country.
in the 1870s gustavus f swift a chicago the number of patents issued to inventors reflected the trend.
meat packer hit on the idea of using the cars to distribute meat during the 1850s fewer than 2 000 patents were issued each year.
nationwide.
setting up disassembly factories to butcher meat by the 1880s and 1890s the figure reached more than 20 000 a henry ford later copied them for his famous assembly lines he year.
between 1790 and 1860 the u s patent office issued just started an era of cheap beef as a newspaper said.
36 000 patents in the decade of the 1890s alone it issued more no innovation however rivaled the importance of the telethan 200 000 phone and the use of electricity for light and power.
the telephone was the work of alexander graham bell a shrewd patents issued by decade 1850 1899 and genial scot who settled in boston in 1871.
221 277 interested in the problems of the deaf bell experimented with ways to transmit speech electrically 195 104 and after several years he had developed electrified metal disks that much like the human ear converted sound waves to electrical impulses and back again.
on march 10 1876 he transmitted the first sentence over a telephone mr.
watson come here i want 124 672 you later that year he exhibited the new device to excited crowds at the centennial exposition in philadelphia.
64 302 in 1878 the year a telephone was installed in the white house the first telephone exchange opened in new haven connecticut.
fighting off 19 591 competitors who challenged the patent the young bell telephone company dominated the growing industry.
by 1895 there were about 310 000 phones 1850 1859 1860 1869 1870 1879 1880 1889 1890 1899 a decade later there were ten million about one for every ten people.
american telephone and source u s bureau of the census historical statistics of the united states colonial times to telegraph company formed by the bell interests in 1970 bicentennial edition washington dc 1975.
other companies followed suit including american sugar refining the northern securities company and the national biscuit company.
merger followed merger.
by 1900 1 percent of the nations companies controlled more than one third of its industrial production.
a decade later a congressional investigation showed that two individuals rockefeller and morgan between them controlled businesses worth more than 22 billion.
in 1897 rockefeller retired with a fortune of nearly 900 million but for standard oil and petroleum in general the most expansive period was yet to come.
the great oil pools of texas and oklahoma had not yet been discovered.
plastics and other oil based synthetics were several decades in the future.
there were only four usable automobiles in the country and the day of the gasoline engine automobile and airplane lay just ahead.
an industrial empire in 1896 records made of hard rubber and shellac appeared on the market the following year a phonograph sold for 20.
in 1904 someone had the idea of recording on both sides of the disk and the phonograph record in its modern form was born.
for the first time in history people could listen again and again to a favorite symphony or piano solo.
the phonograph made human experience repeatable in a way never before possible.
in 1879 came an even larger triumph the incandescent lamp.
sir joseph william swan an english inventor had already experimented with the carbon filament but edisons task involved more than finding a durable filament.
he set out to do nothing less than change light.
a trial and error inventor edison tested sixteen hundred materials before producing late in 1879 the carbon filament he wanted.
then he had to devise a complex system of conductors meters and generators by which electricity could be divided and distributed to homes and businesses.
with the financial backing of j p morgan he organized the edison illuminating company and built the pearl street power station in new york city the testing ground of the new apparatus.
on in the late 1870s the electric light and power transfer were only at inventive stages having been september 4 1882 as morgan and others explored unsuccessfully by a number of inventors.
at that time thomas edison with his ideas and watched edison threw a switch and lit proven analytical abilities undertook the problem.
it was edisons interest in technological systems that the house of morgan the stock exchange led him to a general system of incandescent lighting in the fall of 1878 the new york times and a number of other buildings.
amazed a times reporter marveled that writ1885 became another of the vast holding companies consolidating ing stories in the office at night seemed almost like writing in more than a hundred local systems.
daylight power stations soon opened in boston philadelphia if the telephone dissolved communication barriers as old as and chicago.
by 1900 there were 2 774 stations lighting some the human race thomas alva edison the wizard of menlo park two million electric lights around the country.
in a nation alive invented processes and products of comparable significance.
born with light the habits of centuries changed.
a flick of the switch lit in 1847 edison had little formal education although he was an homes and factories at any hour of the day or night.
avid reader.
like carnegie he went into the new field of telegraphy.
in a rare blunder edison based his system on low voltage direct tinkering in his spare time he made several important improvecurrent which could be transmitted only about two miles.
george ments including a telegraph capable of sending four messages over a westinghouse the inventor of the railroad air brake demonstrated single wire.
gathering teams of specialists to work on specific probthe advantages of high voltage alternating current for transmission lems edison built the first modern research laboratory at menlo over great distances.
in 1886 he formed the westinghouse electric park new jersey.
it may have been his most important invention.
company and with the inventor nikola tesla a hungarian immithe laboratory edison promised would turn out a minor grant developed an alternating current motor that could convert invention every ten days and a big thing every six months or so electricity into mechanical power.
electricity could light a lamp in 1877 it turned out a big thing.
worried about a telephones high or illuminate a skyscraper pull a streetcar or drive an entire railcost edison set out to invent a telephone repeater which became road run a sewing machine or power a mammoth assembly line.
the phonograph.
those unable to afford a phone he thought could transmitted easily over long distances it freed factories and citrecord their voices for replay from a central telephone station.
using ies from location near water or coal.
electricity in short brought tin foil wrapped around a grooved rotating cylinder he shouted the a revolution.
verses of mary had a little lamb and then listened in awe as the buried under pavement or strung from pole to pole wires machine played them back.
i was never so taken aback in all my of every description trolley telephone and power marked the life he later said.
everybody was astonished.
i was always afraid of birth of the modern city.
things that worked the first time read the document thomas edison the success of the electric light complete the assignment shopping in a new society on myhistorylab feature essay shopping in a new society macys was founded by rowland hussey macy who between 1843 and 1855 opened four retail dry goods stores including the original macys store in downtown haverhill massachusetts established in 1851 to serve the mill industry employees of the area.
o f all the innovations that changed the way people lived between the 1870s and 1920s one of the most important was the rise and development of the department store those sprawling urban empires of goods and services that fueled the mass consumption of the new society.
a significant invention in itself the department store took advantage of myriad other changes in american and european society especially the industrial transformation that led to the mass production of consumer goods in varieties and amounts never seen before.
that industrial revolution in turn drew on breakthroughs in transportation including a vast railroad network that linked cities and villages and ended the relative isolation and selfsufficiency of the nations island communities the railroads tied people together brought in products from outside fostered greater interdependence and encouraged economic specialization.
in the cities new streetcar systems another revolution in transportation carried shoppers directly to stores workplaces and other destinations regardless of the weather.
as a new york city department store suggested one winter ladies if walking is too bad just take the cars the advice took hold.
the word commuter first entered the language in the 1870s.
as machines turned out a plethora of new products it became vital to sell them and a new science of marketing spread.
printers ink the first major advertising journal began publishing in 1881.
the rotary press invented in 1875 initiated a new era in newspaper advertising.
woodcuts halftones and photoengraving added illustrations to catch the consumers eye.
liking the results businesses spent more on advertising every year.
in 1870 they spent about 50 million in 1900 about 95 million in 1920 over 500 million.
by the 1970s it was 22 4 billion.
ads and billboards sprouted up everywhere touting cigarettes cars perfumes and cosmetics.
advertising agents using new statistical sampling techniques developed modern concepts of market testing and research.
when people see your name constantly in the paper printers ink argued they begin to believe they know you and it is but a short step from advertising to patronage reflecting common values department stores flourished in europe as well as in america particularly in paris.
emile zola the famed french novelist said the department store democratized luxury offering the public for the first time in history free admission to displays of material goods.
shop he and others pointed out had become a verb.
in the united states r h macy in new york city john wanamaker in philadelphia and marshall field in chicago turned the department store into a national institution.
there people learned to browse a relatively new concept and to buy.
innovations in pricing display and advertising helped customers develop wants they had not known they had.
in 1870 wanamaker took out the first full page newspaper ad and by 1891 macy too had turned to fullpage advertisements often placed on pages next to an article of special interest to women.
the ads were hard to resist follow the crowd an 1885 ad in a new york newspaper said and it will always take you to r h macy co what better evidence do you wish that ours is the all around store of new york city.
ride our bicycles read our books cook in our saucepans dine off our china wear our silks get under our blankets smoke our cigars drink our wines shop at macys and life will cost you less and yield you more than you dreamed possible.
even the surroundings often evoked a dream.
cash registers a new invention rang up every sale and by the 1880s electric lights highlighted the goods.
electric elevators and escalators carried shoppers to new heights.
plate glass windows a product of discoveries in the technology of glassmaking flooded the stores with daylight.
windows on the street levels became show windows a term developed in the united states.
window shopping another new word became popular.
looking through those windows store owners soon noted were women hundreds of them and it was around women that they built their businesses.
woman is a shopper as an industry journal noted.
out of that fact has come the modern department store in these years growing numbers of women worked in factories telephone exchanges and business offices and they could spend their wages on items they desired.
by 1880 2 6 million women were in the work force in 1890 4 million.
in 1900 more than 5 million women one fifth of all adult women worked outside the home.
within limits of course that meant money in womens pockets and the new department stores tailored their advertising and wares to appeal to women.
they also did everything they could to make their stores safe clean and appealing.
in 1892 macys built a new ladies waiting room calling it the most luxurious and beautiful department devoted to the comfort of ladies to be found in a mercantile establishment in the city soon there were ladies lunch rooms dressing rooms specially lit to show off evening gowns in broad daylight and shelves of hats glass and china with monograms and other special designs.
it was not unusual for a department store to stock 1 300 types of womens shoes.
the department store along with advertising brand names and other innovations brought americans of all backgrounds into a national market.
even as the country itself grew a homogeneity of goods bound it together touching cities and farms east and west rich and poor.
a common language of consumption turned americans into a community of consumers who were surrounded by goods unavailable just decades before and able to purchase them.
they had learned to make want and buy.
these are lessons not forgotten.
the department store even today accounts for more than one tenth of all annual commercial sales in the united states.
the spread of the world wide web has added like transportation and communication innovations in an earlier era another route for consumers to buy the alluring products of the department stores.
the so called cyber monday of the 2011 christmas season enticed those who preferred to shop and spend their money buying goods online.
according to the new york times on cyber monday shoppers bought 1 25 billion worth of goods over the internet.
somehow one suspects this would not have surprised macy wanamaker and their nineteenth century colleagues.
questions for discussion 1.
what conditions between the 1870s and 1920s led to the rise of the department store.
what changes did department stores bring in peoples lives.
chapter 18 the industrial society the sellers why were the new methods of advertising so important.
the increased output of the industrial age alone was not enough to ensure huge profits.
the products still had to be sold and that gave rise to the new science of marketing.
some business leaders such as swift in meatpacking james b duke in tobacco and rockefeller in oil built extensive marketing organizations of their own.
others relied on retailers merchandising techniques and advertising developing a host of methods to convince consumers to buy.
in 1867 businesses spent about 50 million on advertising in 1900 they spent more than 500 million and the figure was increasing rapidly.
the first advertising agency n w ayer and son of philadelphia began to service businesses in the mid 1870s and it was followed by numerous imitators.
the rotary press 1875 churned out newspapers and introduced a new era in newspaper advertising.
woodcuts halftones and photoengraving added illustrations to catch the consumers eye.
bringing producer and consumer together nationwide advertising was the final link in the national market.
from roadside signs to newspaper ads it pervaded american life.
r h macy in new york john wanamaker in philadelphia and marshall field in chicago turned the department store into a national institution.
there people could browse a relatively new concept and buy.
innovations in pricing display and advertising helped customers develop wants they did not know they had.
in 1870 wanamaker took out the first full page newspaper ad and macy an aggressive advertiser touted goods suitable for the millionaire at prices in reach of the millions the chain store an american term spread across the country.
the a p grocery stores begun in 1859 numbered sixty seven by 1876 all marked by a familiar red and gold facade.
by 1915 there were a thousand of them.
in 1880 f w woolworth bored with the family farm opened the first five and ten cent store in utica new york.
he had fifty nine stores in 1900 the year he adopted the bright red storefront and heaping counters to lure customers in and persuade them to buy.
in similar fashion sears roebuck and montgomery ward sold to rural customers through mail order catalogs a means of selling that depended on effective transportation and a high level of customer literacy.
as a traveler for a dry goods firm aaron montgomery ward had seen an unfulfilled need of people in the rural west.
he started the mail order trend in 1872 with a one sheet price list offered from a chicago loft.
by 1884 he offered almost ten thousand items in a catalog of 240 pages.
richard w sears also saw the possibilities in the mail order business.
starting with watches and jewelry he gradually expanded his list.
in the early 1880s he moved to chicago and with alvah c roebuck founded sears roebuck and company.
sears sold anything and everything prospering in a business that relied on mutual faith between unseen customers and distant distributors.
sears catalogs soon more than five hundred pages long exploited four color illustration and other new techniques.
by the early 1900s sears distributed six million catalogs annually.
advertising brand names chain stores and mail order houses brought americans of all varieties into a national market.
even as the country grew a certain homogeneity of goods bound it together touching cities and farms east and west rich and poor.
there was a common language of consumption.
the market some contemporaries thought also bridged ethnic and other differences.
a prominent english economist wrote in 1919 widely as the scandinavians are separated from the italians and the native americans from the poles in sentiment in modes of living and even in occupations they are yet purchasers of nearly the same goods.
they buy similar clothes furniture and implements the theory had severe limits ethnic and racial differences remained entrenched in the society.
but americans had become a community of consumers surrounded by goods unavailable just a few decades before and able to purchase them.
they had learned to make want and buy.
see feature essay shopping in a new society on pp 426 427.
the wage earners who were the wage earners in the new economy.
although entrepreneurs were important it was the labor of millions of men and women that built the new industrial society.
in their individual stories nearly all unrecorded lay much of the achievement drama and pain of these years.
in a number of respects their lot improved during the last quarter of the nineteenth century.
real wages rose working conditions improved and the workers influence in national affairs increased.
between 1880 and 1914 wages of the average worker rose about 7 a year.
like others workers also benefited from expanding health and educational services.
working men working women working children still life for workers was not easy.
before 1900 most wage earners worked at least ten hours a day six days a week.
if skilled they earned about 20 cents an hour if unskilled just half that.
on average workers earned between 400 and 500 a year.
it took about 600 for a family of four to live decently.
construction workers machinists government employees printers clerical workers and western miners made more than the average.
eastern coal miners agricultural workers garment workers and unskilled factory hands made considerably less.
there were few holidays or vacations and there was little respite from the grueling routine.
skilled workers could turn the system to their own ends new york city cigar makers for example paid someone to read to them while they worked but the unskilled seldom had such luxury.
they were too easily replaced.
a bit of advice to you said a guidebook for immigrant jews in the 1890s do not take a moments rest.
run do work and keep your own good in mind work was not only grueling it was very dangerous.
safety standards were low and accidents were common more the wage earners common in fact than in any other industrial nation in the world at that time.
on the railroads 1 in every 26 workers was injured and 1 in every 399 was killed each year.
thousands suffered from chronic illness unknowing victims of dust chemicals and other pollutants.
in the early 1900s physician alice hamilton established a link between jobs and disease but meanwhile illness weakened or struck down many a breadwinner.
the breadwinner might be a woman or a child both worked in increasing numbers.
in 1870 about 15 percent of women over the age of 16 were employed for wages in 1900 20 percent 5 3 million women were.
of 303 occupations listed in the 1900 census women were represented in 296.
the textile industry was their largest single employer.
between 1870 and 1900 the number of working children rose nearly 130 percent to 1 8 million.
in 1900 1 out of every 10 girls and 1 out of every 5 boys between the ages of 10 and 15 held jobs.
in paterson new jersey an important industrial city about half of all boys and girls aged 11 to 14 had jobs.
there were so many children in the labor force that when people spoke of child labor they often meant boys and girls under the age of fourteen.
boys were paid little enough but girls made even less.
girls it was argued were headed for marriage those who worked were just doing so in order to help out their families.
we try to employ girls who are members of families a box manufacturer said for we dont pay the girls a living wage in this trade most working women were young and single.
many began working at sixteen or seventeen worked a half dozen years or so married and quit.
in 1900 only 5 percent of all married women were employed outside the home although african american women were an important exception.
among them 25 percent of married women worked in 1900 usually on southern farms or as low paid laundresses or domestic servants.
as clerical work expanded women learned new skills such as typing and stenography.
moving into formerly male occupations they became secretaries bookkeepers typists telephone operators and clerks in the new department stores.
a few women very few became ministers lawyers and doctors.
arabella mansfield admitted to the iowa bar in 1869 was the first woman lawyer in the country.
but change was slow and in the 1880s some law schools still were refusing to admit women because they had not the mentality to study law among women entering the professions the overwhelming majority became nurses schoolteachers and librarians.
in such professions a process of feminization occurred women became a majority of the workers a small number of men took the management roles and most men left for other jobs lowering the professions status.
in most jobs status and pay were divided unequally between men and women.
many of both sexes thought a womans place was in the home queen of a little house no matter how humble where there are children rolling on the floor when employed in read the document mother jones the march of the mill children factories women tended to occupy jobs that were viewed as natural extensions of household activity.
they made clothes and textiles processed food and made cigars tobacco and shoes.
in the womens garment industry which employed large numbers of women they were the sewers and finishers doing jobs that paid less men were the higher paid cutters and pressers.
in the long day the story of a new york working girl as told by herself 1906 the working girl a young schoolteacher earned 2 50 a week paid 1 00 for her room and had 1 50 for food clothes transportation and any social life.
for breakfast she had bread butter and coffee for lunch bread and butter for dinner potato soup bread and butter.
in pittsburgh a worker in a pickle factory said of her day i have stood ten hours i have fitted 1 300 corks i have hauled and loaded 4 000 jars of pickles.
my pay is seventy cents exhausted such workers fell into bed at night and crawled out again at dawn to begin another long day in general adults earned more than chilmany children in the late nineteenth century grew up in the nations factories working long hours for dren the skilled more than the unskilled low wages in often dangerous conditions.
these girls bundling brooms at an indiana manufacturing native born more than foreign born plant were photographed by lewis hine.
chapter 18 the industrial society read the document massachusetts bureau of statistics of labor 1884 this report documents the poor working and living conditions of women workers in massachusetts.
of special concern in the report and to reformers of the time were the unsanitary conditions in which many of the women lived.
the forthcoming economic depression of the 1890s would force even more women into such working conditions.
protestants more than catholics or jews and whites more than blacks and asians.
on average women made a little more than half as much as men according to contemporary estimates.
in some cases employers defended the differences the foreign born for example might not speak english but most simply reflected bias against race creed or gender.
in the industrial society white native born protestant men the bulk of the male population reaped the greatest rewards.
blacks labored on the fringes usually in menial occupations.
the last hired and first fired they earned less than other workers at almost every level of skill.
on the pacific coast the chinese and later the japanese lived in enclaves and suffered periodic attacks of discrimination.
in 1879 the workingmens party of california got a provision in the state constitution forbidding corporations to employ chinese and in 1882 congress passed the chinese exclusion act prohibiting the immigration of chinese workers for ten years.
culture of work how did wage earners organize in this period and what demands did they make.
among almost all groups industrialization shattered age old patterns including work habits and the culture of work as herbert g gutman a social historian noted.
it made people adapt older work routines to new necessities and strained those wedded to premodern patterns of labor adaptation was difficult and often demeaning.
virtually everyone went through it and newcomers repeated the experiences of those who came before.
men and women fresh from farms were not accustomed to the factorys disciplines.
now they worked indoors rather than out paced themselves to the clock rather than the movements of the sun and followed the needs of the market rather than the natural rhythms of the seasons.
they had supervisors and hierarchies and strict rules.
culture of work as industries grew larger work became more impersonal.
machines displaced skilled artisans and the unskilled tended the machines for employers they never saw.
workers picked up and left their jobs with startling frequency and factories drew on a churning highly mobile labor supply.
historian stephan thernstrom who carefully studied the census records found that only about half the people recorded in any census still lived in the same community ten years later.
the country had an enormous reservoir of restless and footloose men who could be lured to new destinations when opportunity beckoned thernstrom and others have also found substantial economic and social mobility.
the rags to riches stories of horatio alger had always said so and careers of men such as andrew carnegie the impoverished immigrant boy who made good seemed to confirm it.
the actual record was considerably more limited.
most business leaders in the period came from well to do or middle class families of old american stock.
of 360 iron and steel barons in pittsburgh carnegies own city only five fit the carnegie characteristics and one of those was carnegie himself.
still if few workers became steel magnates many workers made major progress during their lifetimes.
thernstrom discovered that a quarter of the manual laborers rose to middle class positions and working class children were even more likely to move up the ladder.
in boston about half the jewish immigrants rose from manual to middle class jobs and english irish and italian immigrants were not far behind.
the chance for advancement played a vital role in american industrial development.
it gave workers hope wedded them to the system and tempered their response to the appeal of labor unions and working class agitation.
very few workers rose from rags to riches but a great many rose to better jobs and higher status.
labor unions weak throughout the nineteenth century labor unions never included more than 2 percent of the total labor force or more than 10 percent of industrial workers.
to many workers unions seemed foreign radical and out of step with the american tradition of individual advancement.
craft ethnic and other differences fragmented the labor force and its extraordinary mobility made organization difficult.
employers opposed unions.
i have always had one rule said an executive of u s steel.
if a worker sticks up his head hit it as the national economy emerged however national labor unions gradually took shape.
the early unions often represented skilled workers in local areas but in 1866 william h sylvis a pennsylvania iron molder united several unions into a single national organization the national labor union.
like many of the eras labor leaders sylvis sought long range humanitarian reforms such as the establishment of workers cooperatives rather than specific bread and butter goals.
a talented propagandist he attracted many members some 640 000 by 1868 but he died in 1869 and the organization did not long survive him.
the year sylvis died uriah s stephens and a group of philadelphia garment workers founded a far more successful organization the noble and holy order of the knights of labor known simply as the knights of labor.
a secret fraternal order it grew slowly through the 1870s until terence v powderly the new grand master workman elected in 1879 ended the secrecy and embarked on an aggressive recruitment program.
wanting to unite all labor the knights welcomed everyone who toiled regardless of skill creed sex or color.
unlike most unions it organized women workers and at its peak it had sixty thousand black members.
harking back to the jacksonians the knights set the producers against monopoly and special privilege.
as members they excluded only nonproducers bankers lawyers liquor dealers and gamblers.
since employers were producers they could join and since workers and employers had common interests the knights maintained that workers should not strike.
the orders platform included the eight hour day and the abolition of child labor but more often it focused on uplifting utopian reform.
powderly the eloquent and idealistic leader spun dreams of a new era of harmony and cooperation.
he wanted to sweep away trusts and end drunkenness.
workers should pool their resources establish worker run factories railroads and mines and escape from the wage system.
the aim of the knights of labor properly understood is to make each man his own employer powderly said.
membership grew steadily from 42 000 in 1882 to 110 000 in 1885.
in march 1885 ignoring powderlys dislike of strikes local knights in st louis kansas city and other cities won a victory against jay goulds missouri pacifi c railroad and membership soared.
it soon reached almost 730 000 but neither powderly nor the unions loose structure could handle the growth.
in 1886 the wily gould struck back crushing the knights on the texas and pacific railroad.
the defeat punctured the unions growth and revealed the ineffectiveness of its national leaders.
tens of thousands of unskilled laborers who had recently rushed to join deserted the ranks.
the haymarket riot turned public sympathy against unions like the knights.
by 1890 the order had shrunk to 100 000 members and a few years later it was virtually defunct.
even as the knights waxed and waned another organization emerged that was to endure.
founded in 1886 the american federation of labor afl was a loose alliance of national craft unions.
it organized only skilled workers along craft lines avoided politics and worked for specific practical objectives.
i have my own philosophy and my own dreams said samuel gompers the founder and longtime president but first and foremost i want to increase the workingmans welfare year by year born in a london tenement in 1850 gompers was a child of the union movement.
settling in new york he worked as a cigar maker took an active hand in union activities and experimented for a time with socialism and working class politics.
as leader of the afl he adopted a pragmatic approach to labors needs.
gompers accepted capitalism and did not argue for fundamental changes in it.
for labor he wanted simply a recognized place within the system and a greater share of the rewards.
unlike powderly gompers and the afl assumed that most workers would remain workers throughout their lives.
the task then lay in improving lives in practical ways higher wages shorter hours and better working conditions.
the afl offered some attractive assurances to employers.
as a trade union the afl would use the strike and boycott but only to achieve limited gains chapter 18 the industrial society read the document leonora m barry report to the knights of labor 1887 women delegates at a national meeting of the knights of labor in 1886.
women belonged to separate associations affiliated with local all male unions.
if treated fairly the organization would provide a stable labor force.
the afl would not oppose monopolies and trusts as gompers said so long as we obtain fair wages by the 1890s the afl was the most important labor group in the country and gompers the guiding spirit was its president except for one year until his death in 1924.
membership expanded from 140 000 in 1886 past 250 000 in 1892 to more than one million by 1901.
the afl then included almost one third of the countrys skilled workers.
by 1914 it had more than two million members.
the great majority of workers skilled and unskilled remained unorganized but gompers and the afl had become a significant force in national life.
few unions allowed women to join.
the knights of labor had a department of womans work headed by leonora m barry a shrewd enthusiastic organizer who established a dozen womens locals and investigated the condition of womens labor.
the knights welcomed housewives because they were producers the afl either ignored or opposed women workers.
only two of its national affiliates the cigar makers union and the typographical union accepted women as members others prohibited them outright and gompers himself often complained that women workers undercut the pay scales for men.
working conditions improved after 1900 but even then unions were largely a mans world.
in 1910 when there were 6 3 million women at work only 125 000 of them were in unions.
the afl did not expressly forbid black workers from joining but member unions used high initiation fees technical examinations and other means to discourage black membership.
the afls informal exclusion practices were all in all a sorry record but gompers defended his policy toward blacks women and the unskilled by pointing to the dangers that unions faced.
only by restricting membership he argued could the union succeed.
labor unrest workers used various means to adjust to the factory age.
to the dismay of managers and efficiency experts the employees often dictated the pace and quality of their work and set the tone of the workplace.
friends and relatives of newly arrived immigrants found jobs for them taught them how to deal with factory conditions and humanized the workplace.
workers also formed their own institutions to deal with their jobs.
overcoming differences of race or ethnic origin they often banded together to help each other.
they joined social or fraternal organizations and their unions did more than argue culture of work view the map organizing american labor in the late nineteenth century great railroad strike of 1877 chicago pittsburgh martinsburg baltimore maine washington montana north dakota vt n h minn oregon wisconsin south dakota idaho new york mich wyoming penn.
iowa nebraska nevada utah haymarket riot 1886 chicago pullman strike 1894 chicago and nationwide ohio ind.
ill virginia kentucky missouri california n c s c indian terr.
new mexico territory homestead strike homestead tennessee ok terr.
arizona territory rhode island connecticut new jersey delaware maryland w v.
colorado kansas mass.
ala georgia at l a n t i c ocean pa c i f i c ocean texas louisiana florida counties reporting strikes between 1870 1900 gulf of mexico major strikes labor strikes 1870 1900 more than fourteen thousand strikes occurred in the 1880s and early 1890s involving millions of workers.
for higher wages.
unions offered companionship news of job openings and much needed insurance plans for sickness accident or death.
workers went to the union hall to play cards or pool sing union songs and hear older workers tell of past labor struggles.
unions provided food for sick members and there were dances picnics and parades.
the night i joined the cattle butchers union a young lithuanian said i was led into the room by a negro member.
with me were bohemians germans and poles.
we swore to be loyal to our union above everything else except the country the city and the state to be faithful to each other to protect the women workers to do our best to understand the history of the labor movement and to do all we could to help it on many employers believed in an iron law of wages in which supply and demand not the welfare of their workers dictated wages.
if i wanted boiler iron a steelmaker said i would go out on the market and buy where i could get it the cheapest and if i wanted to employ men i would do the same thing wanting a docile labor force employers fired union members hired scabs to replace strikers and used a new weapon the court injunction to quell strikes.
the injunction which forbade workers to interfere with their employers business was used to break the great pullman strike of 1894 and the supreme court upheld use of the injunction in in re debs 1895.
court decisions also affected the legal protection offered to workers.
in holden v hardy 1898 the court upheld a law limiting working hours for miners because their work was dangerous and long hours might increase injuries.
in lochner v new york 1905 however it struck down a law limiting bakery workers to a sixty hour week and ten hour day.
because baking was safer than mining the court saw no need to interfere with the right of bakers to sell their labor freely.
as employers attitudes hardened strikes and violence broke out.
the united states had the greatest number of violent confrontations between capital and labor in the industrial world.
between 1880 and 1900 there were more than 23 000 strikes involving 6 6 million workers.
the worst incident took place at haymarket square in chicago where workers had been campaigning for an eight hour workday.
in early may 1886 police intervening in a strike at the mccormick harvester works shot and killed two workers.
the next evening may 4 labor leaders called a protest meeting at haymarket square near downtown chicago.
the meeting was peaceful even a bit dull.
about three thousand people were there police ordered them to disperse and someone threw a dynamite chapter 18 the industrial society read the document george engel address by a haymarket anarchist in the rioting that followed the bomb explosion in haymarket square in chicago seven police officers and four workers died and more than seventy officers were wounded many of them by fellow police.
august spies one of the anarchists convicted of murder and sent to the gallows said at his trial let the world know that in a d 1886 in the state of illinois eight men were sentenced to death because they believed in a better future because they had not lost their faith in the ultimate victory of liberty and justice actually seven of the agitators were sentenced to death the eighth to imprisonment.
bomb that instantly killed one policeman and fatally wounded six others.
police fired into the crowd and killed four people.
the authorities never discovered who threw the bomb but many americans not just business leaders immediately labeled the incident the haymarket riot and demanded action against labor radicalism cities strengthened their police forces and armories.
in chicago donors helped to establish nearby fort sheridan and the great lakes naval training station to curb social turmoil.
uncertain who threw the bomb chicago police rounded up eight anarchists who were convicted of murder.
although there was no evidence of their guilt four were hanged one committed suicide and three remained in jail until pardoned by the governor in 1893.
linking labor and anarchism in the public mind the haymarket riot weakened the national labor movement.
violence again broke out in the unsettled conditions of the 1890s.
in 1892 federal troops crushed a strike of silver miners in the coeur dalene district of idaho.
that same year carnegie and henry clay frick carnegies partner and manager cut wages nearly 20 percent at the homestead steel plant.
the amalgamated iron and steel workers an afl affiliate struck and frick responded by locking the workers out of the plant.
the workers surrounded it and frick furious hired a small private army of pinkerton detectives to drive them off.
but alert workers spotted the detectives pinned them down with gunfire and forced them to surrender.
three detectives and ten workers died in the battle.
a few days later the pennsylvania governor ordered the state militia to impose peace at homestead.
on july 23 an anarchist named alexander berkman who was not one of the strikers walked into fricks office and shot him twice then stabbed him several times.
incredibly frick survived watched the police take berkman away called in a doctor to bandage his wounds and stayed in the office until closing time.
i do not think i shall die he told reporters.
but if i do or not the company will pursue the same policy and it will win in late july the homestead works reopened under military guard and in november the strikers gave up.
conclusion industrializations benefits and costs events like the homestead strike troubled many americans who wondered whether industrialization for all its benefits might carry a heavy price in social upheaval class tensions and even outright warfare.
most workers did not share in the immense profits of the industrial age and as the nineteenth century came to a close there were some who rebelled against the inequity.
watch the video the gilded age the rise of capitalism industrialism andpoverty conclusion industrializations benefits and costs in the half century after the civil war the united states became an industrial nation the leading one in fact in the world.
on one hand industrialization meant progress growth world power and in some sense fulfillment of the american promise of abundance.
national wealth grew from 16 billion in 1860 to 88 billion in 1900 wealth per capita more than doubled.
for the bulk of the population the standard of living a particularly american concept rose.
but industrialization also meant rapid change social instability exploitation of labor and growing disparity in income between rich and poor.
industry flourished but control rested in fewer and fewer hands.
maturing quickly the young system became a new corporate capitalism giant businesses interlocking in ownership managed by a new professional class and selling an expanding variety of goods in an increasingly controlled market.
as goods spread through the society so did a sharpened aggressive materialism.
workers felt the strains of the shift to a new social order.
in 1902 a well to do new yorker named bessie van vorst decided to see what it was like to work for a living in a factory.
disguising herself in coarse woolen clothes a shabby felt hat a cheap piece of fur and an old shawl and gloves she went to pittsburgh and got a job in a canning factory.
she worked ten hours a day six days a week including four hours on saturday afternoons when she and the other women on their hands and knees scrubbed the tables stands and entire factory floor.
for that she earned 4 20 a week 3 of which went for food alone.
my hands are stiff she said my thumbs almost blistered.
cases are emptied and refilled bottles are labeled stamped and rolled the gilded age is associated with an enormous expansion of american industry american manufacturing and the growth of the factory system.
its also the moment when its increasingly clear that large numbers of americans are going to be doing wage labor for all their life.
and still there are more cases more jars more bottles.
the monotony of it the noise around her was deafening her head grew dazed and weary.
van vorst was lucky when she tired of the life she could go back to her home in new york.
the working men and women around her were not so fortunate.
they stayed on the factory floor and by dint of their labor created the new industrial society.
chapter 18 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 18 the industrial society on myhistorylab time line 1859 first oil well drilled near titusville pennsylvania 1866 william sylvis establishes national labor union 1869 transcontinental railroad completed at promontory utah knights of labor organize alexander graham bell invents the telephone centennial exposition held in philadelphia railroads cut workers wages leading to bloody and violent strike thomas a edison invents the incandescent lamp rockefellers standard oil company becomes nations first trust edison opens first electric generating station in new york 1883 railroads introduce standard time zones 1886 samuel gompers founds american federation of labor afl labor protest erupts in violence in haymarket riot in chicago railroads adopt standard gauge workers strike at homestead steel plant in pennsylvania economic depression begins j p morgan announces formation of u s steel corporation nations first billion dollar company chapter review industrial development the sellers what enabled the united states to build an industrial economy.
why were the new methods of advertising so important.
the united states had an abundance of natural resources plentiful labor from europe and american farms numerous inventions a national market plentiful capital favorable government policies and entrepreneurs who saw the possibilities in developing a national economy.
p 416 advertising a relatively new industry helped to sell the goods of the new industrial economy.
americans learned to buy goods they did not even know they wanted.
when bored or troubled they went to a store todays mall to shop.
p 428 the wage earners an empire on rails who were the wage earners in the new economy.
how and why did the railroad system grow.
through the infusion of foreign and domestic capital and the help of local state and federal government a railroad system grew that dwarfed those in other countries.
it changed the economic political and social landscape creating a different nation from the country that had come before.
p 416 an industrial empire what were the main characteristics of the new steel and oil industries.
in the late nineteenth century an industrial empire took shape centered around steel and oil leading to the importance of the automobile in the twentieth century.
the result was larger and more complex business organizations and greater concentrations of wealth capital and control by a relatively few individuals and companies.
p 421 the hard work of millions of men and women built the new factory society.
their work was grueling and often dangerous.
men women and children often worked for low wages in unsafe conditions.
p 428 culture of work how did wage earners organize in this period and what demands did they make.
laborers faced many challenges in the new economy including work that followed the clock bigger industries machines and wages.
unions formed including the american federation of labor afl which still exists.
labor unrest for better wages and safer working conditions took peaceful forms but also resulted in violence that disturbed other americans.
p 430 study resources key terms and definitions trunk lines four major railroad networks that emerged after the civil war to connect the eastern seaports to the great lakes and western rivers.
they reflected the growing integration of transportation across the country that helped spur large scale industrialization.
p 419 trust a device to centralize and make more efficient the management of diverse and far flung business operations.
it allowed stockholders to exchange their stock certificates for trust certificates on which dividends were paid.
john d rockefeller organized the first major trust the standard oil trust in 1882 p 423 knights of labor founded in 1869 this labor organization pursued broad gauged reform and practical issues such as improved wages and hours.
the knights welcomed all laborers regardless of race gender or skill.
p 431 american federation of labor afl founded by samuel gompers in 1886 the afl organized skilled workers by craft and worked for specific practical objectives such as higher wages shorter hours and better working conditions.
the afl avoided politics and while it did not expressly forbid blacks and women from joining it used exclusionary practices to keep them out.
p 431 homestead strike in july 1892 wage cutting at andrew carnegies homestead steel plant in pittsburgh provoked a violent strike in which three company hired detectives and ten workers died.
using ruthless force and strikebreakers company officials broke the strike and destroyed the union.
p 435 critical thinking questions 1.
what were eight advantages the united states possessed that helped spur industrial development and in what ways did these advantages lead to the growth of specific industries.
what role did the culture of work and advances in areas like advertising play in shaping economic growth.
in what ways did the hard work of men women and children contrib 2.
in what ways did the revolution in transportation and communications also spur industrial development.
ute to the growth of industry.
how did american workers respond to the demands of industrial 3.
drawing on the conditions leading to the growth of industry how did growth and what did their various responses indicate about the dangerous effects of industrialization.
the huge steel and oil industries grow.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 18 on myhistorylab an empire on rails watch the video culture of work an industrial empire read the document p 422 read the document leonora m barry report to the knights of labor 1887 p 432 andrew carnegie wealth 1889 read the document thomas edison the success of the electric light p 425 the sellers read the document massachusetts bureau of statistics of labor 1884 p 430 railroads and expansion p 417 complete the assignment society p 426 shopping in a new the wage earners view the map organizing american labor in the late nineteenth century p 433 read the document george engel address by a haymarket anarchist p 434 watch the video the gilded age the rise of capitalism industrialism and poverty p 435 indicates study plan media assignment read the document mill children p 429 mother jones the march of the toward an urban society 1877 1900 contents and learning objectives the lure of the city pg.
439 the stirrings of reform pg.
455 why did cities in the united states grow between 1880 and 1900.
how did life in the growing cities lead to ideas of reform.
social and cultural change 1877 1900 pg.
447 how did the growth of american cities affect social cultural and political life.
feature essay ellis island isle of hope isle of tears law and society plessy v ferguson the shaping of jim crow the spread of jim crow pg.
454 why did jim crow laws spread across the south after the end of reconstruction.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 20 political realignments in the 1890s hardship and heartache in june 1894 susan orcutt a young farm woman from western kansas sat down to write the governor of her state a letter.
she was desperate.
the nation was in the midst of a devastating economic depression and like thousands of other people she had no money and nothing to eat.
i take my pen in hand to let you know that we are starving to death she wrote.
hail had ruined the orcutts crops and none of the household could find work.
my husband went away to find work and came home last night and told me that we would have to starve.
h e has bin in ten countys and did not get no work.
i havent had nothing to eat today and it is three oclock.
as bad as conditions were on the farms they were no better in the cities.
there are thousands of homeless and starving men in the streets reported a journalist in chicago in the winter of 1893.
i have seen more misery in this last week than i ever saw in my life before charity societies and churches tried to help but they could not handle the huge numbers of people who were in need.
the records of the massachusetts state medical examiner told a grim story k r 29 suicide by drowning boston october 2 1896 out of work and despondent for a long while.
body found floating in the charles river.
f s 29 suicide by arsenic boston january 1 1896 much depressed for several weeks.
loss of employment.
at 7 50 a m jan 1 she called her father and told him she had taken poison and wished to die.
r n 23 suicide by bullet wound of brain boston june 22 1896 out of work.
mentally depressed.
june 21 shot himself in right temple.
left a letter explaining that he killed himself to save others the trouble of caring for him.
homesteading on the plains.
lasting until 1897 the depression was the decisive event of the decade.
at its height three million people were unemployed fully 20 percent of the workforce.
the human costs were enormous even among the well to do.
they were for me years of simple hell shattering my whole scheme of life said charles francis adams jr the descendant of two american presidents.
i was sixty three years old and a tired man when at last the effects of the 1893 convulsion wore themselves out ike the great depression of the 1930s that gave rise to the new deal the depression of the 1890s had profound and lasting effects.
bringing to a head many of the tensions that had been building in the society it increased rural hostility toward the l cities brought about a bitter fight over the currency and changed peoples thinking about government unemployment and reform.
there were outbreaks of warfare between capital and labor farmers demanded a fairer share of economic and social benefits the new immigrants came under fresh attack.
the depression of the 1890s changed the course of american history as did another event of that decade the war with spain in 1898.
under the cruel impact of the depression ideas changed in many areas including a stronger impulse toward reform a larger role for the presidency and a call for help from many farmers and laborers.
one of the most important of these areas was politics.
a realignment of the american political system which had been developing since the end of reconstruction finally reached its fruition in the 1890s establishing new patterns that gave rise to the progressive era and lasted well into the twentieth century.
chapter 20 political realignments in the 1890s politics of stalemate why was there a stalemate between republicans and democrats until the mid 1890s.
politics was a major fascination of the late nineteenth century its mass entertainment and favorite sport.
political campaigns were events that involved the whole community even though in most states only men could vote.
during the weeks leading up to an election there were rallies parades picnics and torchlight processions.
millions of americans read party newspapers listened to three hour speeches by party leaders and in elections turned out in enormous numbers to vote.
in the six presidential elections from 1876 to 1896 an average of almost 79 percent of the electorate voted a higher percentage than voted before or after.
white males made up the bulk of the electorate until after the turn of the century women could vote in national elections only in wyoming utah idaho and colorado.
the national woman suffrage association sued early for the vote but in 1875 the supreme court minor v happersett upheld the power of the states to deny this right to women.
on several occasions congress refused to pass a constitutional amendment for woman suffrage and between 1870 and 1910 nearly a dozen states defeated referenda to grant women the vote.
black men were another group kept from the polls.
in 1877 georgia adopted the poll tax to make voters pay an annual tax for the right to vote.
the technique aimed at impoverished blacks was quickly copied across the south.
in 1882 south carolina adopted the eight box law soon copied elsewhere that required ballots for separate offices to be placed in separate boxes a difficult task for illiterate voters.
in 1890 mississippi required voters to be able to read and interpret the federal constitution to the satisfaction of registration officials all of them white.
such literacy tests which the supreme court upheld in the case of williams v mississippi 1898 excluded poor white voters as well as blacks.
in 1898 louisiana avoided the problem by adopting the famous grandfather clause which used a literacy test to disqualify black voters but permitted men who had failed the test to vote anyway if their fathers and grandfathers had voted before 1867 a time of course when no blacks could vote.
the number of black voters decreased dramatically.
in 1896 there were 130 334 registered black voters in louisiana in 1904 there were 1 342.
the party deadlock the 1870s and 1880s were still dominated by the civil war generation the unusual group of people who rose to power in the turbulent 1850s.
in both the north and south they had ruled longer than most generations with a consciousness that the war experience had set them apart.
five of the six presidents elected between 1865 and 1900 had served in the war as had many civic business and religious leaders.
in 1890 well over one million veterans of the union army were still alive and confederate veterans numbered in the hundreds of thousands.
party loyalties rooted in civil war traditions ethnic and religious differences and perhaps class distinctions were remarkably strong.
voters clung to their old parties shifts were infrequent and there were relatively few independent voters.
although linked to the defeated confederacy the democrats revived quickly after the war.
in 1874 they gained control of the house of representatives which they maintained for all but four of the succeeding twenty years.
the democrats rested on a less sectional base than the republicans.
identification with civil rights and military rule cut republican strength in the south but the democratic partys principles of states rights decentralization and limited government won supporters everywhere.
while democrats wanted to keep government local and small the republicans pursued policies for the nation as a whole in which government was an instrument to promote moral progress and material wealth.
the republicans passed the homestead act 1862 granted subsidies to the transcontinental railroads and pushed other measures to encourage economic growth.
they enacted legislation and constitutional amendments to protect civil rights.
they advocated a high protective tariff as a tool of economic policy to keep out foreign products while infant industries grew.
in national elections sixteen states mostly in new england and the north consistently voted republican fourteen states mostly in the south consistently voted democratic.
elections therefore depended on a handful of doubtful states which could swing elections either way.
these states new york new jersey connecticut ohio indiana and illinois received special attention at election time.
politicians lavished money and time on them presidential candidates usually came from them.
from 1868 to 1912 eight of the nine republican presidential candidates and six of the seven democratic candidates came from the doubtful states especially new york and ohio.
the two parties were evenly matched and elections were closely fought.
in three of the five presidential elections from 1876 to 1892 the victor won by less than 1 percent of the vote in 1876 and 1888 the losing candidates actually had more popular votes than the winners but lost in the electoral college.
knowing that small mistakes could lose elections politicians became extremely cautious.
only twice during these years did one party control both the presidency and the two houses of congress the republicans in 1888 and the democrats in 1892.
historians once believed that political leaders accomplished little between 1877 and 1900 but those who saw few achievements were looking in the wrong location.
with the impeachment of andrew johnson the authority of the presidency dwindled in relation to congressional strength.
for the first time in many years attention shifted away from washington itself.
north and south people who were weary of the centralization brought on by war and reconstruction looked first to state and local governments to deal with the problems of an urban industrial society.
experiments in the states across the country state bureaus and commissions were established to regulate the new industrial society.
many of the early commissions were formed to oversee the railroads at the time the nations largest businesses.
people who shipped goods over the railroads especially farmers and merchants wanted to end the policies of rate discrimination and other harmful practices.
in 1869 massachusetts politics of stalemate read the document the interstate commerce act 1887 which created the interstate commerce commission icc to investigate and oversee railroad activities.
the act outlawed rebates and pooling agreements and the icc became the prototype of the federal commissions that today regulate many parts of the economy.
reestablishing presidential power the interstate commerce act of 1887 was a federal law crafted to regulate the railroad industry and its anti competitive practices.
the act created a regulatory agency the interstate commerce commission which was empowered to investigate and oversee railroad activities.
established the first commission to regulate the railroads by 1900 twenty eight states had taken such action.
most of the early commissions were advisory in nature.
they collected statistics and published reports on rates and practices serving one commissioner said as a sort of lens to focus public attention.
impatient with the results legislatures in the midwest and on the pacific coast established commissions with greater power to fix rates outlaw rebates and investigate rate discrimination.
these commissions experimental in nature served as models for later policy at the federal level.
illinois had one of the most thoroughgoing provisions.
responding to local merchants who were upset with existing railroad rate policies the illinois state constitution of 1870 declared railroads to be public highways and authorized the legislature to pass laws establishing maximum rates and preventing rate discrimination.
in the important case of munn v illinois 1877 the supreme court upheld the illinois legislation declaring that private property affected with the public interest.
must submit to being controlled by the public for the common good but the court soon weakened that judgment.
in the wabash case of 1886 wabash st louis pacific railway co v illinois it narrowed the munn ruling and held that states could not regulate commerce extending beyond their borders.
only congress could.
the wabash decision turned peoples attention back to the federal government.
it spurred congress to pass the interstate commerce act 1887 johnsons impeachment the scandals of the grant administrations and the controversy surrounding the 1876 election weakened the presidency.
during the last two decades of the nineteenth century presidents fought to reassert their authority and by 1900 under william mckinley they had succeeded to a remarkable degree.
the late 1890s in fact marked the birth of the modern powerful presidency.
rutherford b hayes entered the white house with his title clouded by the disputed election of 1876.
opponents called him his fraudulency and rutherfraud b hayes but soon he began to reassert the authority of the presidency.
hayes worked for reform in the civil service placed well known reformers in high offices and ordering the last troops out of south carolina and louisiana ended military reconstruction.
committed to the gold standard the only basis hayes thought of a sound currency in 1878 he vetoed a bill that called for the partial coinage of silver but congress passed this bland allison silver purchase act over his veto.
james a garfield a union army hero and longtime member of congress succeeded hayes.
winning by a handful of votes in 1880 he took office energetically determined to unite the republican party which had been split by personality differences and disagreement over policy toward the tariff and the south lower the tariff to cut taxes and assert american economic and strategic interests in latin america.
ambitious and eloquent garfield had looked forward to the presidency yet within a few weeks he said to friends my god.
what is there in this place that a man should ever want to get into it office seekers hordes of them evoked garfields anguish.
each one wanted a government job and each one thought nothing of cornering the president on every occasion.
the problem of government jobs also provoked a bitter fight with the powerful senator from new york roscoe conkling who resented some of garfields choices.
on the verge of victory over conkling garfield planned to leave washington on july 2 1881 for a vacation in new england.
walking toward his train he was shot in the back by charles j guiteau a deranged lawyer and disappointed office seeker.
suffering through the summer garfield died on september 19 1881 and vice president chester a arthur an ally of senator conkling became president.
the election of 1880 candidate garfield hancock weaver party republican democrat greenback popular vote 4 454 416 4 444 952 308 578 electoral vote arthur was a better president than many had expected.
deftly he established his independence of conkling.
conservative in outlook he reversed garfields foreign policy initiatives in chapter 20 political realignments in the 1890s latin america but he approved the construction of the modern american navy.
arthur worked to lower the tariff and in 1883 with his backing congress passed the pendleton act to reform the civil service.
in part a reaction to garfields assassination the act created a bipartisan civil service commission to administer competitive examinations and appoint officeholders on the basis of merit.
initially the act affected only about fourteen thousand of some one hundred thousand government offices but it laid the basis for the later expansion of the civil service.
in the election of 1884 grover cleveland the democratic governor of new york narrowly defeated republican nominee james g blaine largely because of the continuing divisions in the republican party.
the first democratic president since 1861 cleveland was slow and ponderous known for his honesty stubbornness and hard work.
his term in the white house from 1885 to 1889 reflected the democratic partys desire to curtail federal activities.
cleveland vetoed more than two thirds of the bills presented to him more than all his predecessors combined.
forthright and sincere he brought a new respectability to a democratic party still tainted by its link with secession.
working long into the night he reviewed veterans pensions and civil service appointments.
he continued arthurs naval construction program and forced railroad lumber and cattle companies to surrender millions of acres of fraudulently occupied public domain.
late in 1887 he devoted his annual message to an attack on the tariff the vicious inequitable and illogical source of unnecessary taxation and committed himself and the democratic party to lowering the tariff.
the republicans accused him of undermining american industries and in 1888 they nominated for the presidency benjamin harrison a defender of the tariff.
cleveland garnered ninety thousand more popular votes than harrison but won the electoral votes of only two northern states and the south.
harrison won the rest of the north most of the doubtful states and the election.
the election of 1884 candidate cleveland blaine butler st john party democrat republican greenback prohibition popular vote 4 874 986 4 851 981 175 370 150 369 electoral vote republicans in power the billion dollar congress how did the republican partys vision shape the billion dollar congress.
despite harrisons narrow margin the election of 1888 was the most sweeping victory for either party in almost twenty years it gave the republicans the presidency and both houses of congress.
the republicans it seemed had broken the party stalemate and become the majority party in the country.
democratic leaders hoped not and eager to embarrass the republicans and block republican sponsored laws the democrats election of 1888 electoral vote by state popular vote republican benjamin harrison 5 439 853 democratic grover cleveland 5 540 309 396 441 minor parties wash terr.
montana terr.
idaho terr.
11 376 603 dakota terr.
new mexico terr.
indian terr.
in congress used minority tactics especially the disappearing quorum rule which let members of the house of representatives join in debate but then refuse to answer the roll call to determine whether a quorum was present.
for two months the democrats used the rule to bring congress to a halt.
the republicans grew angry and impatient.
on january 29 1890 they fell two votes short of a quorum and speaker of the house thomas b reed a crusty veteran of maine politics made congressional history.
the chair he said directs the clerk to record the following names of members present and refusing to vote democrats shouted czar.
czar a title that stuck to reed for the rest of his life.
tumult continued for days but in mid february 1890 the republicans adopted the reed rules and proceeded to enact the partys program.
tariffs trusts and silver as if a dam had burst law after law poured out of the republican congress during 1890.
the republicans passed the mckinley tariff act which raised tariff duties about 4 percent higher than ever before it also included a novel reciprocity provision that allowed the president to lower duties if other countries did the same.
in addition the act used duties to promote new industries such as tinplate for packaging the new canned foods appearing on grocery store shelves.
a dependent pensions act granted pensions to union army veterans and their widows and children.
the pensions were modest 6 to 12 a month but the number of pensioners doubled by 1893 when nearly one million individuals received about 160 million in pensions.
republicans in power the billion dollar congress read the document workingmans amalgamated sherman anti trust 1893 congress passed the sherman anti trust act in 1890 which authorized federal action against any combination in the form of trusts or otherwise or conspiracy in restraint of trade though the act was envisioned as a way to control big business its wording was sufficiently vague as to allow the federal government to use this law against labor unions which many people considered to be combinations.
with little debate the republicans and democrats joined in passing the sherman antitrust act the first federal attempt to regulate big business.
as the initial attempt to deal with the problem of trusts and industrial growth the act shaped all later antitrust policy.
it declared illegal every contract combination in the form of trust or otherwise or conspiracy in restraint of trade or commerce penalties for violation were stiff including fines and imprisonment and the dissolution of guilty trusts.
experimental in nature the acts terms were often vague and left precise interpretation to later experience and the courts.
one of the most important laws congress passed the sherman antitrust act made the united states virtually the only industrial nation to regulate business combinations.
it tried to harness big business without harming it.
many members of congress did not expect the new law to have much effect on businesses and for a decade in fact it did not.
the justice department rarely filed suit under it and in the united states v e c knight co decision 1895 the first judicial interpretation of the law the supreme court severely crippled it.
though the e c knight co controlled 98 percent of all sugar refining in the country the court drew a sharp distinction between commerce and manufacturing holding that the company as a manufacturer was not subject to the law.
but judicial interpretations changed after the turn of the century and the sherman antitrust act gained fresh power.
another measure the sherman silver purchase act tried to end the troublesome problem presented by silver.
as one of the two most commonly used precious metals silver had once played a large role in currencies around the world but by the mid 1800s it had slipped into disuse.
with the discovery of the great bonanza mines in nevada american silver production quadrupled between 1870 and 1890 glutting the world market lowering the price of silver and persuading many european nations to demonetize silver in favor of the scarcer metal gold.
the united states kept a limited form of silver coinage with congressional passage of the bland allison act in 1878.
support for silver coinage was especially strong in the south and west where people thought it might inflate the currency raise wages and crop prices and challenge the power of the gold oriented northeast.
eager to avert the free coinage of silver which would require the coinage of all silver presented at the u s mints president harrison and other republican leaders pressed for a compromise that took shape in the sherman silver purchase act of 1890.
chapter 20 political realignments in the 1890s the act directed the treasury to purchase 4 5 million ounces of silver a month and to issue legal tender in the form of treasury notes in payment for it.
the act was a compromise it satisfied both sides.
opponents of silver were pleased that it did not include free coinage.
silverites on the other hand were delighted that the monthly purchases would buy up most of the countrys silver production.
the treasury notes moreover could be cashed for either gold or silver at the bank a gesture toward a true bimetallic system based on silver and gold.
as a final measure republicans in the house courageously passed a federal elections bill to protect the voting rights of blacks in the south.
although restrained in language and intent it set off a storm of denunciation among the democrats who called it a force bill that would station army troops in the south.
because of the outcry the bill failed in the senate it was the last major effort until the 1950s to enforce the fifteenth amendment to the constitution.
the 1890 elections the republican congress of 1890 was one of the most important congresses in american history.
it passed a record number of significant laws that helped shape later policy and asserted the authority of the federal government to a degree the country would not then accept.
sensing the public reaction the democrats labeled it the billion dollar congress for spending that much in appropriations and grants.
this is a billion dollar country speaker reed replied but the voters disagreed.
the 1890 elections crushed the republicans who lost an extraordinary seventy eight seats in the house.
the elections also crushed republicans in the midwest where again enlarging government authority they had passed state laws prohibiting the sale of alcoholic beverages requiring the closing of businesses on sunday and mandating the use of english in the public and parochial schools.
roman catholics german lutherans and other groups resented such laws which they saw as a direct attack on their religion and personal freedoms and they angrily deserted the republicans.
political veterans went down to defeat and new leaders vaulted into sudden prominence.
nebraska elected a democratic governor for the first time in its history.
the state of iowa once so staunchly republican that a local leader had predicted that iowa will go democratic when hell goes methodist went democratic in 1890.
the rise of the populist movement what factors led to the formation and growth of the farmers alliance and peoples party.
the elections of 1890 drew attention to a fast growing movement among farmers that soon came to be known far and wide as populism.
the movement had begun rather quietly in places distant from normal centers of attention and for a time it went almost unnoticed in the press.
but during the summer of 1890 wagonloads of farm families in the south and west converged on campgrounds and picnic areas to socialize and discuss common problems.
they came by the thousands weary of drought mortgages and low crop prices.
at the campgrounds they picnicked talked and listened to recruiters from an organization called the national farmers alliance and industrial union which promised unified action to solve agricultural problems.
farmers were joining the alliance at the rate of 1 000 a week the kansas alliance alone claimed 130 000 members in 1890.
the summer of 1890 became that wonderful picnicking speech making alliance summer a time of fellowship and spirit long remembered by farmers.
the farm problem farm discontent was a worldwide phenomenon between 1870 and 1900.
with the new means of transportation and communication farmers everywhere were caught up in a complex international market they neither controlled nor entirely understood.
american farmers complained bitterly about declining prices for their products rising railroad rates for shipping them and burdensome mortgages.
some of their grievances were valid.
farm profits were certainly low agriculture in general tends to produce low profits because of the ease of entry into the industry.
the prices of farm commodities fell between 1865 and 1890 corn sold at sixty three cents a bushel in 1881 and twenty eight cents in 1890 but they did not fall as low as did other commodity prices.
despite the fact that farmers received less for their crops their purchasing power actually increased.
neither was the farmers second grievance rising railroad rates entirely justified.
railroad rates actually fell during these years benefiting shippers of all products.
farm mortgages the farmers third grievance were common because many farmers mortgaged their property to expand their holdings or buy new farm machinery.
while certainly burdensome most mortgages did not bring hardship.
they were often short with a term of four years or less after which farmers could renegotiate at new rates and the new machinery the farmers bought enabled them to triple their output and increase their income.
the terms of the farm problem varied from area to area and year to year.
new england farmers suffered from overworked land farmers in western kansas and nebraska went broke in a severe drought that followed a period of unusual rainfall.
many southern farmers were trapped in the crop lien system that kept them in debt.
they called it the anaconda system because of the way it coiled slowly and tightly around them.
some farmers did have valid grievances though many understandably tended to exaggerate them.
more important many farmers were sure their condition had declined and this perception as bitterly real as any actual fact sparked a growing anger.
equally upsetting everyone in the 1870s and 1880s seemed excited about factories not farms.
farmers had become hayseeds a word that first appeared in 1889 and they watched their offspring leave for city lights and new careers.
a literature of disillusionment emerged most notably hamlin garlands son of the middle border 1890 and main travelled roads 1891 which described the drabness of farm life.
the rise of the populist movement selected commodity prices dollars per bushel cents per pound 2 00 10 50 1 80 cotton 1876 1900 9 50 wheat 1866 1900 1 60 8 50 1 40 1 20 7 50 1 00 6 50 80 5 50 60 1876 1880 source u s bureau of the census historical statistics of the united states colonial times to 1970 bicentennial edition washington dc 1975.
the fast growing farmers alliance originally a social organization for farmers the grange lost many of its members as it turned more and more toward politics in the late 1870s.
in its place a multitude of farm societies sprang into existence.
by the end of the 1880s they had formed into two major organizations the national farmers alliance located on the plains west of the mississippi and known as the northwestern alliance and the farmers alliance and industrial union based in the south and known as the southern alliance.
the southern alliance began in texas in 1875 but did not assume major proportions until dr charles w macune an energetic and farsighted person took over the leadership in 1886.
rapidly expanding the alliance absorbed other agricultural societies.
its agents spread across the south where farmers were fed up with crop liens depleted lands and sharecropping.
they seem like unto ripe fruit an alliance organizer said you can garner them by a gentle shake of the bush in 1890 the southern alliance claimed more than a million members.
it welcomed to membership the farmers natural friends country doctors schoolteachers preachers and mechanics.
it excluded lawyers bankers cotton merchants and warehouse operators.
an effective organization the southern alliance published a newspaper and distributed alliance material to hundreds of local newspapers and in five years it sent lecturers to forty three states and territories where they spoke to two million farm families.
it was the most massive organizing drive by any citizen institution of nineteenth century america like the grange the alliance also established cooperative grain elevators marketing associations and retail stores all designed to bring farmers together to make greater profits.
most of the projects were short lived but for a time between 1886 and 1892 cooperative enterprises blossomed in the south.
loosely affiliated with the southern alliance a separate colored farmers national alliance and cooperative union enlisted black farmers in the south.
claiming more than one million members it probably had closer to 250 000 but even that figure was sizable in an era when uppity blacks faced not merely defeat but death.
in 1891 black cotton pickers struck for higher wages near memphis tennessee.
led by ben patterson a 30 year old picker they walked off several plantations but a posse hunted them down and following violence on both sides lynched fifteen strikers including patterson.
the abortive strike ended the colored farmers alliance.
on the plains the northwestern alliance a smaller organization was formed in 1880.
its objectives were similar to those of the southern alliance but it disagreed with the southerners emphasis on secrecy centralized control and separate organizations for blacks.
in 1889 the southern alliance changed its name to the national farmers alliance and industrial union and persuaded the three strongest state alliances on the plains those in north dakota south dakota and kansas to join.
thereafter the renamed organization dominated the alliance movement.
the alliance mainly sponsored social and economic programs but it turned early to politics.
in the west its leaders rejected both the republicans and democrats and organized their own party in june 1890 kansas alliance members formed the first major peoples party.
the southern alliance resisted the idea of a new party for fear it might divide the white vote thus undercutting white supremacy.
thomas e watson and leonidas l polk two politically minded southerners reflected the high quality of alliance leadership.
georgia born watson was a talented orator and organizer he urged georgia farmers black and white to unite against their oppressors.
chapter 20 political realignments in the 1890s read the document proceedings of grange session 1879 the alliance movement grew quickly in the late 1800s among discontented farmers.
this photograph shows southern alliance members meeting at the cabin that was the site of their first formal meeting in 1877 in lampasas county texas.
the cabin was later uprooted and exhibited at the worlds columbian exposition in chicago in 1893.
the president of the national farmers alliance polk believed in scientific farming and cooperative action.
jeremiah simpson of kansas probably the most able of the western leaders was reflective and well read.
a follower of reformer henry george he pushed for major social and economic change.
also from kansas mary e lease helped head a movement remarkably open to female leadership.
a captivating speaker she made 160 speeches during the summer of 1890 calling on farmers to rise against wall street and the industrial east.
meeting in ocala florida in 1890 the alliance adopted the ocala demands the platform the organization pushed as long as it existed.
first and foremost the demands called for the creation of a sub treasury system which would allow farmers to store their crops in government warehouses.
in return they could claim treasury notes for up to 80 percent of the local market value of the crop a loan to be repaid when the crops were sold.
farmers could thus hold their crops for the best price.
the ocala demands also urged the free coinage of silver an end to protective tariffs and national banks a federal income tax the direct election of senators by voters instead of state legislatures and tighter regulation of railroad companies.
the alliance strategy worked well in the elections of 1890.
in kansas the alliance related peoples party organized just a few months before elected four congressmen and a u s senator.
across the south the alliance won victories based on the alliance yardstick a demand that democratic party candidates pledge support for alliance measures.
alliance leaders claimed thirty eight alliance supporters elected to congress with at least a dozen more pledged to alliance principles.
the peoples party after the 1890 elections northern alliance leaders urged the formation of a national third party to promote reform although the southerners remained reluctant still hopeful of capturing control of the democratic party.
plans for a new party were discussed at alliance conventions in 1891 and the following year.
in july 1892 a convention in omaha nebraska formed the new peoples or populist party.
southern alliance leaders joined in convinced now that there was no reason to cooperate with the rise of the populist movement read the document mary e lease the populist crusader 1892 to attract more than a million.
he carried kansas idaho nevada and colorado along with portions of north dakota and oregon for a total of twenty two electoral votes a measure of agrarian unrest.
the populists elected governors in kansas and north dakota ten congressmen five senators and about fifteen hundred members of state legislatures.
despite the populists victories the election brought disappointment.
southern democrats used intimidation fraud and manipulation to hold down populist votes.
weaver was held to less than a quarter of the vote in every southern state except alabama.
in most of the country he lost heavily in urban areas with the exception of some mining towns in the far west.
he also failed to win over most farmers.
in no midwestern state except kansas and north dakota did he win as much as 5 percent of the vote.
in the election of 1892 many voters switched parties but they tended to realign with the democrats rather than the populists whose platform on silver and other issues had relatively little appeal among city dwellers or factory workers.
although the populists did run candidates in the next three presidential elections they had reached their peak in 1892.
that year farmers alliance membership dropped for the second year in a row and the organization which was once the breeding ground of the peoples party was broken.
while it lived the alliance was one of the most powerful protest movements in american history.
catalyzing the feelings of hundreds of thousands of farmers it attempted to solve specific economic problems while at the same time advancing a larger read the document populist mary e lease advised farmers to raise less corn and more hell she also said if one man has not enough to eat three times a day and another man has 25 million that last man has something that belongs to the first ocala platform 1890 election of 1892 electoral vote by state popular vote democratic grover cleveland 5 556 918 republican benjamin harrison 5 176 108 people s populist james b weaver 1 027 329 source kansas state historical society.
the democrats who exploited alliance popularity but failed to adopt its reforms.
in the south some populists had worked to unite black and white farmers.
they are in the ditch just like we are a white texas populist said.
blacks and whites served on populist election committees they spoke from the same platforms and they ran on the same tickets.
populist sheriffs called blacks for jury duty an unheard of practice in the close of the century south.
in 1892 a black populist was threatened with lynching he took refuge with tom watson and two thousand white farmers some of whom rode all night to get there guarded watsons house until the threat passed.
many of the delegates at the omaha convention had planned to nominate leonidas l polk for president but he died suddenly in june and the convention turned instead to james b weaver of iowa a former congressman union army general and third party candidate for president in 1880 on the greenback labor party ticket.
as its platform the peoples party adopted many of the ocala demands.
weaver waged an active campaign but with mixed results.
he won 1 027 329 votes the first third party presidential candidate ever 264 133 minor parties 12 024 488 electors classed as democratic were in many states elected on joint democratic and people s party tickets.
1 1 utah terr.
new ariz terr.
mexico terr.
indian terr.
chapter 20 political realignments in the 1890s vision of harmony and community in which people who cared about each other were rewarded for what they produced.
the crisis of the depression what were the main political and labor effects of the panic and depression of the 1890s.
it was economic crisis however not harmony and community that dominated the last decade of the century.
responding to the heady forces of industrialization the american economy had expanded too rapidly in the 1870s and 1880s.
railroads had overbuilt gambling on future growth.
companies had grown beyond their markets farms and businesses had borrowed heavily for expansion.
the panic of 1893 the mood changed early in 1893.
in mid february panic suddenly hit the new york stock market.
in one day investors dumped one million shares of a leading company the philadelphia and reading railroad and it went bankrupt.
business investment dropped sharply in the railroad and construction industries touching off the worst economic downturn to that point in the countrys history.
frightened people hurriedly sold stocks and other assets to buy gold.
the overwhelming demand depleted the gold reserve of the u s treasury.
eroding almost daily in march 1893 the treasurys reserve slumped toward the 100 million mark an amount that stood for the governments commitment to maintain the gold standard.
on april 22 for the first time since the 1870s the reserve fell below 100 million.
the news shattered business confidence the stock market broke.
on wednesday may 3 railroad and industrial stocks plummeted and the next day several major firms went bankrupt.
when the market opened on friday crowds filled its galleries anticipating a panic.
within minutes leading stocks plunged to record lows and there was pandemonium on the floor and in the streets outside.
may 5 1893 wall streets worst day until the great crash of 1929 became industrial black friday a day of terrible strain long remembered on the market afterward banks cut back on loans.
unable to get capital businesses failed at an average rate of two dozen a day during the month of may.
the papers are full of failures banks are breaking all over the country and there is a tremendous contraction of credits and hoarding of money going on everywhere an observer noted.
on july 26 the erie railroad one of the leading names in railroading history failed.
august 1893 was the worst month.
across the country factories and mines shut down.
on august 15 the northern pacific railroad went bankrupt the union pacific and the santa fe soon followed.
some economists estimated unemployment at two million people or nearly 15 percent of the labor force.
during 1893 fifteen thousand business firms and more than six hundred banks closed.
the year 1894 was even worse.
the gross national product dropped again and by midyear the number of unemployed stood at three million.
one out of every five workers was unemployed.
famine is in our midst said the head of one citys relief committee.
in the summer a heat wave and drought struck the farm belt west of the mississippi river creating conditions unmatched until the devastating dust bowl of the 1930s.
corn withered in the fields.
in the south the price of cotton fell below five cents a pound far under the break even point.
people became restless and angry.
as one newspaper said in 1896 on every corner stands a man whose fortune in these dull times has made him an ugly critic of everything and everybody there was even talk of revolution and bloodshed.
everyone scolds henry adams the historian wrote a british friend.
everyone also knows what ought to be done.
everyone reviles everyone who does not agree with him and everyone differs or agrees only in contempt for everyone else.
as far as i can see everyone is right coxeys army and the pullman strike some of the unemployed wandered across the country singly in small groups and in small armies.
during 1894 there were some fourteen hundred strikes involving more than a half million workers.
on easter sunday 1894 an unusual army of perhaps three hundred people left massillon ohio.
at its head rode general jacob s coxey a mild looking middle aged businessman who wanted to put the nations jobless to work building roads.
coxey wanted congress to pass the coxey good roads bill which would authorize the printing of 500 million in paper money to finance road construction.
his march to washington a petition in boots he called it drew nationwide attention.
other armies sprang up around the country and all headed for washington to persuade the government to provide jobs on irrigation road construction or other projects.
in the west they commandeered freight trains and headed east.
coxey himself reached washington on may 1 1894 after a difficult tiring march.
police were everywhere lining the streets and blocking the approaches to the capitol.
coxey made it to the foot of the capitol steps but before he could do anything the police were on him.
he and a companion were clubbed then arrested for trespassing.
a week later coxey was sentenced to twenty days in jail.
the armies melted away but discontent did not.
the great pullman strike one of the largest strikes in the countrys history began just a few days after coxeys arrest when the employees of the pullman palace car company living in a company town just outside chicago a town in which everything was owned and meted out by the company struck to protest wage cuts continuing high rents and layoffs.
on june 26 1894 the american railway union aru under eugene v debs joined the strike by refusing to handle trains that carried pullman sleeping cars.
within hours the strike paralyzed the western half of the nation.
grain and livestock could not reach markets.
factories shut down for lack of coal.
the strike extended into twenty seven states and territories tying up the economy and renewing talk of class warfare.
in washington president grover cleveland who had been reelected to the presidency in 1892 decided to break the strike on the grounds that it obstructed delivery of the mail.
on july 2 he secured a court injunction against the aru and he ordered troops to chicago.
when they arrived on the morning of independence day the city was peaceful.
before long however violence broke out and mobs composed mostly of nonstrikers the crisis of the depression read the document jacob s coxey address of protest 1894 coxeys army is shown here entering washington d c jacob coxey was arrested for trespassing on the lawn surrounding the u s capitol.
on the fiftieth anniversary of his march to washington coxey was permitted to finish the speech that had been interrupted by his arrest in 1894 overturned freight cars looted and burned.
restoring order the army occupied railroad yards in illinois california and other places.
by late july the strike was over debs was jailed for violating the injunction.
many people applauded clevelands action nominally for the expedition of the mails a newspaper said but really for the preservation of society the pullman strike had far reaching consequences for the development of the labor movement.
working people resented clevelands actions in the strike particularly as it became apparent that he sided with the railroads.
upholding debss sentence in in re debs 1895 the supreme court endorsed the use of the injunction in labor disputes thus giving business and government an effective antilabor weapon that hindered union growth in the 1890s.
the strikes failure catapulted debs into prominence.
during his time in jail he turned to socialism and after his release he worked to build the socialist party of america which experienced some success after 1900.
the miners of the midwest the plight of coal miners in the midwest illustrated the personal and social impact of the depression.
even in the best of times mining was a dirty and dangerous business.
one miner in twelve died underground one in three suffered injury.
mines routinely closed for as long as six months a year and wages fell with the depression.
midwestern mining was often a family occupation passed down from father to son.
it demanded delicate judgments about when to blast where to follow a seam and how to avoid rockfalls.
until 1890 english and irish immigrants dominated the business.
they migrated from mine to mine and they nearly always lived in flimsy shacks owned by the company.
time and again the miners struck for higher wages between 1887 and 1894 there were 116 major coal strikes in illinois 111 in ohio.
after 1890 immigration from southern and eastern europe hitherto a trickle became a flood.
italians lithuanians poles slovaks magyars russians bohemians and croatians came to the mines to find work.
in three years nearly one thousand italians settled in coal city illinois they comprised more than one third of the population.
in other mining towns italian and polish miners soon made up almost half the population.
as the depression deepened tensions grew between miners and their employers and between old miners and the new many new miners spoke no english and often they were birds of passage transients who had come to the united states to make money to take back home.
lacking the skills handed down by the old miners they were often blamed for accidents and they worked longer hours for less pay.
at many a tavern after work old miners grumbled about the different looking newcomers and considered ways to get rid of them.
in april 1894 a wave of wage reductions sparked an explosion of labor unrest in the mines.
the united mine workers a struggling union formed just four years earlier called for a strike of bituminous coal miners and on april 21 virtually all midwestern and pennsylvania miners some 170 000 in all quit working.
the flow of crucial coal slackened cities faced blackouts factories closed.
the violence that soon broke out followed a significant pattern.
over the years the english and irish miners had built up a set of unspoken understandings with their employers.
the new miners had not and they were more prone to violent action to win a strike.
the depression hit them especially hard frustrating their plans to earn money and return home.
in many areas anger and frustration turned the 1894 strikes into outright war.
for nearly two weeks in june 1894 fighting rocked the illinois ohio and indiana coalfields.
mobs ignited mine shafts dynamited coal trains and defied state militias.
while miners of all backgrounds participated in the violence it often divided old miners and new.
in spring valley illinois exiled italian anarchists took over the strike leadership and incited rioting despite the opposition of the old miners.
elsewhere a mine fired by arsonists burned because the new miners prevented the old ones from extinguishing the blaze.
shocked by the violence public opinion shifted against the strikers.
the strike ended in a matter of weeks but its effects lingered.
english and irish miners moved out into other jobs or up into supervisory positions.
jokes and songs poked cruel fun at the new immigrants and the pennsylvania and illinois legislatures adopted laws to keep them out of the mines.
thousands of old miners voted populist in 1894 the populist platform called for restrictions on immigration in one of the populists few successes that year.
the united mine workers dominated by the older miners began in 1896 to urge congress to stop the demoralizing effects of immigration.
chapter 20 political realignments in the 1890s occurring at the same time the pullman strike pulled attention away from the crisis in the coalfields yet the miners strike involved three times as many workers and provided a revealing glimpse of the tensions within american society.
the miners of the midwest were the first large group of skilled workers seriously affected by the flood of immigrants from southern and eastern europe.
buffeted by depression they reflected the social and economic discord that permeated every industry.
a beleaguered president building on the democratic partys sweeping triumph in the midterm elections of 1890 grover cleveland decisively defeated the populist candidate james b weaver and the incumbent president benjamin harrison in 1892.
he won by nearly four hundred thousand votes a large margin by the standards of the era and the democrats increased their strength in the cities and among working class voters.
for the first time since the 1850s they controlled the white house and both branches of congress.
the democrats it now seemed had broken the party stalemate but unfortunately for cleveland the panic of 1893 struck almost as he took office.
he was sure that he knew its cause.
the sherman silver purchase act of 1890 he believed had damaged business confidence drained the treasurys gold reserve and caused the panic.
the solution to the depression was equally simple repeal the act.
in june 1893 cleveland summoned congress into special session.
india had just closed its mints to silver and mexico was now the only country in the world with free silver coinage.
the silverites were on the defensive although they pleaded for a compromise.
rejecting the pleas cleveland pushed the repeal bill through congress and on november 1 1893 he signed it into law.
always sure of himself he had staked everything on a single measure a winning strategy if he succeeded a devastating one if he did not.
repeal of the sherman silver purchase act was probably a necessary action.
it responded to the realities of international finance reduced the flight of gold out of the country and over the long run boosted business confidence.
unfortunately it contracted the currency at a time when inflation might have helped.
it did not bring economic revival.
the stock market remained listless businesses continued to close unemployment spread and farm prices dropped.
we are hourly expecting the arrival of the benevolent man who is to pay ten cents a pound for cotton a virginia newspaper said.
the repeal battle of 1893 discrediting the conservative cleveland democrats who had dominated the party since the 1860s reshaped the politics of the country.
it confined the democratic party largely to the south helped the republicans become the majority party in 1894 and strengthened the position of the silver democrats in their bid for the presidency in 1896.
it also focused national attention on the silver issue and thus intensified the silver sentiment cleveland had intended to dampen.
in the end repeal did not even solve the treasurys gold problem.
by january 1894 the reserve had fallen to 65 million.
a year later it fell to 44 5 million.
in january 1894 cleveland desperately resorted to a sale of 50 million in gold bonds to replenish the gold reserve.
the following november he again sold bonds and in february 1895 arousing outrage among many he agreed to a third bond sale that allowed financier j pierpont morgan and other bankers to reap large profits.
a fourth bond sale in january 1896 also failed to stop the drain on the reserve although it further sharpened the silverites hatred of president cleveland.
still another blow to the morale of the democrats came in 1894 when they tried to fulfill their long standing promise to reduce the tariff.
despite all their efforts the wilson gorman tariff act passed by congress in august 1894 contained only modest reductions in duties.
it reduced the tariff on coal iron ore wool and sugar ended the mckinley tariff acts popular reciprocity agreements with other countries and moved some duties higher than ever before.
it also imposed a small income tax a provision the supreme court overturned in 1895 pollock v farmers loan and trust co.
very few democrats including cleveland were pleased with the measure and the president let it become law without his signature.
breaking the party deadlock the democrats were buried in the elections of 1894.
suffering the greatest defeat in congressional history they lost 113 house seats while the republicans gained 117.
in twenty four states not a single democrat was elected to congress.
only one democrat bostons john f fitzgerald the grandfather of president john f kennedy came from all of new england.
the democrats even lost some of the solid south and in the midwest a crucial battleground of the 1890s the party was virtually destroyed.
wooing labor and the unemployed the populists made striking inroads in parts of the south and west yet their progress was far from enough.
in a year in which thousands of voters switched parties the peoples party elected only four senators and four congressmen.
southern democrats again used fraud and violence to keep the populists totals down.
in the midwest the populists won double the number of votes they had received in 1892 yet still attracted less than 7 percent of the vote.
across the country the discontented tended to vote for the republicans not the populists a discouraging sign for the populist party.
for millions of people grover cleveland became a scapegoat for the countrys economic ills.
the democratic party split and southern and western democrats deserted him in droves.
at democratic conventions clevelands name evoked jeers.
he is an old bag of beef democratic congressman pitchfork ben tillman told a south carolina audience and i am going to go to washington with a pitchfork and prod him in his old fat ribs the elections of 1894 marked the end of the party deadlock that had existed since the 1870s.
the democrats lost the populists gained somewhat and the republicans became the majority party in the country.
in the midst of the depression the republican doctrines of activism and national authority which voters had repudiated in the elections of 1890 became more attractive.
this was a development of great significance because as americans became more accepting of the use of government power to regulate the economy and safeguard individual welfare the way lay open to the reforms of the progressive era the new deal and beyond.
changing attitudes changing attitudes what changes in outlook did the panic and depression of the 1890s bring about.
the depression brutal and far reaching did more than shift political alignments.
across the country it undermined traditional views and caused people to rethink older ideas about government the economy and society.
as men and women concluded that established ideas had failed to deal with the depression they looked for new ones.
there was the president of the university of wisconsin said a general all pervasive restless discontent with the results of current political and economic thought in prosperous times americans had thought of unemployment as the result of personal failure affecting primarily the lazy and immoral.
let us remember a leading protestant minister once said that there is not a poor person in the united states who was not made poor by his own shortcomings in the midst of depression such views were harder to maintain since everyone knew people who were both worthy and unemployed.
next door a respected neighbor might be laid off down the block an entire factory might be shut down.
people debated issues they had long taken for granted.
new and reinvigorated local institutions discussion clubs womens read the document clubs reform societies university extension centers church groups farmers societies gave people a place to discuss alternatives to the existing order.
pressures for reform increased and demand grew for government intervention to help the poor and unemployed.
everybody works but father women and children had been entering the labor force for years and the depression accelerated the trend.
as husbands and fathers lost their jobs more and more women and children went to work.
even as late as 1901 well after the depression had ended a study of working class families showed that more than half the principal breadwinners were out of work.
so many women and children worked that in 1905 there was a popular song titled everybody works but father during the 1890s the number of working women rose from 4 million to 5 3 million.
trying to make ends meet they took in boarders and found jobs as laundresses cleaners or domestics.
where possible they worked in offices and factories.
far more black urban women than white worked to supplement their husbands meager earnings.
in new york city in 1900 nearly 60 percent of all black women worked compared to 27 percent of the foreign born and 24 percent of native born white women.
men still dominated business offices but during the 1890s more everybody works but father 1905 tiny children peddling newspapers and women domestics serving the rich their meager earnings were desperately needed.
chapter 20 political realignments in the 1890s and more employers noted the relative cheapness of female labor.
women telegraph and telephone operators nearly tripled in number during the decade.
women worked as clerks in the new five and tens and department stores and as nurses in 1900 a half million were teachers.
they increasingly entered office work as stenographers and typists occupations in which they earned between 6 00 and 15 00 a week compared to factory wages of 1 50 to 8 00 a week.
the depression also caused an increasing number of children to work.
during the 1890s the number of children employed in southern textile mills jumped more than 160 percent and boys and girls under sixteen years of age made up nearly one third of the labor force of the mills.
youngsters of eight and nine years worked twelve hours a day for pitiful wages.
in most cases however children worked not in factories but in farming and city street trades such as peddling and shoe shining.
in 1900 the south had more than half the child laborers in the nation.
concerned about child labor middle class women in 1896 formed the league for the protection of the family which called for compulsory education to get children out of factories and into classrooms.
the mothers congress of 1896 gave rise to the national congress of parents and teachers the spawning ground of thousands of local parent teacher associations.
the national council of women and the general federation of womens clubs took up similar issues.
by the end of the 1890s the federation had 150 000 members who worked for various civic reforms in the fields of child welfare education and sanitation.
changing themes in literature the depression also gave point to a growing movement in literature toward realism and naturalism.
in the years after the civil war literature often reflected the mood of romanticism sentimental and unrealistic.
walt whitman called it ornamental confectionary and copious dribble but it remained popular through the end of the century.
the novels of horatio alger which provided simple lessons about how to get ahead in business and life continued to attract large numbers of readers.
a failed new york minister alger published some 130 novels with titles such as sink or swim work and win and struggling upward which sold more than 20 million copies.
they told of poor youngsters who made their way to the top through hard work thrift honesty and luck.
louisa may alcotts little women 1868 1869 related the daily lives of four girls in a new england family anna sewells black beauty 1877 charmed readers with the story of an abused horse that found a happy home and lew wallaces ben hur 1880 one of the eras best selling books offered a sweeping epic of life in the roman empire.
after the 1870s however a number of talented authors began to reject romanticism and escapism turning instead to realism.
determined to portray life as it was they studied local dialects wrote regional stories and emphasized the true relationships between people.
in doing so they reflected broader trends in the society such as industrialism evolutionary theory which emphasized the effect of the environment on humans and the new philosophy of pragmatism which emphasized the relativity of values.
regionalist authors such as joel chandler harris and george washington cable depicted life in the south.
hamlin garland described the grimness of life on the great plains and sarah orne jewett wrote about everyday life in rural new england.
another regionalist bret harte achieved fame with stories that portrayed the local color of the california mining camps particularly in his popular tale the outcasts of poker flat harte was joined by a more talented writer mark twain who became the countrys most outstanding realist author.
growing up along the mississippi river in hannibal county missouri the young samuel langhorne clemens observed life around him with a humorous and skeptical eye.
adopting a pen name from the river term mark twain two fathoms he wrote a number of important works that drew on his own experiences.
life on the mississippi 1883 described his career as a steamboat pilot.
the adventures of tom sawyer 1876 and the adventures of huckleberry finn 1884 gained international prominence.
in these books twain used dialect and common speech instead of literary language touching off a major change in american prose style.
william dean howells after twain the countrys most famous author came more slowly to the realist approach.
at first he wrote about the happier sides of life but then he grew worried about the impact of industrialization.
a traveler from altruria 1894 a utopian novel described an industrial society that consumed lives.
the poem society 1895 written in the midst of the depression compared society to a splendid ball in which men and women danced on flowers covering the bodies of the poor and now and then from out the dreadful floor an arm or brow was lifted from the rest as if to strike in madness or implore for mercy and anon some suffering breast heaved from the mass and sank and as before the revellers above them thronged and prest.
other writers the naturalists became impatient even with realism.
pushing darwinian theory to its limits they wrote of a world in which a cruel and merciless environment determined human fate.
often focusing on economic hardship naturalist writers studied the poor the lower classes and the criminal mind they brought to their writing the social workers passion for direct and honest experience.
stephen crane spent a night in a seven cent lodging house on the bowery and in an experiment in misery captured the smells and sounds of the poor.
crane depicted the carnage of war in the red badge of courage 1895 and the impact of poverty in maggie a girl of the streets 1893.
frank norris assailed the power of big business in two dramatic novels the octopus 1901 and the pit 1903 both the story of individual futility in the face of the heartless corporations.
norriss mcteague 1899 studied the disintegration of character the presidential election of 1896 under economic pressure.
jack london another naturalist author traced the power of nature over civilized society in novels such as the sea wolf 1904 and the call of the wild 1903 his classic tale of a sled dog that preferred the difficult life of the wilderness to the world of human beings.
theodore dreiser the foremost naturalist writer grimly portrayed a dark world in which human beings were tossed about by forces beyond their understanding or control.
my own ambition dreiser said is to represent my world to conform to the large truthful lines of life in his great novel sister carrie 1901 he followed a young farm girl who took a job in a chicago shoe factory.
he described the exhausting nature of factory work her hands began to ache at the wrists and then in the fingers and towards the last she seemed one mass of dull complaining muscle fixed in an eternal position and performing a single mechanical movement like other naturalists dreiser focused on environment and character.
he thought writers should tell the truth about human affairs not fabricate romance and sister carrie he said was not intended as a piece of literary craftsmanship but was a picture of conditions the election of 1896 was known as the battle of the standards because it focused primarily on the gold and silver standards of money.
as an election it was exciting and decisive.
new voting patterns replaced old a new majority party confirmed its control of the country and national policy shifted to suit new realities.
silverites believed the amount of money in circulation determined the level of activity in the economy.
if money was short that meant there was a limit on economic activity and ultimately a depression.
if the government coined silver as well as gold that meant more money in circulation more business for everyone and thus prosperity.
farm prices would rise laborers would go back to work.
by 1896 silver was also a symbol.
it had moral and patriotic dimensions by going to a silver standard the united states could assert its independence in the world and it stood for a wide range of popular grievances.
for many it reflected rural values rather than urban ones suggested a shift of power away from the northeast and spoke for the downtrodden instead of the well to do.
silver represented the common people as the vast literature of the movement showed.
william h harveys coins financial school 1894 the most popular of all silver pamphlets had the eloquent coin a wise but unknown youth tutoring famous people on the currency.
bankers lawyers and scholars came to argue for gold but they left shaken leaning toward silver.
coins financial school sold five thousand copies a day at its peak in 1895 with tens of thousands of copies distributed free by silver organizations.
it is being sold on every railroad train by the newsboys and at every cigar store a mississippi congressman said.
it is being read by almost everybody silver was more than just a political or economic issue.
it was a social movement one of the largest in american history but its life span turned out to be brief.
as a mass phenomenon it flourished between 1894 and 1896 then succumbed to electoral defeat the return of prosperity and the onset of fresh concerns.
but in its time the silver movement bespoke a national mood and won millions of followers.
the mystique of silver the republicans and gold sentiment for free silver coinage grew swiftly after 1894 dominating the south and west appearing even in the farming regions of new york and new england.
pro silver literature flooded the country.
see the feature essay the wonderful wizard of oz pp.
pamphlets issued by the millions argued silvers virtues.
people wanted quick solutions to the economic crisis.
during 1896 unemployment shot up and farm income and prices fell to the lowest point in the decade.
i can remember back as far as 1858 an iowa hardware dealer said in february 1896 and i have never seen such hard times as these are the silverites offered a solution simple but compelling the free and independent coinage of silver at the ratio of 16 ounces of silver to every ounce of gold.
free coinage meant that the u s mints would coin all the silver offered to them.
independent coinage meant that the country would coin silver regardless of the policies of other nations nearly all of which were on the gold standard.
it is difficult now to understand the kind of faith the silverites placed in silver as a cure for the depression.
but faith it was and of a sort that some observers compared to religious fervor.
underlying it all was a belief in a quantity theory of money the sensing victory over the discredited democrats numerous republicans fought for the partys presidential nomination including czar thomas b reed of the billion dollar congress.
reed picked up early support but suffered from his reputation for biting wit.
william mckinley of ohio his chief rival soon passed him in the race for the nomination.
able calm and affable mckinley had served in the union army during the civil war.
in 1876 he won a seat in congress where he became the chief sponsor of the tariff act named for him.
in the months before the 1896 national convention marcus a hanna his campaign manager and trusted friend built a powerful national organization that featured mckinley as the advance agent of prosperity an alluring slogan in a country beset with depression.
when the convention met in june mckinley had the nomination in hand and he backed a platform that favored the gold standard against the free coinage of silver.
republicans favoring silver proposed a prosilver platform but the convention overwhelmingly defeated it.
twenty three silverite republicans far fewer than prosilver forces had hoped marched out of the convention hall.
the remaining delegates waved handkerchiefs and flags and shouted good bye and the presidential election of 1896 why was the presidential election of 1896 so important.
complete the assignment the wonderful wizard of oz on myhistorylab feature essay a restless dreamer frank baum tried his hand at several careers before he gained fame and fortune as a writer of childrens literature.
from 1888 to 1891 he ran a store and newspaper in south dakota where he experienced the desolation and grayness that accompanied agrarian discontent.
an avid supporter of william jennings bryan in the battle of the standards baum wrote what many interpret as an enduring allegory of the silver movement the wonderful wizard of oz.
published in april 1900 it was an immediate success.
the book opens with a grim description of kansas the drab environment in which dorothy grew up when dorothy stood in the doorway and looked around she could see nothing but the great gray prairie on every side.
not a tree nor a house broke the broad sweep of flat country that reached the edge of the sky in all directions.
the sun had baked the plowed land into a gray mass with little cracks running through it.
even the grass was not green for the sun had burned the tops of the long blades until they were the same gray color to be seen everywhere.
once the house had been painted but the sun blistered the paint and the rains washed it away and now the house was as dull and gray as everything else.
kansas had not always seemed that way.
after 1854 when the kansas nebraska act opened to settlement its 50 million acres of grassland people poured into the state to stake their claims.
many came from the hilly timbered country to the east the wonderful wizard of oz and breaking onto the prairie they saw a new world reaching to the far horizon without break of trees or chimney stack just sky and grass and grass and sky.
the hush was so loud.
the heavens seemed nearer than ever before and awe and beauty and majesty over all in later years railroads crisscrossed the state and advertisements touted the fertile soil.
land was plentiful rainfall somehow seemed to increase each year crop prices held at levels high enough to pay new farming implements yielded larger crops and property values increased.
yet life on the prairie was never an easy matter.
flat lonely and windswept the land affected people in ways that were hard to describe to the folks back east.
when aunt em dorothys aunt came to kansas to live she was young and pretty but the sun and wind soon changed her.
they had taken the sparkle from her eyes and left them a sober gray they had taken the red from her cheeks and lips and they were gray also like aunt em uncle henry never laughed.
he worked hard from morning till night and did not know what joy was after 1887 the environment of the great plains family changed dramatically.
a series of droughts struck kansas and as many as three out of four farms were mortgaged in some kansas counties.
thousands of settlers like aunt em and uncle henry gave up and retraced their steps east others trusted in the farmers alliance and pinned their hopes on the free coinage of silver.
while gold as a standard of currency symbolized the idle rich of the industrial northeast silver stood the wicked witch of the west.
for the common folk.
added to the currency in the form of silver dollars it meant more money higher crop prices and a return of prosperity.
or so the supporters of silver coinage believed.
in the wonderful wizard of oz read as an allegory dorothy every person is carried by a cyclone a victory of the silver forces at the polls from drought stricken kansas to a marvelous land of riches and witches.
unlike dry gray kansas oz is beautiful with rippling brooks stately trees colorful flowers and brightfeathered birds.
on arrival dorothy disposes of one witch the wicked witch of the east the eastern money power and those favoring gold and frees the munchkins the common people from servitude.
to return to kansas she must first go to the emerald city the greenback colored national capital.
dorothy wears magical silver slippers and follows the yellow brick road thus achieving a proper relationship between the precious metals silver and gold.
like many of her countrymen she does not at first recognize the power of the silver slippers but a kiss from the good witch of the north northern voters protects her on the road.
dorothy meets the scarecrow the farmer who has been told he has no brain but actually possesses great common sense no hick or hayseed he the tin woodman the industrial worker who fears he has become heartless but discovers the spirit of love and cooperation and the cowardly lion reformers particularly william jennings bryan who turns out not to be very cowardly at all.
when the four companions reach the emerald city they meet the great and terrible wizard who tells them that to gain his help they must destroy the wicked witch of the west mortgage companies heartless nature and other things opposing progress there.
courageously they set forth.
dorothy dissolves the witch with a bucket of water what else for drought ridden farmers.
but when they return to the emerald city they find that the great and powerful wizard the money power is only a charlatan a manipulator whose power rests on myth and illusion.
i thought oz was a great head said dorothy.
and i thought oz was a terrible beast said the tin woodman.
and i thought oz was a ball of fire exclaimed the lion.
no you are all wrong said the little man meekly.
i have been making believe dorothy unmasks the wizard and with the help of glinda the good witch of the south support for silver was strong in the south uses the silver slippers to return home to kansas.
sadly the shoes are lost in flight.
back in oz the scarecrow rules the emerald city the triumph of the farmers and the tin woodman reigns in the west industrialism moves west.
oz was a familiar abbreviation to those involved in the fight over the ratio of silver to gold 16 ounces to 1.
baum wanted to write american fairy tales to bear the stamp of our times and depict the progressive fairies of today the land of oz reflected his belief in the american values of freedom and independence love of family self reliance individualism and sympathy for the underdog.
oz he said in the original introduction aspires to being a modernized fairy tale in which the wonderment and joy are retained and the heartaches and nightmares are left out the oz stories have remained popular and they still rest on many childrens bookshelves.
a 1939 film starring judy garland as dorothy with ray bolger as the scarecrow jack haley as the tin woodman bert lahr as the cowardly lion and frank morgan as the wizard was spectacularly successful.
released in the midst of another depression the film included songs designed to escape hardship as dorothy once had somewhere over the rainbow questions for discussion 1.
why was the wizard of oz so popular as a book in the 1890s and a film during the great depression in the 1930s.
how do baums characters symbolize the values and social forces he was trying to address.
if baum were writing today what social forces and issues might he address.
chapter 20 political realignments in the 1890s put them out hanna stood on a chair screaming go.
go william jennings bryan who was there as a special correspondent for a nebraska newspaper climbed on a desk to get a better view.
the democrats and silver silver meanwhile had captured large segments of the democratic party in the south and west.
despite president clevelands opposition more than twenty democratic state platforms came out for free silver in 1894.
power in the party shifted to the south where it remained for decades.
the partys base narrowed its outlook increasingly reflected southern views on silver race and other issues.
in effect the democrats became a sectional no longer a national party.
read the document william jennings bryan cross of gold speech 1896 the anti cleveland democrats had their issue but they lacked a leader.
out in nebraska bryan saw the opportunity to take on that role.
he was barely thirty six years old and had relatively little political experience.
but he had spent months wooing support and he was a captivating public speaker tall slender and handsome with a resounding voice that in an era without microphones projected easily into every corner of an auditorium.
from the outset of the 1896 democratic convention the silver democrats were in charge and they put together a platform that stunned the cleveland wing of the party.
it demanded the free coinage of silver attacked clevelands actions in the pullman strike and censured his sales of gold bonds.
on july 9 as delegates debated the platform bryans moment came.
striding to the stage he stood for an instant a hand raised for silence waiting for the applause to die down.
he would not contend with the previous speakers he began for this is not a contest between persons.
the humblest citizen in all the land when clad in the armor of a righteous cause is stronger than all the hosts of error.
i come to speak to you in defense of a cause as holy as the cause of liberty the cause of humanity the delegates were captivated.
like a trained choir they rose cheered each point and sat back to listen for more.
easterners bryan said liked to praise businessmen but forgot that plain people laborers miners and farmers were businessmen too.
shouts rang through the hall and delegates pounded on chairs.
savoring each cheer bryan defended silver.
then came the famous closing having behind us the producing masses of this nation and the world.
we will answer their demand for a gold standard by saying to them you shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold bryan moved his fingers down his temples suggesting blood trickling from his wounds.
he ended with his arms outstretched as on a cross.
letting the silence hang he dropped his arms stepped back then started to his seat.
suddenly there was pandemonium.
delegates shouted and cheered.
when the tumult subsided they adopted the anti cleveland platform and the next day bryan won the presidential nomination.
campaign and election william jennings bryan was well known for his dramatic speeches.
during the democratic convention of 1896 bryan delivered his best known speech which attacked the gold standard.
his stirring rhetoric captivated his audience and won him the democratic presidential nomination for the election of 1896.
the democratic convention presented the populists with a dilemma.
the peoples party had staked everything on the assumption that neither major party would endorse silver.
now it faced a painful choice nominate an independent ticket and risk splitting the silverite forces or nominate bryan and give up its separate identity as a party.
the choice was unpleasant and it shattered the peoples party.
meeting late in july the partys national convention nominated bryan but rather than accept the democratic candidate for vice president it named tom watson instead.
the populists endorsement probably hurt bryan as much as it helped.
it won him relatively few votes since many populists would have voted for him anyway.
it also identified him as a populist which he was not allowing the republicans to accuse him of heading a ragtag army of malcontents.
the squabble over watson seemed the mckinley administration the northeast and midwest and carried four border states.
in the cities mckinley crushed bryan.
the election struck down the populists whose totals sagged nearly everywhere.
many populist proposals were later adopted under different leadership.
the graduated income tax crop loans to farmers the secret ballot and direct election of u s senators all were early populist ideas.
but the peoples party never could win over a majority of the voters and failing that it vanished after 1896.
election of 1896 electoral vote by state popular vote republican william mckinley 7 104 779 democratic 176 william j bryan 6 502 925 265 155 minor parties 13 872 859 ariz new 1 terr.
mexico terr.
indian terr.
24 15 6 12 to prove that the democratic populist alliance could never stay together long enough to govern.
in august 1896 bryan set off on a campaign that became an american legend.
much of the conservative democratic eastern press had deserted him and he took his campaign directly to the voters the first presidential candidate in history to do so in a systematic way.
by his own count bryan traveled 18 009 miles visited 27 states and spoke 600 times to a total of some 3 million people.
he built skillfully on a new merchandising style of campaign in which he worked to educate and persuade voters.
bryan summoned voters to an older america a land where farms were as important as factories where the virtues of rural and religious life outweighed the doubtful lure of the city where common people still ruled and opportunity existed for all.
he drew on the jeffersonian tradition of rural virtue distrust of central authority and abiding faith in the powers of human reason.
urged to take the stump against bryan mckinley replied i might just as well put up a trapeze on my front lawn and compete with some professional athlete as go out speaking against bryan the republican candidate let voters come to him.
railroads brought them by the thousands into mckinleys hometown of canton ohio and he spoke to them from his front porch.
through use of the press he reached fully as many people as bryans more strenuous effort.
appealing to labor immigrants well to do farmers businessmen and the middle class mckinley defended economic nationalism and the advancing urbanindustrial society.
on election day voter turnout was extraordinarily high a measure of the intense interest.
by nightfall the outcome was clear mckinley won 50 percent of the vote to bryans 46 percent.
he won the mckinley administration what did mckinley accomplish that placed the results of the 1896 election on a solid basis.
the election of 1896 cemented the voter realignment of 1894 and initiated a generation of republican rule.
for more than three decades after 1896 with only a brief democratic resurgence under woodrow wilson the republicans remained the countrys majority party.
mckinley took office in 1897 under favorable circumstances.
to everyones relief the economy had begun to revive.
the stock market rose factories once again churned out goods and farmers prospered.
farm prices climbed sharply during 1897 on bumper crops of wheat cotton and corn.
discoveries of gold in australia and alaska together with the development of a new cyanide process for extracting gold from ore enlarged the worlds gold supply decreased its price and inflated the currency as the silverites had hoped.
for the first time since 1890 the 1897 treasury statements showed a comfortable gold reserve.
mckinley and the republicans basked in the glow.
they became the party of progress and prosperity an image that helped them win victories until another depression hit in the 1930s.
mckinleys popularity soared.
open and accessible in contrast to clevelands isolation he rode the washington streetcars walked the streets and enjoyed looking in department store windows.
mckinley became the first president to ride in an automobile reaching the speed of 18 miles an hour.
an activist president he set the policies of the administration.
conscious of the limits of power he maintained close ties with congress and worked hard to educate the public on national choices and priorities.
mckinley struck new relations with the press and traveled far more than previous presidents.
in some ways he began the modern presidency.
shortly after taking office he summoned congress into special session to revise the tariff.
in july 1897 the dingley tariff passed the house and senate.
it raised average tariff duties to a record level and as the final burst of nineteenth century protectionism it caused trouble for the republican party.
by the end of the 1890s consumers critics and the republicans themselves were wondering if the tariff had outlived its usefulness in the maturing american economy.
from the 1860s to the 1890s the republicans had built their party on a pledge to promote economic growth through the use of state and national power.
by 1900 with the industrial system chapter 20 political realignments in the 1890s the election of 1900 view the closer look republican campaign poster of 1896 william mckinley candidate mckinley bryan woolley debs party republican democrat prohibition socialist popular vote 7 207 923 6 358 133 209 004 94 768 electoral vote in 1898 and 1899 the mckinley administration focused on the war with spain the peace treaty that followed and the dawning realization that the war had thrust the united states into a position of world power.
in march 1900 congress passed the gold standard act which declared gold the standard of currency and ended the silver controversy that had dominated the 1890s.
the presidential campaign of 1900 was a replay of the mckinley bryan fight of 1896.
mckinleys running mate was theodore roosevelt hero of the spanish american war and former governor of new york who was nominated for vice president to capitalize on his popularity and his enemies hoped to sidetrack his political career into oblivion.
bryan emphasized the issues of imperialism and the trusts mckinley emphasized his record at home and abroad.
the result in 1900 was a landslide.
on september 6 1901 a few months after his second inauguration mckinley stood in a receiving line at the panamerican exposition in buffalo.
leon czolgosz a 28 year old unemployed laborer and anarchist moved through the line and reaching the president shot him.
surgeons probed the wound but could find nothing.
a recent discovery called the x ray was on display at the exposition but it was not used.
on september 14 mckinley died and vice president theodore roosevelt became president.
a new century had begun.
this republican campaign poster of 1896 depicts candidate william mckinley as the champion of commerce and civilization.
the sun rising behind the flag mckinley is holding suggests that a new day will dawn with a republican administration.
firmly in place the focus had shifted.
the need to regulate to control the effects of industrialism became a central public concern of the new century.
mckinley prodded the republicans to meet that shift but he died before his plans matured.
mckinley toyed with the idea of lowering the tariff but one obstacle always stood in the way the government needed revenue and tariff duties were one of the few taxes the public would support.
the spanish american war of 1898 persuaded people to accept greater federal power and with it new forms of taxation.
in 1899 mckinley spoke of lowering tariff barriers in a world that technology had made smaller.
god and man have linked the nations together he said in his last speech at buffalo new york in 1901.
isolation is no longer possible or desirable conclusion a decades dramatic changes as the funeral train carried mckinleys body back to ohio mark hanna mckinleys old friend and ally sat slumped in his parlor car.
i told william mckinley it was a mistake to nominate that wild man at philadelphia he mourned.
i asked him if he realized what would happen if he should die.
now look that damned cowboy is president of the united states hannas world had changed and so had the nations not so much because that damned cowboy was suddenly president but because events of the 1890s had had powerful effects.
in the course of that decade political patterns shifted the presidency acquired fresh power and massive unrest prompted social change.
the war with spain brought a new empire and worldwide responsibilities.
economic hardship posed questions of the most difficult sort about industrialization urbanization and the quality of american life.
worried people embraced new ideas study resources and causes.
reform movements begun in the 1890s flowered in the progressive era after 1900.
technology continued to alter the way americans lived.
in 1896 henry ford produced a two cylinder four horsepower car the first of the famous line that bore his name.
in 1899 the first automobile salesroom opened in new york and some innovative thinkers were already imagining a network of service stations to keep the new cars running.
at kitty hawk north carolina wilbur and orville wright two bicycle manufacturers neared the birth of powered flight.
the realignments that reached their peak in the 1890s seem distant yet they are not.
important decisions in those years shaped nearly everything that came after them.
in character and influence the 1890s were as much a part of the twentieth century as of the nineteenth and continue to have repercussions into the twenty first century.
study y resources take the study plan for chapter 20 political realignments in the 1890s on myhistorylab time line 1876 mark twain publishes the adventures of tom sawyer 1877 disputed election of 1876 results in awarding of presidency to republican rutherford b hayes republican james a garfield elected president garfield assassinated vice president chester a arthur becomes president democrat grover cleveland elected president defeating republican james g blaine cleveland calls for lowering of tariff duties republican benjamin harrison wins presidential election national farmers alliance and industrial union formed to address problems of farmers republican dominated billion dollar congress enacts mckinley tariff act sherman antitrust act and sherman silver purchase act farmers alliance adopts the ocala demands 1892 democrat cleveland defeats republican harrison for presidency peoples party formed financial panic touches off depression lasting until 1897 sherman silver purchase act repealed world columbian exposition opens in chicago coxeys army marches on washington pullman employees strike republican mckinley defeats william jennings bryan democratic and populist candidate in battle of the standards gold discovered in alaska dingley tariff act raises tariff duties mckinley reelected again defeating bryan gold standard act establishes gold as standard of currency mckinley assassinated vice president theodore roosevelt assumes presidency naturalist writer theodore dreiser publishes sister carrie chapter 20 chapter review chapter review politics of stalemate changing attitudes why was there a stalemate between republicans and democrats until the mid 1890s.
what changes in outlook did the panic and depression of the 1890s bring about.
for more than two decades after reconstruction there was a stalemate in which the democrats and republicans fought for votes and focused on a handful of doubtful states.
in general democrats dominated the south and republicans controlled crucial sections of the north.
presidents reestablished the authority of their office.
p 468 the depression led people to reconsider the roles of the government the economy and society.
they had once thought that people lost their jobs because of their own failings now they knew that economic forces were at fault.
people joined organizations like womens clubs church groups and farm societies to discuss cures for the situation.
more women and children worked.
realism and naturalism dominated american literature.
p 479 republicans in power the billion dollar congress the presidential election of 1896 how did the republican partys vision shape the billion dollar congress.
why was the presidential election of 1896 so important.
in control of both the presidency and congress after 1888 republicans enacted their activist policies only to discover that voters were not ready for them.
the congressional elections of 1890 restored the democrats to power.
p 470 the election of 1896 brought to a head the fight between supporters of silver and gold established the republicans as the majority party and shaped the nations politics until 1932.
p 481 the rise of the populist movement the mckinley administration what factors led to the formation and growth of the farmers alliance and peoples party.
what did mckinley accomplish that placed the results of the 1896 election on a solid basis.
in the late 1880s and early 1890s farmers in the south and west joined the farmers alliance and later the peoples party.
the peoples party failed as voters turned to the democrats in the presidential election of 1892.
p 472 the mckinley administration profited from economic recovery.
it enacted the gold standard passed a new tariff and defeated spain.
how to regulate big business instead of simply promoting it became a new challenge.
p 485 the crisis of the depression what were the main political and labor effects of the panic and depression of the 1890s.
the depression encouraged people to rethink their views on the causes of poverty and unemployment.
it discredited president cleveland and crushed the democrats in the midterm elections of 1894 giving the republican party a long term lease on power.
p 476 key terms and definitions bland allison silver purchase act this 1878 act called for the partial coinage of silver.
those favoring silver coinage argued that it would increase the money supply and help farmers and workers repay their debts.
opponents advocated a restricted money supply based solely on gold and pointed out that few other major countries accepted silver coinage.
congress passed the bill over president rutherford b hayess veto.
p 469 pendleton act this 1883 law created a bipartisan civil service commission to administer competitive exams for civil service jobs and appoint officeholders based on merit.
it also outlawed compulsory political contributions from appointed officials.
p 470 sherman antitrust act this 1890 act was the first major u s attempt to deal with the problem of the increasing size of business.
it declared illegal every contract combination in the form of trust or otherwise or conspiracy in restraint of trade or commerce p 471 sherman silver purchase act an 1890 act that attempted to resolve the controversy over silver coinage by requiring the treasury to purchase 4 5 million ounces of silver each month and issue legal tender in the form of treasury notes for it.
the act pleased opponents of silver because it did not call for free coinage it pleased proponents of silver because it bought up most of the nations silver production.
p 471 study resources national farmers alliance and industrial union the alliance sought to organize farmers in the south and west to fight for reforms that would improve their lot including measures to overcome low crop prices burdensome mortgages and high railroad rates.
the alliance ultimately organized the peoples populist party.
p 472 ocala demands adopted by the farmers alliance in 1890 in ocala florida these demands became the organizations main platform.
they called for a sub treasury system to allow farmers to store their crops until they could get the best price the free coinage of silver an end to protective tariffs and national banks a federal income tax the direct election of senators by voters and tighter regulation of railroads.
see peoples party.
p 474 peoples or populist party this political party was organized in 1892 by farm labor and reform leaders mainly from the farmers alliance.
it offered a broad based reform platform reflecting the ocala demands.
after 1896 it became identified as a one issue party focused on free silver and gradually died away.
p 474 pullman strike beginning in may 1894 this strike at the pullman palace car company near chicago was one of the largest strikes in american history.
workers struck to protest wage cuts high rents for company housing and layoffs.
the american railway union led by eugene v debs joined the strike in june.
extending into 27 states and territories it paralyzed the western half of the nation.
president grover cleveland secured an injunction to break the strike on the grounds that it obstructed the mail and sent federal troops to enforce it.
p 476 gold standard act passed by congress in 1900 this law made all currency redeemable in gold.
the united states remained on the gold standard until 1933 p 486 critical thinking questions 1.
what effect did the rise of the peoples party have on american politics.
how did the depression give rise to conditions that made the election 3.
how would events have been different if william jennings bryan and the democrats won the election of 1896.
why did mckinley and the republican party demonstrate about the of 1896 important.
changes in popular attitudes since 1890.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 20 on myhistorylab politics of stalemate read the document changing attitudes read the document the interstate commerce act 1887 p 469 republicans in power the billion dollar congress read the document workingmans amalgamated sherman anti trust 1893 p 471 the rise of the populist movement read the document mary e lease the populist read the document ocala platform 1890 p 475 the crisis of the depression read the document protest 1894 p 477 complete the assignment oz p 482 read the document the wonderful wizard of william jennings bryan cross of gold speech 1896 p 484 the mckinley administration crusader 1892 p 475 the presidential election of 1896 proceedings of grange session 1879 p 474 read the document everybody works but father 1905 p 479 jacob s coxey address of view the closer look republican campaign poster of 1896 william mckinley p 486 indicates study plan media assignment toward empire contents and learning objectives america looks outward pg.
492 acquisition of empire pg.
503 why did americans look outward in the last half of the nineteenth century.
what were the various viewpoints about the acquisition of empire after the war with spain.
war with spain pg.
497 what were the causes and results of the war with spain.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab feature essay the 400 million customers of china.
chapter 21 toward empire roosevelt and the rough riders many americans regretted the start of the war with spain that began in april 1898 but many others welcomed it.
many highly respected people believed that nations must fight every now and then to prove their power and test the national spirit.
theodore roosevelt 39 years old in 1898 was one of them.
nations needed to fight in order to survive he thought.
for months roosevelt argued strenuously for war with spain for three reasons first on grounds of freeing cuba and expelling spain from the hemisphere second because of the benefit done to our people by giving them something to think of which isnt material gain and third because the army and navy needed the practice.
in april 1898 roosevelt was serving in the important post of assistant secretary of the navy.
when war broke out he quickly resigned to join the army rejecting the advice of the secretary of the navy who warned he would only ride a horse and brush mosquitoes from his neck in the florida sands the secretary was wrong dead wrong and later had the grace to admit it.
roosevelt was right he said.
his going into the army led straight to the presidency in 1898 officers supplied their own uniforms and roosevelt the son of well to do parents wanted his to be stylish.
he wired brooks brothers the expensive new york clothier for a regular lieutenant colonels uniform without yellow on the collar and with leggings to be ready in a week.
joining a friend he chose to enlist his own regiment and after a few telephone calls to friends and telegrams to the governors of arizona new mexico and oklahoma asking for good shots and good riders he had more than enough men.
the first united states volunteer cavalry an intriguing mixture of ivy league athletes and western frontiersmen was born.
known as the rough riders it included men from the harvard yale and princeton clubs of new york city the somerset club of boston and new yorks exclusive knickerbocker club.
former college athletes football players tennis players and track stars enlisted.
woodbury kane a wealthy yachtsman signed up and promptly volunteered for kitchen duty.
other volunteers came from the west natural soldiers roosevelt called them tall and sinewy with resolute weather beaten faces and eyes that looked a man straight in the face without flinching among the cowboys hunters and prospectors there were bucky oneill a legendary arizona sheriff and indian fighter a half dozen other sheriffs and texas rangers a large number of indians a famous broncobuster and an ex marshal of dodge city kansas.
eager for war the men trained hard played harder and rarely passed up a chance for an intellectual discussion if roosevelts memoir of the war is to be believed.
once he overheard bucky oneill and a princeton graduate discussing aryan word roots together and then sliding off into a review of the novels of balzac and a discussion as to how far balzac could be said to be the founder of the modern realistic school of watch the video roosevelts rough riders this lithograph depicts lieutenant colonel teddy roosevelt and his rough rider regiment charging up san juan hill on july 1 1898.
the battle of san juan hill was considered the bloodiest of the war and the greatest victory by the rough riders.
fiction roosevelt himself spent his spare time reading superiorit des anglo saxons a french work that strove to prove the superiority of english speaking peoples.
in such a camp discipline was lax and enlisted men got on easily with the officers.
the troops howled with joy when orders came to join the invasion army for cuba.
they won their first victories in florida fighting off other regiments to capture a train to take them to the wharf and then seizing the only available troopship to cuba.
the rough riders set sail on june 14 1898 and lieutenant colonel roosevelt who had performed a war dance for the troops the night before caught their mood we knew not whither we were bound nor what we were to do but we believed that the nearing future held for us many chances of death and hardship of honor and renown.
if we failed we would share the fate of all who fail but we were sure that we would win that we should score the first great triumph in a mighty world movement chapter 21 toward empire hat world movement roosevelt was sure would establish the united states as a world power whose commerce and influence would extend around the globe particularly in latin america and asia.
as he hoped the nation in the 1890s underwent dramatic expansion building on the foreign policy approaches of administrations from lincoln to william mckinley.
policy makers fostered business interests abroad strengthened the navy and extended american influence into latin america and the pacific.
differences over cuba resulted in a war with spain that brought new colonies and colonial subjects establishing for the first time an american overseas empire.
t america looks outward why did americans look outward in the last half of the nineteenth century.
the overseas expansion of the 1890s differed in several important respects from earlier expansionist moves of the united states.
from its beginning the american republic had been expanding.
after the first landings in jamestown and plymouth settlers pushed westward into the trans appalachian region the louisiana territory florida texas california arizona and new mexico.
most of these lands were contiguous with existing territories of the united states and most were intended for settlement usually agricultural.
the expansion of the 1890s was different.
it sought to gain island possessions the bulk of them already thickly populated.
the new territories were intended less for settlement than for use as naval bases trading outposts or commercial centers on major trade routes.
more often than not they were viewed as colonies not as states in the making.
historian samuel f bemis described the overseas expansion of the 1890s as the great aberration a time when the country adopted expansionist policies that did not fit with prior experience.
other historians pointing to expansionist tendencies in thought and foreign policy that surfaced during the last half of the nineteenth century have found a developing pattern that led naturally to the overseas adventures of the 1890s.
in the view of walter lafeber the united states did not set out on an expansionist path in the late 1890s in a sudden spur of the moment fashion.
the overseas empire that americans controlled in 1900 was not a break in their history but a natural culmination catching the spirit of empire most people in most times in history tend to look at domestic concerns and americans in the years following the civil war were no exception.
among other things they focused on reconstruction the movement westward and simply making a living.
they took seriously the well remembered advice of george washingtons farewell address to steer clear of foreign entanglements.
throughout the nineteenth century americans enjoyed free security without fully appreciating it.
sheltered by two oceans and the british navy they could enunciate bold policies such as the monroe doctrine which instructed european nations to stay out of the affairs of the western hemisphere while remaining virtually impregnable to foreign attack.
in those circumstances a sense of isolationism spread fostering a desire to stay out of foreign entanglements.
some people even urged abolition of the foreign service considering it an unnecessary expenditure a dangerous profession that might lead to involvement in the struggles of the worlds great powers.
in the 1870s and after however americans began to take an increasing interest in events abroad.
there was a growing sense of internationalism which stemmed in part from the telegraphs telephones and undersea cables that kept people better informed about political and economic developments in distant lands.
many americans continued to be interested in expansion of the countrys borders relatively few were interested in imperialism.
expansion meant the kind of growth that had brought california and oregon into the american system.
imperialism meant the imposition of control over other peoples through annexation military conquest or economic domination.
reasons for expansion several developments in these years combined to shift attention outward across the seas.
the end of the frontier announced officially in the census report of 1890 sparked fears about diminishing opportunities at home.
further growth it seemed to some must take place abroad as john a kasson an able and experienced diplomat said in the north american review we are rapidly utilizing the whole of our continental territory.
we must turn our eyes abroad or they will soon look inward upon discontent factories and farms multiplied producing more goods than the domestic market could consume.
both farmers and industrialists looked for new overseas markets and the growing volume of exports including more and more manufactured goods changed the nature of american trade relations with the world.
american exports of merchandise amounted to 393 million in 1870 858 million in 1890 and 1 4 billion in 1900.
in 1898 the united states exported more than it imported beginning a trend that lasted through the 1960s.
political leaders such as james g blaine began to argue for the vital importance of foreign markets to continued economic growth.
blaine secretary of state under garfield and again under harrison aggressively sought wider markets in latin america asia and africa using tariff reciprocity agreements and other measures.
to some extent he and others were also caught up in a worldwide scramble for empire.
in the last third of the century great britain france and germany divided up africa and looked covetously at asia.
the idea of imperialistic expansion was in the air and the great powers measured their greatness by the colonies they acquired.
inevitably some americans certain business interests and foreign policy strategists for example caught the spirit and wanted to enter the international hunt for territory.
intellectual currents that supported expansion drew on charles darwins theories of evolution.
adherents pointed for example to the origin of species which mentioned in its subtitle the preservation of favoured races in the struggle for life.
america looks outward read the document josiah strong from our country 1885 josiah strong 1847 1916 was a protestant minister who advocated in his works and speeches the responsibility of the anglo saxons to civilize and christianize inferior races around the world.
strongs opinions influenced support among american protestants by the 1890s for the development of an expansionist and imperialist foreign policy.
applied to human and social development biological concepts seemed to call for the triumph of the fit and the elimination of the unfit.
in this world said theodore roosevelt who thought of himself as one of the fit the nation that has trained itself to a career of unwarlike and isolated ease is bound in the end to go down before other nations which have not lost the manly and adventurous qualities the biogenetic law formulated by german biologist ernst haeckel suggested that the development of the race paralleled the development of the individual.
primitive peoples thus were in the arrested stages of childhood or adolescence they needed supervision and protection.
in a similar vein john fiske a popular writer and lecturer argued for anglo saxon racial superiority a result of the process of natural selection.
the english and americans fiske said would occupy every land on the globe that was not already civilized bringing the advances of commerce and democratic institutions.
such views were widespread among the lettered and unlettered alike.
in cuba one of the rough riders ushered a visiting russian prince around the trenches informing him with ill considered enthusiasm you see prince the great result of this war is that it has united the two branches of anglo saxon people and now that they are together they can whip the world prince.
they can whip the world eminent scholars such as john w burgess a professor of political science at columbia university argued in similar though more dignified fashion that people of english origin were destined to impose their political institutions on the world.
the career of josiah strong a congregational minister and fervent expansionist suggested the strength of the developing ideas.
a champion of overseas missionary work strong traveled extensively through the west for the home missionary society and in 1885 drawing on his experiences he published a book titled our country its possible future and its present crisis.
an immediate best seller the book called on foreign missions to civilize the world under the anglo saxon races.
strong became a national celebrity.
our country argued for expanding american trade and dominion.
trade was important it said because the desire for material things was one of the hallmarks of civilized people.
so was the christian religion and by exporting both trade and religion americans could civilize and christianize inferior races around the world.
as anglo saxons they were members of a god favored race destined to lead the world.
anglo saxons already owned one third of the earth strong said and in a famous passage he concluded that they would take more.
in the final competition of races they would win and move down upon mexico down upon central and south america out upon the islands of the sea over upon africa and beyond taken together these developments in social political and economic thought prepared americans for a larger role in the world.
the change was gradual and there was never a day when people awoke with a sudden realization of their interests overseas.
but change there was and by the 1890s americans were ready to reach out into the world in a more determined and deliberate fashion than ever before.
for almost the first time they felt the need for a foreign policy foreign policy approaches 1867 1900 rarely consistent american foreign policy in the last half of the nineteenth century took different approaches to different areas of the world.
in relation to europe seat of the dominant world powers policy makers promoted trade and tried to avoid diplomatic entanglements.
in north and south america they based policy on the monroe doctrine a recurrent dream of annexing canada or mexico a hope for extensive trade and pan american unity against the nations of the old world.
in the pacific they coveted hawaii and other outposts on the sea lanes to china.
secretary of state william henry seward who served from 1861 to 1869 aggressively pushed an expansive foreign policy.
chapter 21 toward empire give me.
fifty forty thirty more years of life he told a boston audience in 1867 and i will give you possession of the american continent and control of the world seward it turned out had only five more years of life but he developed a vision of an american empire stretching south into latin america and west to the shores of asia.
his vision included canada and mexico islands in the caribbean as strategic bases to protect a canal across the isthmus and hawaii and other islands as stepping stones to asia which seward and many others considered a virtually bottomless outlet for farm and manufactured goods.
seward tried unsuccessfully to negotiate a commercial treaty with hawaii in 1867 and the same year he annexed the midway islands a small atoll group twelve hundred miles northwest of hawaii.
in 1867 he concluded a treaty with russia for the purchase of alaska which was promptly labeled sewards folly partly to sandwich western canada between american territory and lead to its annexation.
as the american empire spread seward thought mexico city would become its capital.
secretary of state hamilton fish an urbane new yorker followed seward in 1869 serving under president ulysses s grant.
an avid expansionist grant wanted to extend american influence in the caribbean and pacific though the more conservative fish often restrained him.
they moved first to repair relations with great britain.
the first business was settlement of the alabama claims demands that britain pay the united states for damages to union ships caused by confederate vessels which like the alabama had been built and outfitted in british shipyards.
negotiating patiently fish signed the treaty of washington in 1871 providing for arbitration of the alabama issue and other nettlesome controversies.
the treaty one of the landmarks in the peaceful settlement of international disputes marked a significant step in cementing angloamerican relations.
grant and fish looked most eagerly to latin america.
in 1870 grant became the first president to proclaim the nontransfer principle hereafter no territory on this continent shall be regarded as subject to transfer to a european power fish also promoted the independence of cuba restive under spanish rule while holding off the annexation desired by the more eager grant.
influenced by speculators grant tried to annex santo domingo in 1869 but was thwarted by powerful republicans in the senate who disliked foreign involvement and feared a subsequent attempt to annex haiti.
james g blaine served briefly as secretary of state under president james garfield and laid extensive plans to establish closer commercial relations with latin america.
blaines successor frederick t frelinghuysen changed blaines approach but not his strategy.
like blaine frelinghuysen wanted to find caribbean markets for american goods he negotiated separate reciprocity treaties with mexico cuba and puerto rico the british west indies santo domingo and colombia.
using these treaties frelinghuysen hoped not only to obtain markets for american goods but to bind these countries to american interests.
when blaine returned to the state department in 1889 under president benjamin harrison he moved again to expand markets in latin america.
drawing on earlier ideas he envisaged a hemispheric system of peaceful intercourse arbitration of disputes and expanded trade.
he also wanted to annex hawaii.
i think there are only three places that are of value and not already taken that are not continental he wrote in a letter to president harrison in 1891.
one is hawaii and the others are cuba and puerto rico the last two might take a generation to acquire but hawaii may come up for decision at any unexpected hour and i hope we shall be prepared to decide it in the affirmative harrison and blaine toyed with naval acquisitions in the caribbean and elsewhere but in general they focused on pan americanism and tariff reciprocity.
blaine presided over the first inter american conference in washington on october 2 1889 where delegates from nineteen american nations negotiated several agreements to promote trade and created the international bureau of the american republics later renamed the pan american union for the exchange of general information including political scientific and cultural knowledge.
the conference a major step in hemispheric relations led to later meetings promoting trade and other agreements.
reciprocity harrison and blaine hoped would divert latin american trade from europe to the united states.
working hard to sell the idea in congress blaine lobbied for a reciprocity provision in the mckinley tariff act of 1890 and once that was enacted he negotiated reciprocity treaties with most latin american nations.
the treaties failed to foster the hoped for trade because of the depression of the 1890s nevertheless they resulted in greater american exports of flour grain meat iron and machinery.
exports to cuba jumped by one third between 1891 and 1893 then dropped precipitously when the 1894 wilson gorman tariff act ended reciprocity.
grover cleveland harrisons successor also pursued an aggressive policy toward latin america.
in 1895 he brought the united states precariously close to war with great britain over a boundary dispute between venezuela and british guiana.
cleveland sympathized with venezuela and he and secretary of state richard olney urged britain to arbitrate the dispute.
when britain failed to act olney drafted a stiff diplomatic note affirming the monroe doctrine and denying european nations the right to meddle in western hemisphere affairs.
four months passed before lord salisbury the british foreign secretary replied.
rejecting olneys arguments he sent two letters the first bluntly repudiating the monroe doctrine as international law.
the second letter carefully reasoned and sometimes sarcastic rejected olneys arguments for the venezuelan boundary.
enraged cleveland defended the monroe doctrine and he asked congress for authority to appoint a commission to decide the boundary and enforce its decision.
i am fully alive to the responsibility incurred and keenly realize all the consequences that may follow he told congress plainly implying war.
preoccupied with larger diplomatic problems in africa and europe britain changed its position.
in november 1896 the two countries signed a treaty of arbitration under which great britain and venezuela divided the disputed territory.
though clevelands approach was clumsy throughout the crisis for example he rarely consulted venezuela the venezuelan incident demonstrated a growing determination to exert american power in the western hemisphere.
cleveland and olney had persuaded great britain to recognize the dominance of the united states and they had increased american influence in latin america.
america looks outward the monroe doctrine assumed new importance.
in averting war an era of angloamerican friendship was begun.
read the document liliuokalani hawaiis story the lure of hawaii and samoa the islands of hawaii offered a tempting way station to asian markets.
in the early 1800s they were already called the crossroads of the pacific and trading ships of many nations stopped there.
in 1820 the first american missionaries arrived to convert the islanders to christianity.
like missionaries elsewhere they advertised hawaiis economic and other benefits and attracted new settlers.
their children later came to dominate hawaiian political and economic life and played an important role in annexation.
after the civil war the united states tightened its connections with the islands.
the reciprocity treaty of 1875 allowed hawaiian sugar to enter the united states free of duty and bound the hawaiian monarchy to make no territorial or economic concessions to other powers.
the treaty increased hawaiian economic dependence on the united states its political clauses effectively made hawaii an american protectorate.
in 1887 a new treaty reaffirmed these arrangements and granted the united states exclusive use of pearl harbor a magnificent harbor that had early caught the eye of naval strategists.
following the 1875 treaty white hawaiians became more and more influential in the islands political life.
the mckinley tariff act of 1890 ended the special status given hawaiian sugar and at the same time awarded american producers a bounty of two cents a pound.
hawaiian sugar production dropped dramatically unemployment rose and property values fell.
the following year the weak king kalakaua died bringing to power a strongthe first step toward american annexation of hawaii came in 1893 when queen liliuokalani was willed nationalist queen liliuokalani.
removed from the throne.
hawaii was annexed to the united states as a possession in 1898 and resentful of white minority rule she became a u s territory in 1900 decreed a new constitution that gave greater power to native hawaiians.
unhappy the american residents revolted in early 1893 and states to pluck it on february 14 1893 harrisons secretary of called on the united states for help.
john l stevens the american state john w foster and delegates of the new government signed minister in honolulu sent 150 marines ashore from the cruiser a treaty annexing hawaii to the united states.
boston and within three days the bloodless revolution was over.
but only two weeks remained in harrisons term and the queen liliuokalani surrendered to the superior force of the united senate refused to ratify the agreement.
five days after taking office states and the victorious rebels set up a provisional government.
cleveland withdrew the treaty he then sent a representative to stevens urged annexation telling washington that the hawaiian investigate the cause of the rebellion.
the investigation revealed pear is now fully ripe and this is the golden hour for the united that the americans role in it had been improper and cleveland chapter 21 toward empire alaska russia canada china united states japan hawaiian islands pacific ocean equator australia samoan islands major shipping routes hawaiian islands the hawaiian islands provided the united states with both a convenient stopping point on the way to asian markets and a strategic naval station in the pacific.
decided to restore the queen to her throne.
he made the demand but the provisional government in hawaii politely refused and instead established the republic of hawaii which the embarrassed cleveland unable to do otherwise recognized.
the debate over hawaiian annexation continuing through the 1890s foreshadowed the later debate over the treaty to end the spanish american war.
people in favor of annexation pointed to hawaiis strategic location argued that japan or other powers might seize the islands if the united states did not and suggested that americans had a responsibility to civilize and christianize the native hawaiians.
opponents warned that annexation might lead to a colonial army and colonial problems the inclusion of a mongrel population in the united states and rule over an area not destined for statehood.
annexation came swiftly in july 1898 in the midst of excitement over victories in the spanish american war.
the year before president william mckinley had sent a treaty of annexation to the senate but opposition quickly arose and the treaty stalled.
japan protested against it pointing out that japanese made up a quarter of the hawaiian population.
japan dispatched a cruiser to honolulu the navy department sent the battleship oregon and ordered naval forces to take hawaii if the japanese made threatening moves.
in 1898 annexationists redoubled arguments about hawaiis commercial and military importance.
mckinley and congressional leaders switched strategies to seek a joint resolution rather than a treaty for annexation.
a joint resolution required only a majority of both houses while a treaty needed a two thirds vote in the senate.
bolstered by the new strategy the annexation measure moved quickly through congress and mckinley signed it on july 7 1898.
his signature giving the united states a naval and commercial base in the mid pacific realized a goal held by policy makers since the 1860s.
while annexation of hawaii represented a step toward china the samoan islands three thousand miles to the south offered a strategic location astride the sea lanes of the south pacific.
americans showed early interest in samoa and in 1872 a naval officer negotiated a treaty granting the united states the use of pago pago a splendid harbor on one of its islands.
the senate rejected the treaty but six years later approved a similar agreement providing for a naval station there.
the agreement bound the united states to use its good offices to adjust any disputes between the samoan chiefs and foreign governments.
great britain and germany also secured treaty rights in samoa and thereafter the three nations jockeyed for position.
the situation grew tense in 1889 when warships from all three countries gathered in a samoan harbor.
but a sudden typhoon damaged the fleets and tensions eased.
a month later delegates from britain germany and the united states met in berlin to negotiate the problem.
britain and germany wanted to divide up the islands secretary of state blaine held out for some degree of authority by the indigenous population with american control over pago pago.
the agreement an uneasy one ended in 1899 when the united states and germany divided samoa and compensated britain with lands elsewhere in the pacific.
germany claimed the two larger islands in the chain the united states kept the harbor at pago pago.
the new navy large navies were vital in the scramble for colonies and in the 1870s the united states had almost no naval power.
one of the most powerful fleets in the world during the civil war the american navy had fallen into rapid decline.
by 1880 there were fewer than two thousand vessels only forty eight of which could fire a gun.
ships rotted and many officers left the service.
conditions changed during the 1880s.
a group of rising young officers steeped in a new naval philosophy argued for an expanded navy equipped with fast aggressive fleets capable of fighting battles across the seas.
this group had its greatest influence in a special naval advisory board formed by the secretary of the navy in 1881.
big navy proponents pointed to the growing fleets of great britain france and germany arguing that the united states needed greater fleet strength to protect its economic and other interests in the caribbean and pacific.
in 1883 congress authorized construction of four steel ships marking the beginning of the new navy.
experts also worked to improve naval management and the quality of fleet personnel and between 1885 and 1889 congress budgeted funds for thirty additional ships.
the initial building program focused on lightly armored fast cruisers for raiding enemy merchant ships and protecting american shores but after 1890 the program shifted to the construction of a seagoing offensive battleship navy capable of challenging the strongest fleets of europe.
alfred thayer mahan and benjamin f tracy were two of the main forces behind the new navy.
austere and scholarly mahan was the eras most influential naval strategist.
after graduating from war with spain the naval academy in 1859 he devoted a lifetime to studying the influence of sea power in history for more than two decades he headed the newport naval war college where officers imbibed the latest in strategic thinking.
a clear logical writer mahan summarized his beliefs in several major books including the influence of sea power upon history 1660 1783 1890 and the interest of america in sea power 1897.
mahans reasoning was simple and to that generation persuasive.
industrialism he argued produced vast surpluses of agricultural and manufactured goods for which markets must be found.
markets involved distant ports reaching them required a large merchant marine and a powerful navy to protect it.
navies in turn needed coaling stations and repair yards.
coaling stations meant colonies and colonies became strategic read the document alfred thayer mahan the interest of america in sea power bases the foundation of a nations wealth and power.
the bases might serve as markets themselves but they were more important as stepping stones to other objectives such as the markets of latin america and asia.
mahan called attention to the worldwide race for power a race he warned the united states could not afford to lose.
all around us now is strife the struggle of life the race of life are phrases so familiar that we do not feel their significance till we stop to think about them.
everywhere nation is arrayed against nation our own no less than others to compete in the struggle mahan argued the united states must expand.
it needed strategic bases a powerful oceangoing navy a canal across the isthmus to link the east coast with the pacific and hawaii as a way station on the route to asia.
mahan influenced a generation of policy makers in the united states and europe one of them benjamin f tracy became harrisons secretary of the navy in 1889.
tracy organized the bureau of construction and repair to design and build new ships established the naval reserve in 1891 and ordered construction of the first american submarine in 1893.
he also adopted the first heavy rapid fire guns smokeless powder torpedoes and heavy armor.
above all tracy joined with big navy advocates in congress to push for a far ranging battleship fleet capable of attacking distant enemies.
he wanted two fleets of battle ships eight ships in the pacific and twelve in the atlantic.
he got four first class battleships.
in 1889 when tracy entered office the united states ranked twelfth among world navies in 1893 when he left it ranked seventh and was climbing rapidly.
the sea he predicted in 1891 will be the future seat of empires.
and we shall rule it as certainly as the sun doth rise by the end of the decade the navy had seventeen steel battleships six armored cruisers and many smaller craft.
it ranked third in the world.
war with spain what were the causes and results of the war with spain.
this 1881 cartoon depicted our top heavy navy a decrepit vessel sinking with idle officers.
the war with spain in 1898 built a mood of national confidence altered older more insular patterns of thought and reshaped the way americans saw themselves and the world.
its outcome pleased some people but troubled others who raised questions about war itself colonies and subject peoples.
the war left a lingering strain of isolationism and antiwar feeling that affected later policy.
it also left an american empire small by european standards but quite new to the american experience by virtue of its overseas location.
when the war ended american possessions stretched into the caribbean and deep into the pacific.
american influence went further still and the united states was recognized as a world power the spanish american war established the united states as a dominant force for the twentieth century.
it brought america colonies and millions of colonial subjects it brought the responsibilities of governing an empire and protecting it.
for better chapter 21 toward empire or worse it involved the country in other nations arguments and affairs.
the war strengthened the office of the presidency swept the nation together in a tide of emotion and confirmed the longstanding belief in the superiority of the new world over the old.
when it was over americans looked outward as never before touched they were sure with a special destiny.
a war for principle by the 1890s cuba and the nearby island of puerto rico comprised nearly all that remained of spains once vast empire in the new world.
several times cuban insurgents had rebelled against spanish rule including a decade long rebellion from 1868 to 1878 the ten years war that failed to settle the conflict.
the depression of 1893 damaged the cuban economy and the wilson gorman tariff of 1894 prostrated it.
duties on sugar cubas lifeblood were raised 40 percent.
with the islands sugar market in ruins discontent with spanish rule heightened and in late february 1895 revolt again broke out.
recognizing the importance of the nearby united states cuban insurgents established a junta in new york city to raise money buy weapons and wage a propaganda war to sway american public opinion.
conditions in cuba were grim.
the insurgents pursued a hit and run scorched earth policy to force the spanish to leave.
spain committed more than two hundred thousand soldiers the spanish commander who had won with similar tactics in 1878 tried to pin the insurgents in the eastern part of the island where they could be cornered and destroyed.
when this strategy failed spain in january 1896 sent a new commander general valeriano weyler y nicolau.
relentless and brutal weyler gave the rebels ten days to lay down their arms.
he then put into effect a reconcentration policy designed to move the native population into camps and destroy the rebellions popular base.
herded into fortified areas cubans died by the thousands victims of unsanitary conditions overcrowding and disease.
stories in american newspapers spurred a wave of sympathy for the insurgents.
two brash newspaper publishers in new york city william randolph hearst of the new york journal and joseph pulitzer of the new york world hoped to use the situation in cuba to increase sales of their newspapers.
to do so they published accounts of lurid spanish atrocities rebel victories and of innocent cuban women harassed by spanish troops.
because of the yellow color of the comic strips in both papers the tactic became known as yellow journalism and some blamed it for causing the war.
in actual fact it did not.
the conflict stemmed from larger disputes in policies and perceptions between spain and the united states.
grover cleveland under whose administration the rebellion began preferred spanish rule to the kind of turmoil that might invite foreign intervention.
opposed to the annexation of cuba he issued a proclamation of neutrality and tried to restrain public opinion.
in 1896 congress passed a resolution favoring recognition of cuban belligerence but cleveland ignored it.
instead he offered to mediate the struggle an offer spain declined.
taking office in march 1897 president mckinley also urged neutrality but leaned slightly toward the insurgents.
he immediately sent a trusted aide on a fact finding mission to cuba the aide reported in mid 1897 that weylers policy had wrapped cuba in the stillness of death and the silence of desolation the report in hand mckinley offered to mediate the struggle but concerned over the suffering he protested against spains uncivilized and inhuman conduct.
the united states he made clear did not contest spains right to fight the rebellion but insisted it be done within humane limits.
late in 1897 a change in government in madrid brought a temporary lull in the crisis.
the new government recalled weyler and agreed to offer the cubans some form of autonomy.
it also declared an amnesty for political prisoners and released americans from cuban jails.
the new initiatives pleased mckinley though he again warned spain that it must find a humane end to the rebellion.
then in january 1898 spanish army officers led riots in havana against the new autonomy policy shaking the presidents confidence in madrids control over conditions in cuba.
mckinley ordered the battleship maine to havana to demonstrate strength and protect american citizens if necessary.
on february 9 1898 the new york journal a leader of the yellow press published a letter stolen from enrique dupuy de lme the spanish ambassador in washington.
in the letter which was private correspondence to a friend de lme called mckinley weak a would be politician and a bidder for the admiration of the crowd many americans were angered by the insult mckinley himself was more worried about other sections of the letter that revealed spanish insincerity in the negotiations.
de lme immediately resigned and went home but the damage was done.
a few days later at 9 40 in the evening of february 15 an explosion tore through the hull of the maine riding at anchor in havana harbor.
the ship a trim symbol of the new steel navy sank quickly 266 lives were lost.
mckinley cautioned patience and promised an immediate investigation.
crowds gathered quietly on capitol hill and outside the white house mourning the lost men.
soon there was a new slogan remember the maine and to hell with spain the most recent study of the maine incident blames the sinking on an accidental internal explosion caused perhaps by spontaneous combustion in poorly ventilated coal bunkers.
in 1898 americans blamed it on spain.
spaniards were hanged in effigy in many communities.
roosevelt william jennings bryan and others urged war but mckinley delayed hopeful that spain might yet agree to an armistice and perhaps cuban independence.
in early march 1898 wanting to be ready for war if it came mckinley asked congress for 50 million in emergency defense appropriations a request congress promptly approved.
the unanimous vote stunned spain allowing the president a latitude that was highly unusual for the era it appropriated the money for the national defense and for each and every purpose connected therewith to be expended at the discretion of the president in late march the report of the investigating board blamed the sinking of the maine on an external and thus presumably spanish explosion.
pressures for war increased.
on march 27 mckinley cabled spain his final terms.
he asked spain to declare an armistice end the reconcentration war with spain watch the video burial of the maine victims this photo of the burial procession of victims of the maine was taken at key west fl on march 27 1898.
two hundred sixty six sailors and marines were killed in the explosion in havana harbor.
policy and implicitly move toward cuban independence.
when the spanish answer came it conceded some things but not in mckinleys judgment the important ones.
spain offered a suspension of hostilities but not an armistice and left the spanish commander in cuba to set the length and terms of the suspension.
it also revoked the reconcentration policy.
but the spanish response made no mention of a true armistice mckinleys offer to mediate or cubas independence.
reluctantly mckinley prepared his war message.
congress heard it on april 11 1898.
on april 19 congress passed a joint resolution declaring cuba independent and authorizing the president to use the army and navy to expel the spanish from it.
the teller amendment offered by colorado senator henry m teller pledged that the united states had no intention of annexing the island.
on april 21 spain severed diplomatic relations.
the following day mckinley proclaimed a blockade of cuba and called for 125 000 volunteers.
on monday april 25 congress passed a declaration of war.
late that afternoon mckinley signed it.
some historians have suggested that in leading the country toward war mckinley was weak and indecisive a victim of war hysteria in the congress and the country others have called him a wily manipulator for war and imperial gains.
in truth he was neither.
throughout the spanish crisis mckinley pursued a moderate middle course that sought to end the suffering in cuba promote cubas independence and allow spain time to adjust to the loss of the remnant of empire.
he also wanted peace as did spain but in the end the conflicting national interests of the two countries brought them to war.
chapter 21 toward empire a splendid little war ten weeks after the declaration of war the fighting was over.
for americans they were ten glorious dizzying weeks with victories to fill every headline and slogans to suit every taste.
no war can be a happy occasion for those who fight it but the spanishamerican war came closer than most.
declared in april it ended in august.
relatively few americans died and the quick victory seemed to verify burgeoning american power though sherwood anderson the author suggested that fighting a weakened spain was like robbing an old gypsy woman in a vacant lot at night after a fair john hay soon to be mckinleys secretary of state called it a splendid little war at the outset the united states was militarily unprepared.
unlike the navy the army had not been rebuilt or modernized and it had shrunk drastically since the day thirty three years before when grants great civil war army marched sixty abreast two hundred thousand strong down washingtons pennsylvania avenue.
in 1898 the regular army consisted of only twenty eight thousand officers and men most of them more experienced in quelling indian uprisings than fighting large scale battles.
when mckinley called for 125 000 volunteers as many as one million young americans responded.
ohio alone had 100 000 volunteers.
keeping the regular army units intact war department officials enlisted the volunteers in national guard units that were then integrated into the national army.
men clamored to join.
the secretary of war feared there is going to be more trouble to satisfy those who are not going than to find those who are willing to go in an army inundated with men problems of equipment and supply quickly appeared.
the regulars had the new 30 caliber krag jorgensen rifles but national guard units carried civil war springfield rifles that used old black powder cartridges.
the cartridges gave off a puff of smoke when fired neatly marking the troops position.
spanish troops were better equipped they had modern mausers with smokeless powder which they used to devastating effect.
food was also a problem as was sickness.
the war department fell behind in supplies and received many complaints about the canned beef it offered the men.
tropical disease felled many soldiers.
scores took ill after landing in cuba and the philippines and it was not uncommon for half a regiment to be unable to answer the bugle call.
americans then believed that a foreign war should be fought by the hometown military unit acting as an extension of their community soldiers identified with their hometowns dressed in the local fashion and thought of themselves as members of a town unit in a national army.
the poet carl sandburg twenty years old in 1898 rushed to join the army and called his unit a living part of his hometown of galesburg illinois.
and the citizens of galesburg for their part took a special interest in sandburgs unit in a fashion repeated in countless towns across the country.
not surprisingly then national guard units mirrored the social patterns of their communities.
since everyone knew each other there was an easygoing familiarity tempered by the deference charge of the 24th and 25th colored infantry and rescue of the rough riders at san juan hill july 2 1898 colored lithograph by kurz and allison 1899 above.
the twenty fourth and twenty fifth colored infantry regiments served with exceptional gallantry in the spanish american war.
charles young right an 1889 graduate of west point was the only african american officer in the army during the spanish american war except for a few chaplains.
war with spain view the map the spanish american war united states tampa china atlantic ocean florida miami nassau china c chi na s sea key west us havana sinking of the maine feb 15 1898 nav a l blo cka d bahamas e el caney and san juan kettle hill santiago july 1 1898 de cuba ey manila 500 miles philippines 0 500 km guantnamo bay us na santiago jamaica 400 miles 400 km br.
pa pacific p acific a c ocean oc c an ce n cuba us e naval blockad cayman is.
formosa hong kong de w gulf of mexico br.
kingston santiago de cuba july 1 2 1898 haiti val b loc ka dominican republic port au prince hispaniola santo domingo u s forces de spanish forces san juan puerto rico u s victories caribbean sea u s naval blockade disputes regarding cuba and the sinking of the battleship u s s.
maine prompted the united states to declare war on spain in 1898.
the two nations dueled over another spanish possession the philippines.
the treaty of paris of 1898 that ended the war granted cuba its independence although it remained an american protectorate until 1934 and established u s control over puerto rico guam and the philippines.
that went with hometown wealth occupation education and length of residence.
enlisted men resented officers who grabbed too much authority and they expected officers and men to call each other by their first names.
sandburg knew most of the privates in his unit had worked for his corporal and had gone to school with the first lieutenant.
officers and men of the guard mingle on a plane of beautiful equality said a visitor to one volunteer camp.
privates invade the tents of their officers at will and yell at them half the length of the street each community thought of the hometown unit as its own unit an extension of itself.
in later wars the government censored news and dominated press relations there was little censorship in the war with spain and the freshest news arrived in the latest letter home.
small town newspapers printed news of the men and townswomen knit special red or white bellybands of stitched flannel thought to ward off tropical fevers.
towns sent food clothing and occasionally even local doctors to the front.
at the close of the war the clyde ohio ladies society collected funds to provide each member of the towns company a medal struck on behalf of the town.
smoked yankees when the invasion force sailed for cuba nearly one fourth of it was african american.
in 1898 the regular army included four regiments of african american soldiers the twenty fourth and twenty fifth infantry and the ninth and tenth cavalry.
black regiments had served with distinction in campaigns against the indians in the west.
most african american troops in fact were posted in the west no eastern community would accept them.
a troop of the ninth cavalry was stationed in virginia in 1891 but whites protested and the troop was ordered back to the west.
when the war broke out the war department called for five black volunteer regiments.
the army needed men and military authorities were sure that black men had a natural immunity to the climate and diseases of the tropics.
but most state governors refused to accept black volunteers.
only alabama ohio and massachusetts mustered in black units in response to mckinleys first call for volunteers.
company l of the sixth massachusetts regiment took part in the invasion of puerto rico in july 1898 the only one of the black volunteer units to see action in the caribbean.
african american leaders among them p b s pinchback former acting governor of louisiana and george white of north carolina the lone african american member of congress protested the discrimination.
the mckinley administration intervened and in the end the volunteer army included more than ten thousand black troops.
orders quickly went out to the four black regular army regiments in the west to move to camps in the south to prepare for the invasion of cuba.
crowds and cheers followed the troop trains across the plains but as they crossed into kentucky and tennessee the cheering stopped.
welcoming crowds were kept away from the trains and the troops were hustled onward.
station restaurants chapter 21 toward empire refused to serve them all waiting rooms were segregated.
it mattered not if we were soldiers of the united states and going to fight for the honor of our country sergeant frank w pullen of the twenty fourth infantry wrote we were niggers as they called us and treated us with contempt many soldiers were not prepared to put up with the treatment.
those stationed near chickamauga park tennessee shot at some whites who insulted them and forcibly desegregated the railroad cars on the line into chattanooga.
troops training near macon georgia refused to ride in the segregated trailers attached to the trolleys and fights broke out.
discovering a macon park with a sign saying dogs and niggers not allowed they invaded it and removed the sign.
they also chopped down a tree in the park that had been used for lynchings.
more than four thousand black troops training near tampa and lakeland florida found segregated saloons cafes and drugstores.
here the negro is not allowed to purchase over the same counter in some stores as the white man purchases over chaplain george w prioleau charged.
why sir the negro of this country is a freeman and yet a slave.
talk about fighting and freeing poor cuba and of spains brutality of cubas murdered thousands and starving reconcentradoes.
is america any better than spain when the invasion force sailed a few days later segregation continued on some of the troopships.
blacks were assigned to the lowest decks or whites and blacks were placed on different sides of the ship.
but the confusion of war often ended the problem if only temporarily.
blacks took command as white officers died and spanish troops soon came to fear the smoked yankees as they called them.
black soldiers played a major role in the cuban campaign and probably staved off defeat for the rough riders at san juan hill.
in cuba they won twenty six certificates of merit and five congressional medals of honor.
the course of the war mahans naval war college had begun studying strategy for a war with spain in 1895.
by 1898 it had a detailed plan for operations in the caribbean and pacific.
naval strategy was simple destroy the spanish fleet damage spains merchant marine and harry the colonies or the coast of spain.
planners were excited two steam powered armored fleets had yet to meet in battle anywhere in the world.
the armys task was more difficult.
it had to defend the united states invade cuba and probably puerto rico and undertake possible action in far flung places such as the philippines or spain.
even before war was declared the secretary of war arranged joint planning between the army and navy.
military intelligence was plentiful and planners knew the numbers and locations of the spanish troops.
earlier they had rejected a proposal to send an officer in disguise to map cuban harbors such things they said were simply not done in peacetime.
still the war departments new military information division a sign of the increasing professionalization of the army had detailed diagrams of spanish fortifications in havana and other points.
on the afternoon of april 20 1898 mckinley summoned the strategists to the white house to the dismay of those who wanted a more aggressive policy they decided on the limited strategy of blockading cuba sending arms to the insurgents and annoying the spanish with small thrusts by the army.
victories soon changed the strategy.
in case of war longstanding naval plans had called for a holding action against the spanish base in the philippines.
on may 1 1898 with the war barely a week old commodore george dewey commander of the asiatic squadron located at hong kong crushed the spanish fleet in manila bay.
suddenly manila and the philippines lay within american grasp.
at home dewey portraits songs and poems blossomed everywhere and his calm order to the flagships captain you may fire when ready gridley hung on every tongue.
dewey had two modern cruisers a gunboat and a civil war paddle steamer.
he sank eight spanish warships.
dewey had no troops to attack the spanish army in manila but the war department stunned by the speed and size of the victory quickly raised an expeditionary force.
on august 13 1898 the troops accepted the surrender of manila and with it the philippines.
mckinley and his aides were worried about admiral pascual cerveras main spanish fleet thought to be headed across the atlantic for an attack on florida.
on may 13 the navy found cerveras ships near martinique in the caribbean but then lost them again.
a few days later cervera slipped secretly into the harbor of santiago de cuba a city on the islands southern coast.
but a spy in the havana telegraph office alerted the americans and on may 28 a superior american force under admiral william t sampson bottled cervera up.
in early june a small force of marines seized guantnamo bay the great harbor on the south of the island.
they established depots for the navy to refuel and pinned down spanish troops in the area.
on june 14 an invasion force of about seventeen thousand men set sail from tampa.
seven days later they landed at daiquiri on cubas southeastern coast.
all was confusion but the spanish offered no resistance.
helped by cuban insurgents the americans immediately pushed west toward santiago which they hoped to surround and capture.
at first the advance through the lush tropical countryside was peaceful.
the first battle broke out at las guasimas a crossroads on the santiago road.
after a sharp fight the spanish fell back.
on july 1 the rough riders troops from the four black regiments and the other regulars reached the strong fortifications at el caney and san juan hill.
black soldiers of the twenty fifth infantry charged the el caney blockhouses surprising the spanish defenders with comanche yells.
for the better part of a day the defenders fought stubbornly and held back the armys elite corps.
in the confusion of battle roosevelt rallied an assortment of infantry and cavalry to take kettle hill adjacent to san juan hill.
they charged directly into the spanish guns roosevelt at their head mounted on a horse a blue polka dot handkerchief floating from the brim of his sombrero.
i waved my hat and we went up the hill with a rush he recalled in his autobiography.
actually it was not quite so easy.
losses were heavy eighty nine rough riders were killed or wounded in the attack.
dense foliage concealed the enemy and smokeless powder gave no clue to their position.
at nightfall the surviving spanish defenders withdrew and the americans prepared for the counterattack.
acquisition of empire american troops now occupied the ridges overlooking santiago.
they were weakened by sickness a fact unknown to the spanish who decided the city was lost.
the spanish command in havana ordered cervera to run for the open sea although he knew the attempt to escape was hopeless.
on the morning of july 3 cerveras squadron steamed down the bay and out through the harbors narrow channel but the waiting american fleet closed in and in a few hours every spanish vessel was destroyed.
two weeks later santiago surrendered.
soon thereafter army troops meeting little resistance occupied puerto rico.
cervera had commanded spains only battle fleet and when it sank spain was helpless against attacks on the colonies or even its own shores.
the war was over.
lasting 113 days it took relatively few lives most of them the result of accident yellow fever malaria and typhoid in cuba.
of the 5 500 americans who died in view the closer look the war only 379 were killed in battle.
the navy lost one man in the battle at santiago bay and only one to heatstroke in the stunning victory in manila bay.
acquisition of empire what were the various viewpoints about the acquisition of empire after the war with spain.
late in the afternoon of august 12 1898 representatives of spain and the united states met in mckinleys white house office to sign the preliminary instrument of peace.
secretary of state william r day beckoned a presidential aide over to a large globe remarking lets see what we get by this american empire alaska asia north aleutian is.
america united states cea ea an pacific ocean wake is.
guam atlantic ocean cuba u s acquires exclusive rights to lease naval bases midway is.
philippine is.
hawaiian an is is.
puerto rico johnston ohn is.
1858 kingman reef 1858 palmyra is.
1898 howland is.
equator jarvis is.
american samoa australia american empire 1900 with the treaty of paris the united states gained an expanded colonial empire stretching from the caribbean to the far pacific.
it embraced puerto rico alaska hawaii part of samoa guam the philippines and a chain of pacific islands.
the dates on the map refer to the date of u s acquisition.
south america chapter 21 toward empire what the united states got was an expansion of its territory and an even larger expansion of its responsibilities.
according to the preliminary agreement spain granted independence to cuba ceded puerto rico and the pacific island of guam to the united states and allowed americans to occupy manila until the two countries reached final agreement on the philippines.
to mckinley the philippines were the problem.
puerto rico was close to the mainland and it appealed even to many of the opponents of expansion.
guam was small and unknown it escaped attention.
the philippines on the other hand were huge sprawling and thousands of miles from america.
mckinley weighed a number of alternatives for the philippines but he liked none of them.
he believed he could not give the islands back to spain public opinion would not allow it.
he might turn them over to another nation but then they would fall as he later said a golden apple of discord among the rival powers germany japan great britain and russia had all expressed interest in acquiring them.
germany even sent a large fleet to manila and laid plans to take the philippines if the united states let them go.
rejecting those alternatives mckinley considered independence for the islands but was soon talked out of it.
people who had been there reflecting the eras racism told him the filipinos were not ready for independence.
he thought of establishing an american protectorate but discarded the idea convinced it would bring american responsibilities without full american control.
sifting the alternatives mckinley decided there was only one practical policy annex the philippines with an eye to future independence after a period of tutelage.
at first hesitant american opinion was swinging to the same conclusion.
religious and missionary organizations appealed to mckinley to hold on to the philippines in order to christianize them.
some merchants and industrialists saw them as the key to the china market and the wealth of asia.
many americans simply regarded them as the legitimate fruits of war.
in october 1898 representatives of the united states and spain met in paris to discuss a peace treaty.
spain agreed to recognize cubas independence assume the cuban debt and cede puerto rico and guam to the united states.
acting on instructions from mckinley the american representatives demanded the cession of the philippines.
grave as are the responsibilities and unforeseen as are the difficulties which are before us the president can see but one plain path of duty the acceptance of the archipelago the instructions said.
in return the united states offered a payment of 20 million.
spain resisted but had little choice and on december 10 1898 the american and spanish representatives signed the treaty of paris.
the treaty of paris debate submitted to the senate for ratification the treaty set off a storm of debate throughout the country.
industrialist andrew carnegie reformer jane addams labor leader samuel gompers prominent republicans such as thomas b reed and john sherman mark twain william dean howells and a host of others argued forcefully against annexing the philippines.
annexation of the philippines the anti imperialists protested over and over again violated the very principles of independence and self determination on which the united states was founded.
some labor leaders feared the importation of cheap labor from new pacific colonies.
gompers warned about the halfbreeds and semi barbaric people who might undercut wages and the union movement.
other anti imperialists argued against assimilation of different races spanish americans as one said with all the mixture of indian and negro blood and malays and other unspeakable asiatics by the tens of millions such racial views were also common among those favoring expansion and the anti imperialists usually focused on different arguments.
if the united states established a tyranny abroad they were sure there would soon be tyranny at home.
this nation declared william jennings bryan cannot endure half republic and half colony half free and half vassal charles francis adams jr warned that the possession of colonies meant big armies government and debts an income tax looms up in the largest possible proportions he said.
bryan scoffed at the argument that colonies were good for trade pointing out it is not necessary to own people to trade with them e l godkin the editor of the nation george f hoar a leading republican senator and many others thought there was no way to reconcile the countrys republican ideals with the practice of keeping people under heel abroad.
as one of them put it dewey took manila with the loss of one man and all our institutions to booker t washington the country had more important things to think about at home including its treatment of indians and blacks.
carnegie was so upset that he offered to buy filipino independence with a personal check for 20 million.
he was sure that keeping the philippines would divert attention from industrial development to foreign adventure would glorify physical force and would lead to a war against the filipinos themselves in which american soldiers who had signed up to fight the oppressor would end up shooting down the oppressed in november 1898 opponents of expansion formed the anti imperialist league to fight against the peace treaty.
local leagues sprang up in boston new york philadelphia and many other cities the parent league claimed thirty thousand members and more than half a million contributors membership centered in new england the cause was less popular in the west and south.
it enlisted more democrats than republicans though never a majority of either.
the anti imperialists were weakened by the fact that they lacked a coherent program.
some favored keeping naval bases in the conquered areas.
some wanted hawaii and puerto rico but not the philippines.
others wanted nothing at all to do with any colonies.
most simply wished that dewey had sailed away after beating the spanish at manila bay.
the treaty debate in the senate lasted a month.
pressing hard for ratification mckinley earlier toured the south to rally support and consulted closely with senators.
though opposed to taking the philippines bryan supported ratification in order to end the war his support influenced some democratic votes.
still on the final weekend before the vote the treaty was two votes short.
that saturday night news reached washington that fighting had broken out between american troops and filipino insurgents who demanded immediate independence.
the news acquisition of empire read the document carl schurz platform of the american anti imperialist league carl schurz and other anti imperialists of the american anti imperialists league lobbied president mckinley not to annex the philippines after the spanish american war in 1898.
these anti imperialists argued that annexation of the philippines would violate republican principles.
increased pressure to ratify the treaty which the senate did on february 6 1899 with two votes to spare.
an amendment promising independence as soon as the filipinos established a stable government lost by one vote.
the united states had a colonial empire.
guerrilla warfare in the philippines historians rarely write of the philippine american war but it was an important event in american history.
the war with spain was over a few months after it began but war with the filipinos lasted more than three years.
four times as many american soldiers fought in the philippines as in cuba.
for the first time americans fought men of a different color in an asian guerrilla war.
the philippine american war of 1898 1902 took a heavy toll 4 300 american lives and untold thousands of filipino lives estimates range from 50 000 to 200 000.
emilio aguinaldo the filipino leader was twenty nine years old in 1898.
an early organizer of the anti spanish resistance he had gone into exile in hong kong from there he welcomed the outbreak of the spanish american war.
certain the united states would grant independence he worked for an american victory.
filipino insurgents helped guide dewey into manila bay and dewey himself sent a ship to hong kong to bring back aguinaldo to lead a native uprising against the spanish.
on june 12 1898 the insurgents proclaimed their independence.
cooperating with the americans they drove the spanish out of many areas of the islands.
in the liberated regions aguinaldo established local governments with appointed provincial governors.
he waited impatiently for american recognition but mckinley and others had concluded that the filipinos were not ready.
soon warfare broke out between the filipinos and americans over the question of filipino independence.
by late 1899 the american army had defeated and dispersed the organized filipino army but claims of victory proved premature.
aguinaldo and his advisers shifted to guerrilla tactics striking suddenly and then melting into the jungle or friendly native villages.
in many areas the americans ruled the day the guerrillas the night.
there were terrible atrocities on both sides.
the americans found themselves using brutal weyler like tactics.
after any attack on an american patrol the americans burned all the houses in the nearest district.
they tortured people and executed prisoners.
they established protected zones and herded filipinos into them.
seizing or destroying all food outside the zones they starved many guerrillas into submission.
bryan tried to turn the election of 1900 into a debate over imperialism but the attempt failed.
for one thing he himself refused to give up the silver issue which cost him some support among anti imperialists in the northeast who were for gold.
mckinley moreover was able to take advantage of the surging economy and he could defend expansion as an accomplished fact.
it is no longer a question of expansion with us he told one audience.
if there is any question at all it is a question of contraction and who is going to contract riding a wave of patriotism and prosperity mckinley won the election handily by an even larger margin than he had in 1896.
in 1900 mckinley sent a special philippine commission to the islands under william howard taft a prominent ohio judge.
directed to establish a civil government the commission organized municipal administrations and in stages created a government for the philippines.
in march 1901 five american soldiers tricked their way into aguinaldos camp deep in the mountains and took him prisoner.
back in manila he signed a proclamation urging his people to end the fighting.
some guerrillas held out for another year but to no avail.
on july 4 1901 authority was transferred from the army to taft who was named civilian governor of the islands and his civilian commission.
mckinley reaffirmed his purpose to grant the filipinos self government as soon as they were deemed ready for it.
given broad powers the taft commission introduced many changes.
new schools provided education and vocational training for filipinos of all social classes.
the americans built roads and bridges reformed the judiciary restructured the tax system and introduced sanitation and vaccination programs.
they established local governments built on filipino traditions and hierarchies.
chapter 21 toward empire greenland denmark iceland denmark sweden denmark the netherlands great german britain empire belgium austriafrance hungary alaska u s canada atlantic ocean italy greece morocco egypt puerto rico u s cuba french west africa liberia belgian congo c n e r f angola h ecuador brazil peru bolivia paraguay german southwest africa japan burma siam french indochina philippine islands ethiopia pacific islands german 1899 british east africa german east africa du tch east in dies indian ocean madagascar australia union of south africa uruguay chile korea pacific ocean india angloegyptian sudan eq ua to ria colombia china afghanistan persia arabia mo za mb ique mexico venezuela equator ottoman empire tripoli l africa pacific ocean spain ma nc hu ri a portugal united states russian empire argentina new zealand world colonial empires 1900 belgium german empire italy portugal united states france great britain the netherlands spain other independent states world colonial empires 1900 events of the nineteenth century increased european hegemony over the world.
by 1900 most independent african nations had disappeared and the major european nations had divided the continent among themselves.
in the east the european powers and japan took advantage of chinas internal weakness to gain both trading ports and economic concessions.
taft encouraged filipino participation in government.
during the following decades other measures broadened filipino rights.
independence finally came on july 4 1946 nearly fifty years after aguinaldo proclaimed it.
governing the empire ruling the colonies raised new and perplexing questions.
how could and how should the distant dependencies be governed.
did their inhabitants have the rights of american citizens.
some people contended that acquisition did not automatically incorporate the new possessions into the united states and endow them with constitutional privileges.
others argued that the constitution followed the flag meaning that acquisition made the possessions part of the nation and thus entitled them to all constitutional guarantees.
a third group suggested that only fundamental constitutional guarantees citizenship the right to vote and the right to trial by jury not formal privileges the right to use american currency the right to be taxed and the right to run for the presidency were applicable to the new empire.
in a series of cases between 1901 and 1904 de lima v bidwell dooley v u s and downes v bidwell the supreme court asserted the principle that the constitution did not automatically and immediately apply to the people of an annexed territory and did not confer upon them all the privileges of u s citizenship.
instead congress could specifically extend such constitutional provisions as it saw fit.
ye es the secretary of war said of the courts ambiguous rulings as near as i can make out the constitution follows the flag but doesnt quite catch up with it four dependencies hawaii alaska guam and puerto rico were organized quickly.
in 1900 congress granted territorial status to hawaii gave american citizenship to all citizens of the hawaiian republic authorized an elective legislature and provided for a governor appointed from washington.
a similar measure made alaska a territory in 1912.
guam and american samoa were simply placed under the control of naval officers.
unlike the filipinos puerto ricans readily accepted the wars outcome and mckinley early withdrew troops from the island.
the foraker act of 1900 established civil government in puerto rico.
it organized the island as a territory made its residents citizens of puerto rico u s citizenship was extended to them in 1917 and empowered the president to appoint a governor general and a council to serve as the upper house of the legislature.
a lower house of delegates was to be elected.
acquisition of empire view the image emilio aguinaldo cubans themselves.
it repaired the damage of the civil war built roads and schools and established order in rural areas.
a public health campaign headed by dr walter reed an army surgeon wiped out yellow fever.
most troops withdrew at the end of 1899 but a small american occupation force remained until may 1902.
when it sailed for home the cubans at last had a form of independence but they were still under the clear domination of their neighbor to the north.
the open door emilio aguinaldo in the philippines 1896.
aguinaldos forces helped the americans drive spain out of the philippines expecting that the united states would recognize filipino independence.
when the united states failed to do so aguinaldo led his forces in warfare against the americans.
cuba proved a trickier matter.
mckinley asserted the authority of the united states over conquered territory and promised to govern the island until the cubans had established a firm and stable government of their own.
i want you to go down there to get the people ready for a republican form of government he instructed general leonard wood commander of the army in cuba until 1902.
i leave the details of procedure to you.
give them a good school system try to straighten out their ports and put them on their feet as best you can.
we want to do all we can for them and to get out of the island as soon as we safely can wood moved quickly to implement the instructions.
early in 1900 he completed a census of the cuban population conducted municipal elections and arranged the election of delegates to a constitutional convention.
the convention adopted a constitution modeled on the u s constitution and at woods prodding included provisions for future relations with the united states.
known as the platt amendment to the new cuban constitution the provisions stipulated that cuba should make no treaties with other powers that might impair its independence acquire no debts it could not pay and lease naval bases such as guantnamo bay to the united states.
most important the amendment empowered the united states to intervene in cuba to maintain orderly government.
between 1898 and 1902 the american military government worked hard for the economic and political revival of the island though it often demonstrated a paternalistic attitude toward the poised in the philippines the united states had become an asian power on the doorstep of china.
weakened by years of warfare china in 1898 and 1899 was unable to resist foreign influence.
japan england france germany and russia eyed it covetously dividing parts of the country into spheres of influence they forced china to grant concessions that allowed them exclusive rights to develop particular areas and threatened american hopes for extensive trade with the country.
mckinley first outlined a new china policy in september 1898 when he said that americans sought more trade but we seek no advantages in the orient which are not common to all.
asking only the open door for ourselves we are ready to accord the open door to others in september 1899 secretary of state john hay addressed identical diplomatic notes to england germany and russia and later to france japan and italy asking them to join the united states in establishing the open door policy.
this policy urged three agreements nations possessing a sphere of influence would respect the rights and privileges of other nations in that sphere the chinese government would continue to collect tariff duties in all spheres and nations would not discriminate against other nations in levying port dues and railroad rates within their respective spheres of influence.
under the open door policy the united states would retain many commercial advantages it might lose if china was partitioned into spheres of influence.
mckinley and hay also attempted to preserve for the chinese some semblance of national authority.
great britain most nearly accepted the principle of the open door.
russia declined to approve it and the other powers sending evasive replies stated they would agree only if all the other nations did.
hay turned the situation to american advantage by boldly announcing in march 1900 that all the powers had accepted the open door policy.
see the feature essay the 400 million customers of china pp.
508 510 for more on u s trade in china.
the policys first test came just three months later with the outbreak of the boxer rebellion in peking now beijing.
in june 1900 a secret intensely nationalistic chinese society called the boxers tried to oust all foreigners from their country.
overrunning peking they drove foreigners into their legations and penned them up for nearly two months.
in the end the united states joined britain germany and other powers in sending troops to lift the siege.
fearing that the rebellion gave some nations especially germany and russia an excuse to expand their spheres of influence hay took quick action to emphasize american policy.
in july he sent off another round of open door notes affirming complete the assignment the 400 million customers of china on myhistorylab feature essay the 400 million customers of china dukes cameo cigarettes card depicting the ruler flag and coat of arms of china.
the w duke sons company merged with other tobacco manufacturers in 1890 to form the american tobacco company which began selling cigarettes in china that same year.
t he issue of american trade with china so much in the news today has been a concern of the united states for more than two centuries.
many of the things americans now buy and wear carry the label made in china the united states had long hoped that the chinese would be buying goods made in the u s a but it has not worked out entirely that way.
for a time it seemed it would.
when the united states won independence from great britain it opened up markets the british had monopolized such as china whose huge population of 400 million people fascinated american business leaders throughout the nineteenth century.
let me say to the businessmen of america a member of congress exclaimed in 1898 look to the land of the setting sun look to the pacific.
there are teeming millions there who will ere long want to be fed and clothed the same as we are step by step americans in the 1800s moved closer to those teeming millions by actions including secretary of state william h sewards 1867 purchase of alaska and the later decisions to acquire hawaii and construct a canal across the isthmus of panama.
president william mckinley offered several reasons for retaining the philippine islands after the spanish american war but one of them was their nearness to china.
adding a sense of urgency business and political leaders during the 1880s and 1890s became increasingly concerned that the avalanche of goods pouring out of the nations farms and factories outpaced the purchasing power of customers at home.
presidents from mckinley to woodrow wilson pointed out that businesses must find new markets abroad or face collapse.
o ur industries have expanded to such a point wilson argued in 1912 that they will burst their jackets if they cannot find a free outlet to the markets of the world but doing that was not easy in china whose great distances different language and restrictive laws stymied even some of americas most legendary business leaders.
both j p morgan the famed financier who bought up railroads everywhere and created the gigantic u s steel company and e h harriman a railroad magnate who dreamed of china as part of a transportation system that circled the globe tried and failed.
others who took account of chinese customs and conditions succeeded.
bring me the atlas james b duke head of the american tobacco company said to an aide soon after he founded the company.
turning the pages he quickly scanned population figures until he came to one he liked pop.
430 000 000 that he said is where we are going to sell cigarettes and that place of course was china.
american tobacco shipped its first cigarettes to china in 1890 and watched sales rise dramatically from 1 25 billion cigarettes in 1902 to 9 75 billion in 1912 and 12 billion in 1916.
it built large plants in two chinese cities established key distribution centers and advertised widely.
the company employed some native chinese to market its cigarettes but also hired teams of westerners usually bachelors under the age of 25 who could accept the risks of living and working in china.
urging them to learn colloquial chinese the company held language exams every six months and awarded a 500 bonus to anyone who passed.
before long american tobacco produced nearly two thirds of the cigarettes consumed in china.
other businesses adopted similar strategies among them john d rockefellers standard oil company which by 1910 marketed more than half the kerosene sold in china.
standards famous red kerosene tin flattened to make roofs and walls of houses around the world became a symbol of americas economic reach.
significantly americans in the progressive period exported not only oil and tobacco but also major social reforms reflecting a certainty so common in our history that the chinese could not do it for themselves.
the pigtails the old pinched shoes the parasols and banners a leading reform magazine said in 1915 must give way to parks and sewers and filtered water and war on rats and mosquitoes american agencies and universities eagerly took up the far eastern question as lillian wald a prominent female reformer put it.
the rockefeller foundation worked to encourage cultivation of arable land the suffragist magazine campaigned to give chinese women the vote americans in china tried to improve the postal service and introduce the wireless radio the american red cross employed engineers to eliminate floods on chinese rivers and open up new farmland.
before long the young mens christian association extended its mission to china aiming to improve schools form settlement houses in major cities and reform the sanitation of chinas prisons parks and businesses.
drawing on its staff of young dedicated college graduates it held literacy campaigns worked for better public health paid for social surveys and tried to provide recreation and residences for some of chinas poor.
students from princeton university established a settlement house soon known as princeton in peking.
in 1906 yale university students founded the yale in china medical college at changsha to function as one of the founders said as a center for the uplifting of leading chinese young men toward civilization heady ideas they were typical of the united states in the progressive period a conviction that changing the environment would change people a desire to expand business growth and progressive reform and export both to other countries.
business leaders eager to acquire more and more of the vast china market were among those who urged the mckinley administration to establish the famed open door.
the great depression and world war ii diverted american attention from the china market but once the war ended business leaders again flocked there only to find that the victory in 1949 of mao tse tung and his communist peoples liberation army had closed the door to trade.
china emptied of americans.
the last american diplomats left in the spring of 1950 followed soon after by business figures and missionaries.
it took two decades to begin a thaw even longer to begin the serious business of trading once again.
president richard m nixon visited china in 1972 in a historic trip that signaled a new direction in relations between the two countries.
six years later president jimmy carter restored diplomatic relations.
sounding very much like his nineteenth century predecessors president bill clinton noted in 2000 that china with more than a billion people is home to the largest potential market in the world backed by the united states china entered the world trade organization in 2001 with much of american business still hopeful of capturing the china trade in favor.
and the chinese did buy american goods as those businesses hoped 35 billion worth in the year 2000 making china americas fifth largest market in the world.
american tobacco companies continue to sell millions of cigarettes in china companies dealing in aircraft engines power plant equipment soybeans cotton and fruit also do well.
but the old dream proves elusive still.
americans buy from china far more than the chinese buy from the united states about six times more in fact.
by the end of 2005 the u s deficit with china reached 202 billion the largest trade deficit in the history of the world the u s trade representative said in a recent speech in beijing.
that deficit continues to grow.
with many american name brands now made in china the chinese have begun to wonder what a made in the u s a label really means.
questions for discussion 1.
why did american business in the late nineteenth century want to tap the china market.
what social reforms did americans in the progressive era want to export to china.
chapter 21 toward empire an american cartoon of 1900 showing uncle sam opening china to free trade with the key of american diplomacy while economic competitors england and russia look on.
u s commitment to equal commercial opportunity and respect for chinas independence.
while the first open door notes had implied recognition of chinas continued independence the second notes explicitly stated the need to preserve it.
together the two notes composed the open door policy which became a central element in american policy in the far east.
to some degree the policy tried to help china but it also led to further american meddling in the affairs of another country.
moreover by committing itself to a policy that americans were not prepared to defend militarily the mckinley administration left the opportunity for later controversy with japan and other expansion minded powers in the pacific.
conclusion outcome of the war with spain the war with spain over roosevelt and the rough riders sailed for home in mid august 1898.
they sauntered through the streets of new york the heroes of the city.
a few weeks later roosevelt bade them farewell.
they presented him with a reproduction of frederick remingtons famed bronze the bronco buster and close to tears he told them i am proud of this regiment beyond measure roosevelt later wrote an account of the war in which he played so central a role that mr dooley suggested if i was him id call th book alone in conclusion outcome of the war with spain cubia by then roosevelt was already governor of new york and on his way to the white house.
other soldiers were also glad to be home although they were sometimes resentful of the reception they found.
the war is over now said winslow hobson a black trooper from the ninth ohio and roosevelt.
and others white of course have all there is to be gotten out of it bravery in cuba and the philippines won some recognition for black soldiers but the war itself set back the cause of civil rights.
it spurred talk about inferior races at home and abroad and united whites in the north and south.
the negro might as well know it now as later a black editor said the closer the north and south get together by this war the harder he will have to fight to maintain a footing a fresh outburst of segregation and lynching occurred during the decade after the war.
mckinley and the republican party soared to new heights of popularity.
firmly established the republican majority dominated politics until 1932.
scandals arose about the canned beef and the conduct of the war department but there was none of the sharp sense of deception and betrayal that was to mark the years after world war i.
in a little more than a century the united states had grown from thirteen states stretched along a thin atlantic coastline into a world power that reached from the caribbean to the pacific.
as seward and others had hoped the nation now dominated its own hemisphere dealt with european powers on more equal terms and was a major power in asia.
chapter 21 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 21 toward empire on myhistorylab time line 1867 united states purchases alaska from russia 1895 cuban insurgents rebel against spanish rule 1898 battleship maine explodes in havana harbor midway islands are annexed treaty of washington between united states and great britain sets precedent for peaceful settlement of international disputes reciprocity treaty with hawaii binds hawaii economically and politically to united states united states acquires naval base in samoa congress approves funds for construction of first modern steel ships beginning of modern navy new treaty with hawaii gives united states exclusive use of pearl harbor first inter american conference meets in washington d c american settlers in hawaii overthrow queen liliuokalani provisional government established february congress declares war against spain april commodore dewey defeats spanish fleet at manila bay may united states annexes hawaii july americans defeat spanish at el caney san juan hill actually kettle hill and santiago july spain sues for peace august treaty of paris ends spanish american war december congress ratifies treaty of paris united states sends open door notes to britain germany russia france japan and italy philippine american war erupts foraker act establishes civil government in puerto rico platt amendment authorizes american intervention in cuba philippine american war ends with american victory chapter review america looks outward alaska russia canad hina why did americans look outward in the last half of the nineteenth century.
acquisition of empire alaska a north aleutian is.
americ un st pacific ocean japan in the late nineteenth century americans increasingly looked overseas influenced by the example of other nations and confidence in what their country could offer other peoples including christianity commerce and american values.
policy makers were sure that the nation needed a navy colonial outposts foreign markets and a new foreign policy.
p 492 hawaiian islands pacific ocean equator australia what were the various viewpoints about the acquisition of empire after the war with spain.
united s samoan islands war with spain what were the causes and results of the war with spain.
in 1898 the united states fought a war with spain which resulted in a quick victory and enormous changes for american society including a larger military an increased role for the federal government in american life the acquisition of colonies and increased power for the presidency.
p 497 in the peace treaty ending the war with spain the united states acquired a new empire including puerto rico guam and the philippines.
for the first time the united states owned territories overseas to which it did not intend to grant statehood.
that together with historical racial and other arguments caused an angry debate between those in favor and those opposing the new colonies.
adding to the furor was the outbreak of warfare between american troops and filipino insurgents in the philippines.
p 503 midway is.
philippine is.
guam hawaiian is.
johnston is.
1858 kingman reef 1858 palmyra is.
1898 howland is.
equato jarvis is.
american samoa australia study resources key terms and definitions isolationism a belief that the united states should avoid entanglements with other nations.
p 492 imperialism the policy of extending a nations power over other areas through military conquest economic domination or annexation.
p 492 yellow journalism to sell newspapers before and during the spanishamerican war publishers william randolph hearst and joseph pulitzer engaged in blatant sensationalization of the news which became known as yellow journalism although it did not cause the war it helped turn u s public opinion against spain.
p 498 teller amendment in this amendment to the declaration of war on spain in 1898 the united states pledged that it did not intend to annex cuba and that it would recognize cuban independence after the spanishamerican war.
p 499 anti imperialist league an organization formed in 1898 to fight the treaty of paris ending the spanish american war.
members opposed acquiring overseas colonies believing it would subvert american ideals and institutions.
membership centered in new england the cause was less popular in the south and west.
p 504 philippine american war a war fought from 1899 to 1903 to quell filipino resistance to u s control of the philippine islands.
p 505 open door policy this policy established free trade between the united states and china in 1900 and attempted to induce european nations and japan to recognize the territorial integrity of china.
it marked a departure from the american tradition of isolationism and signaled the countrys growing involvement in the world.
p 507 treaty of paris treaty in december 1898 ending the spanish american war.
under its terms spain recognized cubas independence assumed the cuban debt and ceded puerto rico guam and the philippines to the united states.
p 504 critical thinking questions 1.
what were the key developments in leading the united states to look abroad between the 1870s and the 1890s and how did these developments ultimately lead to the war with spain in 1898.
what were the most important effects of the end of the war and the acquisition of empire.
why did the important causes and events of the spanish american war lead to the crucial decision to acquire and overseas empire.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 21 on myhistorylab acquisition of empire america looks outward watch the video read the document roosevelts rough riders p 491 josiah strong from our country american empire p 503 read the document carl schurz platform of the american anti imperialist league p 505 1885 p 493 read the document view the closer look liliuokalani hawaiis story p 495 view the image emilio aguinaldo p 507 read the document alfred thayer mahan the interest of america in sea power p 497 war with spain watch the video complete the assignment of china p 508 burial of the maine victims p 499 view the map the spanish american war p 501 indicates study plan media assignment the 400 million customers the progressive era contents and learning objectives the changing face of industrialism pg.
515 a new urban culture pg.
530 what happened to art and culture in these years so filled with change.
how did industrialism change after 1900.
feature essay the triangle fire societys masses pg.
519 how did mass production affect women children immigrants and african americans.
conflict in the workplace pg.
524 why were there so many strikes in this period.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
