chapter 13 the politics of separation 357 passed the house but died in the senate where southern senators were able to block all such measures in 1846 and 1847.
a boston newspaper said of the proviso asif by magic it brought to a head the great question that is about to divide the american people by 1850 the question of slavery created divisions that cut across party lines whether democrat or whig.
california the compromise of 1850 and the fugitive slave act a new congress elected just after the end of the war with mexico and a new president war hero zachery taylor tackled the complex question of californias statehood.
taylor was a political unknown.
southerners tended to trust him because he owned slaves and a louisiana plantation but 40 years as an officer in the u s army had led taylor to value the union.
he hated the threat of secession.
in 1849 taylor proposed admitting not only california but new mexico as new states.
california would certainly be a free state but taylors proposal left the future status of new mexico uncertain though there were virtually no slaves there.
by the time congress convened in december 1849 much of the country was in an uproar with many in the south threatening secession if two free states were admitted and many in the north willing to call their bluff.
in that charged situation senator henry clay of kentucky long known as the great compromiser for his role in crafting the compromise of 1820 tried again.
clay offered a series of proposals that he hoped would pass congress and avert a sectional crisis by defusing tension in a number of areas.
the first compromise would admit california as a state but organize new mexico under a territorial government with no restriction or condition on the subject of slavery as a territory new mexico would have no votes in the senate a key concern of slaveholders in congress since they were certain probably rightly that new mexico would opt to enter the union as a free state.
the second compromise clay proposed would resolve the contested question of the texas new mexico border by giving more land to new mexico and giving texas 10 million to pay off the debts of the former republic of texas.
since many southerners held republic of texas bonds this proposal had great appeal in the south.
the third proposal abolished the slave trade but not slavery itself in the district of columbia.
finally to ensure southern support clay proposed a fourth compromise a law enhancing slaveholders right to reclaim slaves who fled north.
the whole package may have seemed to clay like a careful balance that would appeal to both sections.
in fact most members of congress from each section disliked it claiming that it did not go nearly far enough in the direction they wanted.
in the debate that followed clays proposals john c calhoun warned that if california were admitted as a free state it would destroy irretrievably the equilibrium between the two sections and that southerners could not remain in the union.
the threat of secession was clear.
three days later daniel webster spoke in favor of the compromise.
webster began i wish to speak to day not as a massachusetts man nor as a northern man but as an american.
i speak to day for the preservation of the union it was an impressive speech and one memorized by generations of school children.
but it virtually destroyed websters reputation in an increasingly abolitionist massachusetts where many of his constituents were no longer willing to compromise with slaveholders.
in the long hot summer of 1850 first calhoun and then president taylor both died in office.
the new president millard fillmore from new york favored compromise perhaps more than taylor had.
in addition a new generation of senators of whom stephen a douglas was the leader managed to forge a final compromise close to clay s proposal.
in a series of separate resolutions california was admitted as a free state new mexico and utah were organized as territories with no votes in congress thus maintaining the balance in the senate the slave trade but not slavery was pro hibited in the district of columbia and texas happily accepted the 10 million io exchange for a less expansive border with new mexico.
most fatefully congress also 358 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 henry clay john c calhoun and daniel webster three men who had dominated the senate since 1820 debated for the last time in congress as they tried to resolve the complex issues raised by the admission of california as a state.
passed the fugitive slave act which was designed to please the south by giving them the right not only to reclaim runaway slaves but also to demand federal and local northern help in the process.
there was great rejoicing in washington in the fall of 1850 when the package passed.
president fillmore called it a final settlement but not everyone agreed.
a convention of delegates from southern states condemned the compromise and affirmed the right of secession.
in the north charles francis adams son and grandson of moderately antislavery presidents called the compromise the consummation of the iniquities of the most disgraceful session of congress horace mann the former massachusetts education leader who had succeeded john quincy adams as a representative from massachusetts in the congressional seat that was because of adamss long efforts considered the abolitionist seat said that the compromise meant the declaration of independence applied only to white men.
for northerners the vigorous enforcement of the fugitive slave act would soon become intolerable and many southern leaders became convinced that the abolitionists wanted to end slavery not only in the territories but also in the states where it was strong and that the only solution was to leave the union.
no one knew what the next decade would hold but the most perceptive among them thought the celebrations of 1850 were premature.
fugitive slave act a law that was part of the compromise of 1850.
it created a new set of federal agents to help track runaway slaves and required authorities in the north to assist southern slave catchers and return runaway slaves to their owners.
forcing the fugitive slave act len henry clay proposed a new fugitive slave act as part of the compromise of 50 and stephen a douglas persuaded congress to adopt it or when presidents more 1850 1853 and franklin pierce 1853 1857 vigorously enforced that law ne of them expected the firestorm that resulted.
the core of the new law was not v the constitution said no person held to service or labor i e a slave in one state under the laws thereof escaping into another shall in consequence of any law or regulation therein be discharged from such service or labor but shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service or labor may be due.
chapter 13 the politics of separation 359 caption.
colored people or boston one ale tod are fcereby respectfully cautioned ud advised to avoid conversing with the watchmen and police officers of boston for since the recent ottder of the matob a au rmn they are empowered to act as kidnappers slave catchers and they have already been actually employed la kiwappiw catchiw and beefing slaves.
therefore if you value your ubsrtt and the o flie among you sam them in every possible manner as so many jgfofofjojt on the track of the most unfortunate of your race.
keep a sharp look out for kidnappers and have top eye open.
after enforcement of the fugitive slave act became common abolitionists posted warnings to african americans that whether born free or escaping from slavery they were no longer safe in northern cities like boston.
even though northern states had passed personal liberty laws in the 1830s that made it harder to recapture a former slave the supreme court in 1842 had affirmed that slaveholders had a constitutional right to capture slaves who had escaped to a free state.
given the number of runaway slaves slave catching was a growth industry in the united states before 1850.
nevertheless the new fugitive slave act went much further than any previous law.
it created a new corps of federal agents to help capture runaway slaves.
court appointed federal commissioners would determine whether a person claimed by a slave catcher was truly a slave or actually a free person.
commissioners were paid a double fee every time they found that a person was a fugitive slave as opposed to a free person and there was no appeal from their decisions.
finally the law provided for a 1 000 fine and up to a year in jail for anyone who helped a fugitive slave.
across the north free blacks were worried and many knowing that it would be difficult to prove that they had been born free moved to canada before trouble arrived.
but the slave catchers now supported by federal agents fanned out across the north seeking escaped slaves and in town after town people saw the results.
it was an ugly spectacle.
anthony burns escaped from slavery in virginia went to boston and found work in a clothing store.
but his former owner discovered his whereabouts and under the fugitive slave act a federal marshal arrested burns on may 24 1854.
bostonians were incensed.
white and black abolitionists attacked the courthouse where burns was held and a federal marshal was killed in the melee.
president pierce ordered marines cavalry and artillery to boston to ensure that the fugitive slave act was enforced.
on june 2 1854 federal troops marched burns in chains through the streets of boston to a coast guard ship that was waiting in boston harbor to take him back to slavery in virginia.
huge crowds watched the spectacle church bells tolled and flags flew upside down.
pierce had upheld the law but he had lost the respect of many of the nations citizens.
amos a lawrence one of the richest men in massachusetts and a conservative whig was a changed man after watching the burns affair.
he said that he and many of his friends went to bed one night old fashioned conservative compromise union whigs waked up stark mad abolitionists lawrence was far from alone.
happily for burns his boston supporters eventually purchased his freedom.
nevertheless the sight of this man being marched by u s troops back to slavery on the streets of boston was indelible for many who saw and heard about it.
similar incidents happened across the north.
in ohio margaret garner an escaped slave who had crossed the ohio river from kentucky discovered slave catchers at her door and she tried to kill her children rather than allow them to be returned to slavery.
one of the children died.
garner was sold back to slavery in new orleans.
for northerners these sorts of events undermined the notion that they were living in free states.
many concluded that freedom could not exist in a nation that allowed slavery anywhere.
southern defenders of slavery and even their nonslaveholding neighbors were similarly coming to the conclusion that slave states and free states could not remain in the same country.
the divisive issue could not be contained by compromise.
federal law had banned the international slave trade since 1808 but smugglers found ways to flout that ban and bring new slaves directly from africa.
northerners likewise flouted the fugitive slave act.
when the best known of the southern slave smugglers charles a l lamar was tried in federal court for smuggling slaves into the united states a southern newspaper asked what is the difference between a yankee violating the fugitive slave law in the north and a southern man violating the law against the 360 partv expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 african slave trade in the south.
in the 1850s the vigorous enforcement of some laws and the flouting of others angered many americans but they differed greatly on which laws they wanted enforced and which flouted.
uncle tom s cabin anger at the fugitive slave act also convinced harriet beecher stowe already a well known author to do something for the antislavery cause.
as the fugitive slave act took effect stowe wrote that the time is come when even a woman or a child who can speak a word for freedom and humanity is bound to speak and speak she did.
although she was living in brunswick maine at the time stowe had spent many years in cincinnati ohio and had herself seen slavery directly across the ohio river in kentucky.
cincinnati a city that faced the ohio river and from which one could see the slave state of kentucky on the far shore was itself home to many fugitives from slavery.
she began writing what would become uncle tom s cabin.
it was first published in serial form in the national era in 1851 and 1852 and then as a book.
within a year 310 000 copies were in print making it the bestselling book of the century other than the bible.
what seems to modern readers to be an unrealistic and sentimental story of uncle tom the ever patient and kind slave his evil owner simon legree and heroic eliza harris the slave mother who jumps on ice floes in 13 1 135 000 sets 270 000 tqiomes soli.
uncle toms cabin edition tor the million.
wwuhli in 1 v.
in i pr r 58 tents.
in 2 uls cloth plates price si hl rn.
b i pricks prom oo to oa oo.
the greatestbookof the age.
fob sale selling 300 000 copies uncle tom s cabin was one of the best selling books of the century and helped to galvanize northern opinion against slavery.
chapter 13 the politics of separation 361 thinking historically uncle tom s cabin early in uncle tom s cabin stowe described her heroine eliza s decision to run away from a kentucky plantation after hearing that her young son was about to be sold away from her and the family to a new owner it is impossible to conceive of a human creature more wholly desolate and forlorn than eliza when she turned her footsteps from uncle tom s cabin.
her husband s suffering and dangers and the danger of her child all blended in her mind with a confused and stunning sense of the risk she was running in leaving the only home she had ever known and cutting loose from the protection of a friend whom she loved and revered.
then there was the parting from every familiar object but stronger than all was maternal love wrought into a paroxysm of frenzy by the near approach of a fearful danger.
her boy was old enough to have walked by her side and in an indifferent case she would only have led him by the hand but now the bare thought of putting him out of her arms made her shudder and she strained him to her bosom with a convulsive grasp as she went rapidly forward.
if it were your harry mother or your willie that were going to be torn from you by a brutal trader tomorrow morning if you had seen the man and heard that the papers were signed and delivered and you had only from twelve o clock till morning to make good your escape how fast could you walk.
for many americans eliza s fear and determination made the reality of slavery come alive in ways that decades of antislavery publications and true life stories had not.
what a modern reader reads as melodrama readers of the time found compelling.
source harriet beecher stowe uncle tom s cabin or life among the lowly boston j p jewett 1852.
thinking critically 1.
historical interpretation how does stowe transform the slavery question from an abstract political issue into a personal tragedy.
contextualization how does stowe build understanding for eliza and therefore for all slaves in this short passage.
rvvl the ohio river to escape pursuing slave catchers was not only a literary but also a political phenomenon in the 1850s and 1860s.
if any one book brought home a picture of slavery to moderate or ambivalent northerners it was uncle tom s cabin.
the book also enraged the south.
de bow s southern and western review one of the nations largest proslavery publications said the novel was insulting to the south because mrs stowe wants the world to believe that all she has written is true in the turmoil of the 1850s however the book galvanized antislavery opinion not only in the north but also in england where it was credited with playing a role in keeping britain neutral during the civil war.
the book angered both southerners who rationalized slavery and northerners many of whom first saw the nature of slavery through its pages.
the kansas nebraska act of 1854 developments in the early 1850s proved how wrong president fillmore had been to think that the compromise of 1850 was a final settlement of north south tensions.
the fillmore administrations enforcement of the fugitive slave act exacerbated antislavery opinion across the north and probably cost fillmore the whig nomination for president.
in the 1852 elections the whigs deeply divided between north and south voted on 53 ballots before finally nominating another war hero general winfield scott.
an almost equally divided democratic party nominated franklin pierce of new hampshire whom many in the south considered as reliable as calhoun himself 362 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 on the issue of slavery because they thought he would win the white house for them by sweeping the south.
the democrats gamble paid off pierce won and enforced the fugitive slave act as actively as fillmore.
despite that highly tense political atmosphere senator stephen a douglas of illinois hoped to get federal support for a transcontinental railroad from chicago to the pacific coast.
a railroad did not seem to be something that would immediately stir up the tensions swirling around slavery but it soon did.
as one step toward organizing the railroad douglas and congressman william a richardson a fellow illinois democrat introduced bills into congress in 1853 that would organize the remaining land in the louisiana purchase north of the arkansas river into what they called the nebraska territory to facilitate awarding a right of way for the railroad see map 13 1.
southern senators feared an effort to create another free state out of nebraska and blocked the bill.
after several failed efforts at compromise douglas proposed to split nebraska into two territories nebraska and kansas and allow each territory to decide whether to allow slavery.
he called this approach popular sovereignty letting each state or territory decide for itself whether to allow or ban slavery in its jurisdiction.
others had used the term before him but douglas became its most prominent proponent.
the term sounded democratic as least for white voters but popular sovereignty a solution to the slavery crisis suggested by senator lewis cass of michigan by which territorial residents not congress would decide slavery s fate in any proposed new state.
c a nad a oregon territory unorganized territory minnesota territory vermont maine iowa california admitted free 1850 utah territory 1850 illinois new hampshire f sachvsetts z x.
rhode island connecticut ohio jew jersey indiana new york pacific ocean new mexico territory indian x v virginia r territory tennessee carouna delaware x maryland texas claimed 836 50 free states and territories i slave states to be decided by popular sovereignty missouri compromise line mexico texas after 1850 louis.
05 z alabama lith gulf of mexico south carolina georgia islk atlantic ocean 3.
t 1ap13 the compromise of 1850 and the kansas nebraskaact.
the compromise of.
850 admitted aiif neuompromis h new mexico and utah territories.
three years later rma as a free state and se unorganized territory between minnesota and oregon enator stephen a douglas p posed th abo t whether the territory might eventually become hat set off a firestorm in congress and the country about wrieu.
lave or free states.
chapter 13 the politics of separation 363 1 kansas nebraska act a law passed in 1854 creating the kansas and nebraska territories but leaving the question of slavery open to local residents.
republican party a new political party created in 1854 that was dedicated to stopping the spread of slavery in any place in the nation where it did not exist.
it explicitly repealed the missouri compromise of 1820 which banned slavery north of missouri no matter what local residents said.
ihe proposal to split the nebraska territory and allow popular sovereignty to overrule the missouri compromise got douglas the support he needed from southern senators but it also raised a hell of a storm as douglas knew it would.
for many moderates even for president pierce the missouri compromise had held the union together for 34 years almost half the nations lifetime.
tampering with it seemed dangerous.
douglas was offering to repeal it to be able to organize the new territories that he thought were essential to his plans for a railroad.
the risk was that repealing the missouri compromise could allow slavery if the local voters supported it in territory where it had been banned since 1820.
while defenders of slavery were delighted northern abolitionists and moderates saw taking this risk as another step toward spreading slavery throughout the union something they found unacceptable.
northern outrage was intense.
the most moderate free soil advocates who opposed extending slavery united with the most radical abolitionists in opposition.
five state legislatures and hundreds of meetings and conventions sent petitions to congress declaring this crime shall not be consummated whig senator william pitt fessenden of maine called the kansas nebraska bill a terrible outrage on the other hand southerners of both parties strongly supported the kansas nebraska act.
in the end the bill passed in 1854 pierce signed it and douglas got his territory but he also virtually destroyed the whig party.
the congressional elections of 1854 and the birth of the republican party the kansas nebraska act became the defining issue in the 1854 elections for congress.
battles between antislavery and proslavery factions within kansas dominated the national news for the next several years.
in 1854 northern whigs led by senator william h seward of new york along with members of the declining free soil party came together to create the republican party.
many former whigs and members of smaller parties campaigned for office as republicans members of a brand new party in the 1854 congressional elections and the republicans not the whigs would nominate candidates for president in 1856 and 1860.
southern and proslavery whigs tried to maintain their party for a few years but what had been a major political party in the united states since it was organized to oppose andrew jackson disappeared during the 1850s.
in illinois a former one term whig congressman abraham lincoln was aroused as he had never been before by the kansas nebraska act and began a campaign for a seat in the u s senate that would allow him to oppose the act on the national stage.
stephen a douglas in the middle of his own 6 year term as the other senator from illinois since all states elect two senators for 6 year terms at different times opposed lincoln hoping instead for a fellow democrat to join him in the senate.
senators were elected by state legislatures at that time not by popular votes the 1854 senatorial campaign was actually a race among candidates for the illinois legislature who would then elect the new u s.
everyone understood that if the democrats won a majority of the state legislature they would elect a democrat to join douglas but if the winning majority was the emerging republican party supported by the remnants of the whig party they would many expected elect lincoln.
in the fall of 1854 lincoln and douglas campaigned throughout the state to support the candidates they favored for the illinois legislature.
lincoln was a moderate far too moderate for many abolitionists and he remained a whig throughout the 1854 campaign choosing at that time not to join the new republican party however his opposition to the spread of slavery was growing stronger.
he argued that while the constitution protected slavery in the states where it existed it furnishes no more 164 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 excuse for permitting slavery to go into our own free territory than it would for reviving the african slave trade.
when douglas defended his long standing policy of popular sovereignty and the sacred right of self government lincoln responded when the white man governs himself that is self government but when he governs himself and also governs another man that is despotism lincoln said that he understood that ending slavery where it existed was difficult but he also insisted that there could be no moral right for anyone to enslave any other person.
lincoln s coalition won the majority of the illinois legislature but the coalition included former democrats who would not vote for a whig like lincoln.
in the end lincoln backed lyman trumbull a former democrat turned republican for the senate rather than allow a democrat to win.
but during the 1854 campaign lincoln had established himself as a national actor on the political stage.
the speeches that both lincoln and douglas made were a preview of the more formal debates that would take place between them 4 years later when lincoln campaigned directly against douglas in an effort to win his seat in the senate.
across the north the 1854 election led to victories by anti kansas nebraska act coalitions in state after state.
democrats lost control of most northern state legislatures.
the majority of the members of the senate were not up for election in 1854 but the state of wisconsin elected the first republican to serve in that body.
more significant changes came in the house of representatives the members of which are elected for 2 year terms directly by the voters not by state legislatures.
northern democrats dropped from 93 to 23 seats in the house of representatives while southern democrats held 58 seats.
but 150 members of congress were now committed to stopping slavery in the territories some as whigs some as republicans and some as members of minor parties.
since the formation of the jacksonian democrats and whig opposition in the 1830s leaders had changed party affiliations on occasion in response to strong issues but never as often as they did in the 1850s as the old parties weakened.
after 1854 voters south and north cared mostly about whether candidates were anti or proslavery and whether they were moderate or radical in their views.
the kansas nebraska act had unified northern political opinion against the spread of slavery as nothing before it had done.
a new political party the republican party was forming to speak for that point of view.
unlike the whigs or the democrats both of which included northern and southern members the republican party represented only one section of the nation and one political perspective.
ihe party had virtually no southerners and no one who spoke for popular sovereignty or any other plan to allow the growth of slavery.
when the new congress assembled in late 1855 the house eventually elected as its new speaker nathaniel p banks of massachusetts a former know nothing who had recently switched his political allegiance to the republican party.
a representative of a political party that had not existed 2 years earlier now held the gavel in the house of representatives.
13 2 j quick review how did the escalation of hostility over slavery indicate the issue could not be settled peacefully.
bleeding kansas and dred scott v sandford h of the battle over slavery in kansas and the supreme and the impact of those events on public opinion.
analyze the causes and consequences court s decision in the dred scott case the kansas nebraska act however was still the law of the land in spite of the outcome of the 1854 elections.
the act essentially split the former unorganized territory in half see map 13 1.
the southern portion was the modern state of kansas and the northern called nebraska included the modern states of nebraska chapter 13 the politics of separation 365 lecompton constitution proslavery draft written in 1857 by kansas territorial delegates elected under questionable circumstances it what was decisively defeated by congress.
in 1854 and 1855 thousands of missouri ruffians as their opponents called them arrived in kansas well armed and determined to control the territory.
before long equally well armed abolitionists from the north began arriving in the territory.
given the presence of so many guns and such anger it was not surprising that bloodshed quickly followed.
66 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 south dakota and north dakota.
kansas and nebraska each now had to decide whether to apply for admission to the union as slave or free states.
no one was sure when elections would be held or who would vote though many wanted to control the outcome.
while nebraska stayed relatively calm kansas with its proximity to the slave state of missouri but also within easy travel of the free states of illinois and iowa was easier for southerners and northerners to move to.
it quickly became a dangerous and violent place.
even before president pierce appointed andrew reeder a pennsylvania democrat as territorial governor hundreds of proslavery border ruffians from missouri and abolitionists from the north began pouring into kansas.
the missourians got there first and when the first elections were held for the territorial representative to congress in november 1854 they won easily.
they also gained a majority of the territorial legislature that was elected in march 1855.
the proslavery faction could probably have won these early elections fairly but the votes were accompanied by widespread cheating fraudulent vote counting votes by people who still resided in missouri and voter intimidation.
so the results were challenged even as more antislavery voters began arriving in larger numbers and quickly came to outnumber the proslavery advocates.
in response to the first elections the settlers who supported admitting kansas as a free state called a convention in december 1855 in which they declared the territorial legislature elected in march to be illegitimately elected.
they then held their own election established their own legislature to meet at topeka adopted a state constitution the topeka constitution and elected their own governor.
thus by january 1856 kansas had two legislatures and two governors as well as sent two different territorial representatives to congress.
for the most part each faction voted in its own elections and boycotted the elections called by the other.
in 1856 u s troops under orders from president pierce dispersed the topeka legislature since it lacked any legal mandate to meet and the official legislature called a convention to write a state constitution.
a new federal governor robert walker finally began to establish order in the territory and convinced both sides that an honest election could be held.
in the october y 1857 elections probably the most honest in the territory in which both factions voted for the first time the free state faction won a sizeable majority.
but while the free state majority now controlled the legislature the constitutional convention which had been appointed by the previous proslavery legislature continued to write a constitution.
the situation in kansas then got even more complicated.
the proslavery convention at lecompton kansas that wrote what came to be known as the lecompton constitution finished its work in the fall of 1857 and a vote on the constitution was called for december.
however the convention decreed that the vote was only on the clause that would decide whether kansas would be a slave or a free state.
free state residents were convinced that the whole lecompton document was a fatally flawed defense of slavery even if voters made kansas a free state the lecompton document said that slaves already in the territory were bound to remain slaves.
they boycotted the election and the proslavery clause won by a vote of 6 226 to 569.
then the new legislature called for a vote on the whole constitution in january 1858.
proslavery residents boycotted this election and the constitution was defeated by a vote of 10 226 to 162.
both votes were then sent forward to congress to sort out.
after another long and bitter debate on kansas in the late spring of 1858 this time with douglas in opposition to admitting kansas as a slave state because of the trickery and juggling congress called for a new vote in kansas on the lecompton constitution.
the legislation said that if the constitution passed kansas would gain immediate statehood but if it did not statehood would be delayed significantly.
in august 1858 kansas voters defeated the lecompton constitution and the offer of immediate statehood by a vote of 11 300 to 1 788.
kansas would remain a territory until 1861.
the 4 year battle from 1854 to 1858 gave the territory the name of bleeding kansas and hardened public opinion north and south.
the battle in kansas not only was confusing but also was violent.
missouri border ruffians and missouri militia intimidated and killed free state voters.
but the violence was not all on one side.
samuel jones the country sheriff for lawrence kansas was shot while trying to serve warrants on the free state leaders.
he survived and led the militia back to town to take prisoners and demolish a hotel a newspaper office and the home of the free state governor.
his successor threatened the free state legislature in 1857 and was killed.
john brown came to kansas to strike terror in the hearts of the proslavery people brown attacked a small proslavery community near pottawatomie creek and killed and mutilated five settlers.
the battles continued in 1856 and 1857.
missourians boarded steamboats on the missouri river to search for antislavery immigrants.
both sides claimed their martyrs.
in most parts of the territory the u s army slowly asserted control but just before the final resolution in may 1858 proslavery guerrillas shot nine unarmed free state farmers and five of them died.
the violence was not limited to kansas.
in washington congressman preston brooks of south carolina who believed that protecting the status of kansas as a slave state was a point of honor badly beat massachusetts senator charles sumner in the senate chamber after sumner delivered his crime against kansas speech favoring a free state kansas.
in brooklyn new york the nations most famous bleeding kansas violence between pro and antislavery forces in kansas territory after the passage of the kansas nebraska act in 1854.
1j 1 13 2 133 13 a czxxx brooks of south carolina was enraged by ixktn s hox.
antislavery arguments during the debates about kansas which brooks took an attack on the honor of his family andthe south.
in may 1856 brooks came into the senate chamber and beat sumner w th a cane while h sat at his desk.
sumner never fully recovered from his injuries but remamed n the senate as a staunch republican through the civil war and reconstruction until he died in 1874.
chapter 13 the politics of separation 367 dred scott v sandford a supreme court case brought by dred scott a slave demanding his freedom based on his residence in a free state and a free territory with his master.
after the supreme court s decision on the dred scott case many americans north and south concluded that slavery had to be banned everywhere or nowhere.
preacher henry ward beecher warned of the need to stand firm and collected funds for beechers bibles which were springfield rifles to be sent to kansas.
even after the nation turned to other matters few americans forgot the intense emotions kansas aroused.
the supreme court and dred scott while the battle for kansas transfixed the nation a court case was making its way through the nations slow judicial process.
ihe case dred scott v sandford resulted in one of the most far reaching decisions in the history of the supreme court.
it began in state courts in st louis missouri in 1846 when abolitionists urged dred scott a slave to sue for his freedom because his owner an army surgeon had taken him to illinois and then on to fort snelling in what is now minnesota then simply the northern tip of the louisiana purchase where the missouri compromise banned slavery.
after living for years in free territory his lawyers claimed scott had won his freedom.
in a series of trials and appeals scotts case went back and forth.
scott lost the first time but on retrial in state court in st louis he won his freedom.
the missouri supreme court then overturned the decision on appeal in 1852 and returned scott to slavery.
although the missouri high court had previously found in favor of slaves who had lived in free territory ideas were hardening across the south and the court concluded that missouri law governed the case even though scott had been in federally controlled free territory for years.
scotts lawyers appealed to the federal courts and when the district court in missouri decided against scott his lawyers appealed to the u s supreme court where the case was heard in 1856.
the supreme court also decided against scott.
the justices could have based their ruling on fairly narrow grounds.
instead the majority used the case to make a larger legal point.
considerable though behind the scenes pressure was apparently brought to bear on the justices.
chief justice roger taney however did not need pressure to speak his mind.
on march 6 1857 he spoke for a majority of the court.
in a long and complex decision taney made two key points.
first as a black man presumably even a free black man taney said that scott had no rights that the united states needed to honor.
based on his reading of the constitution taney said that black people had no rights which a white man was bound to respect when two dissenting justices noted that blacks had actually been voters in five of the states that had ratified the constitution in 1789 taney countered that they might indeed have all the rights and privileges of the citizen of a state but that they were not entitled to the rights and privileges of a citizen in any other state this opinion seemed to directly contradict article iv section 2 of the constitution which said the citizens of each state shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of citizens in the several states but taney ignored the clause and previous case law.
second taney broadened the ruling.
scott had no standing to bring the case the chief justice said and even if he did have standing he did not have a case.
fort snelling was not actually free territory because the missouri compromise was unconstitutional.
congress did not have the right to bar slavery in any federal territories.
depriving slave owners of their slaves he said violated the fifth amendment that said no one could be deprived of life liberty or property without due process of law and slaves were the private property of their owners.
he did not say anything about the lives or liberties of enslaved people.
but he did say that congress could not authorize a territorial government to exercise any power to prohibit slavery.
8 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 the court not only returned scott to slavery but also ruled that congress could not prohibit slavery in any federal territory under any circumstances.
abolitionists soon purchased scott and set him and his wife free.
but the decision seemed to lock millions of their fellow african americans either in slavery or in second class status even if they were free.
the outcome thrilled southern leaders.
the proslavery constitutionalist in augusta georgia editorialized that southern opinion upon the subject of slavery is now the supreme law of the land at the same time many northern democrats were also delighted seeing the decision as the funeral sermon of the new republican party.
many moderate northerners however were outraged.
william cullen bryant editor of the new york evening post wrote that taneys decision was a willful perversion of the constitution.
republican leaders especially seward of new york and lincoln of illinois attacked the decision as the result of a secret negotiation between the chief justice and president elect james buchanan.
lincoln also said that if the taney policy stood then the advocates of slavery would soon make it lawful in all the states north as well as south he promised that if a republican were elected president in 1860 he would find a way to undo the decision.
the lines between the pro and antislavery camps were hardening not only in congress but also in the country as a whole.
b quick review why was the dred scott case a significant turning point in public opinion north and south in the years leading up to the civil war.
133 the economy the panic of and the lincoln douglas debates explain how the economic crisis of 1857 and the growing political crises of the decade impacted each other and led the nation to divide.
historians have long debated the degree to which economic issues rather than arguments over slavery caused the civil war.
the disagreements are nearly always ones of emphasis but most agree that both issues economic factors in the nation and debates over the morality of slavery were factors.
the growth of the cotton economy between 1815 and 1860 tied the nation together creating common interests among southern slave owning producers of cotton northern mill owners and owners of ships that transported cotton to britain.
abolitionist senator charles sumner of massachusetts despaired of a country dominated by the lords of the lash and the lords of the loom.
other economic forces however were dividing the country.
ihe opening of the erie canal in 1825 created an east west trade axis from new england through new york and into the midwestern states of ohio indiana and illinois with connections through the great lakes to michigan wisconsin and even minnesota.
this trade network rivaled and then exceeded the trade down mississippi river.
in 1835 95 percent of the trade in the ohio valley flowed south through new orleans and only 5 percent through new york.
but by 1850 more trade went from the midwest to new york than to new orleans.
midwesterners who before the mid 1830s saw their economic lives connected to the states that bordered the mississippi were now much more connected to new york and new england and had little reason to care about the southern states that had once been so important to them.
as the railroads were built slowly in the 1820s and 1830s but much more rapidly in the 1840s and 1850s they also followed the newer trade routes linking the midwest to the northeast while other rail networks linked the interior of the south to charleston and new orleans.
new settlement followed the trade chapter 13 the politics of separation 369 routes.
more and more of the growing population of the upper midwest came from new york and new england the most antislavery regions of the country.
in the 1850s the new republican party reflected the interests of this fast growing swath of the nation that stretched from new england into all of the ohio river valley and beyond to indiana illinois and iowa.
most people in the region tended to be opposed to slavery even if few were serious abolitionists.
in addition the republican party also spoke for their economic interests.
john sherman brother of civil war general william tecumseh sherman began his political career as a whig but by 1854 he was elected to congress as a republican from an ohio district on the shores of lake erie.
sherman said that while the republican party was born with the immediate purpose and aim of stopping the spread of slavery into the territories it also supported an increase in the tariff to strengthen american industries a homestead bill to encourage settlement of the new territories by people who wanted to build small family farms and who had no intention or money to bring slaves with them land grant colleges that would serve agriculture and industry and a transcontinental railroad that would link california to the east coast.
it was a good summary of what would become the republicans economic program in the 1860s and 1870s and it played well across the region.
however neither that same economic program nor the republicans opposition to the spread of slavery was seen as a benefit in the south especially the deep south.
the pre civil war south was not an economic backwater.
indeed it was the most prosperous part of the nation in the 1850s but the prosperity could not be separated from cotton growing and slavery.
as much as southern cotton served as the raw material for new england mills far more of it was shipped across the atlantic to the larger mills in england.
as much as the south was building railroads often with slave labor its rivers and extended coastline meant that water transport served the south better than the north.
the southern planter elite saw far less reason than most northerners to support federal spending on canals as the price of midwestern wheat and goods produced in pennsylvania and ohio fell rapidly in 1857 panic hit the nation s financial center of new york s wall street.
newsboys sold extra editions of newspapers with.
news brought by telegraph from around the country and the papers were snapped up by fearful investors.
370 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 or a federal tariff that protected northern industries.
southern leaning presidents from polk in the 1840s to pierce in the 1850s vetoed bills for internal improvement that most northerners regardless of political party badly wanted.
the panic of 1857 exacerbated the economic split between the regions.
it was much more severe in the north than in the south.
overproduction of northern wheat helped precipitate the panic.
when the crimean war which had pitted britain and france against russia ended in 1856 european farmers resumed full scale wheat production and prices for american wheat fell sharply.
but the english mills continued to need southern cotton and the price of cotton held steady.
moreover in the iron and coal producing areas of the country pennsylvania and ohio demand for steel fell people lost their jobs banks failed and panic ensued.
not surprisingly the republican platform of 1860 supported a tariff both to provide revenue for the government and to protect northern industry.
the platform solidified support for the republicans especially in pennsylvania and new jersey.
it also showed how deeply these states were cut off from the interests of the south where the tariff raised the cost of manufactured goods but did nothing to keep the price of cotton high.
panic of 1857 a banking crisis that caused a credit crunch in the north it was less severe in the south where high cotton prices spurred a quick recovery.
s the lincoln douglas debates define the political parties on june 16 1858 abraham lincoln spoke to the republican state convention in springfield illinois that had just nominated him as their candidate against stephen a douglas for the u s senate.
reflecting on the fugitive slave act the kansas nebraska crisis and the dred scott decision lincoln quoted the bible well known to all of the convention delegates and told them a house divided against itself cannot stand he continued i believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half ree.
i do not expect the union to be dissolved i do not expect the house to fall but i do expect it will cease to be divided.
it will become all one thing or all the other.
either the opponents of slavery will arrest the further spread of it and place it where the public mind shall rest in the belief that it is in the course of ultimate extinction or its advocates will push it forward till it should become alike lawful in all the states old as well as new north as well as south.
with all that had happened since 1850 lincoln could see no other option.
he begged his fellow republicans to be sure the outcome was what they wanted.
ihe result is not doubtful he concluded.
we shall not fail if we stand firm we shall not fail some of the delegates who had just nominated lincoln thought the speech was too radical and would hurt lincoln in the fall elections but by 1858 he was prepared to stand firm on his ideas.
later that summer on august 21 1858 democratic senator stephan a douglas met lincoln in ottawa illinois for the first of seven debates they held across illinois in that election season.
douglas and lincoln were campaigning to be elected by the illinois legislature to represent the state in the u s senate.
they were also seeking to define the philosophy of their respective political parties.
hundreds attended their debates and newspapers in every part of the country took their words to thousands of americans.
the debates were long and closely argued.
each sometimes spoke for 2 hours at a time.
ihe speeches and the responses were not sound bites but carefully reasoned arguments that forced each leader to refine his views and the audience to follow them closely.
at the ottawa debate douglas spoke first.
he painted lincoln and the republican party black republicans douglas called them as allies of the most radical abolitionists.
he attacked lincolns a house divided against itself speech.
why can it not exist divided into free and slave states douglas asked.
washington jefferson franklin madison hamilton jay and the great men of that day made this government divided into free states and slave states and left each state perfectly free to do as it pleased on the subject of slavery.
chapter 13 the politics of separation 371 in the 1850s frederick douglass who had grown up in slavery became one of the nation s best known abolitionist speakers.
even many who disagreed with or were frightened by his words admired his public speakving ability and his capacity to win many to the abolitionist cause.
13 3 douglas also criticized lincolns attack on the dred scott decision.
douglas said that he agreed with the decision and told his audience that lincolns approach would fill illinois with blacks who would become citizens and voters on an equality with yourselves he warned that lincoln was trying to array all the northern states in one body against the south to excite a sectional war between the free states and the slave states he and the democrats douglas said were the party of unity while lincoln and the republicans promised only civil war.
in response lincoln declared that he was no abolitionist and that he had no prejudice against southern people he also said that he would not himself know how to quickly abolish slavery where it already existed and indeed would honor all of the souths constitutional rights to protect slavery.
he would even support the fugitive slave act if it should not in its stringency be more likely to carry a free man into slavery but the issue for him lincoln said was the spread of slavery in the territories.
lincoln said that he had no interest in perfect social and political equality with the negro douglass efforts to say that he did were a fantastic arrangement of words by which a man can prove a horse chestnut to be a chestnut horse lincoln also attacked douglass belief in popular sovereignty when he invites any people willing to have slavery to establish it he is blowing out the moral lights around us the republicans lost the campaign for the legislature and therefore lincoln lost the senatorial election of 1858 to douglas.
but the 1858 debates helped shape the core philosophies of the nations political parties.
they also put in the spotlight two political rivals who would meet again in 1860.
quick review how did the various expressions about slavery written spoken and acted deepen the already profound split in the union.
from john brown to the secession of the south 13 4 analyze the political impact of john brown s raid and why lincoln won the presidential election of 1860 and the southern states then voted to leave.
mason dixon line a line surveyed by charles mason and jeremiah dixon between 1763 and 1767 that settled the border between the then colonies of pennsylvania and maryland.
the year 1859 was an off year in american electoral politics.
regardless in august not far north of the mason dixon line that divided pennsylvania from maryland and thus free states from slave states people in the small town of chambersburg pennsylvania suddenly turned their attention to the issue of slavery and abolition.
one of the nations best known abolitionists frederick douglass who had escaped from slavery on a maryland plantation when he was a young adult and began his abolitionist career with william lloyd garrison gave a speech in the franklin county town.
both the towns democratic and republican newspapers gave douglass high marks as a speaker even though both said they disagreed with his views.
but the speech was a cover for the real reason for douglass being there.
he had been summoned for a secret meeting with his old friend john brown who was a fugitive for his role in the violence in kansas and who was living in chambersburg under the name of dr isaac smith.
john brown at harper s ferry douglass knew that brown harbored dreams of sparking a slave uprising across the south.
until he met with him that august day in 1859 however he had no idea how close brown was to implementing his ideas.
years later douglass recounted their meeting while the two went fishing at an old quarry the taking of harpers ferry of which 72 partv expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 american voices lydia maria child and governor henry a.
wise letters regarding john brown 1859 o i t u hen she heard of john brown s raid and trial lydia maria ww child a well known massachusetts abolitionist defender of women s rights and the rights of american indians who was also a popular children s author deplored the violence of brown s effort but offered to go to virginia to support him while he recovered from his wounds and awaited execution.
virginia governor henry a.
wise known as a moderate responded offering child protection in virginia but also making it clear he held her and her fellow abolitionists guilty of inspiring brown s violence.
their correspondence was published in garrison s liberator.
wayland mass oct 26th 1859.
governor wise.
enclosed is a letter to capt.
john brown.
will you have the kindness after reading it yourself to transmit it to the prisoner.
i and all my large circle of abolition acquaintances were taken by surprise when news came of capt.
brown s recent attempt nor do i know of a single person who would have approved of it had they been apprised of his intention.
but i and thousands of others feel a natural impulse of sympathy for the brave and suffering man.
perhaps god who sees the inmost of our souls perceives some such sentiment in your heart also.
he needs a mother or sister to dress his wounds and speak soothingly to him.
will you allow me to perform that mission of humanity.
i have been for years an uncompromising abolitionist and i should scorn to deny it or apologize for it as much as john brown himself would do.
believing in peace principles i deeply regret the step that the old veteran has taken.
i will also say that if i believed our religion justified men in fighting for freedom i should consider the enslaved everywhere as best entitled to that right.
such an avowal is a simple frank expression of my sense of natural justice.
yours respectfully l maria child.
richmond va oct 29th 1859.
madam i will forward the letter for john brown a prisoner under our laws for the crimes of murder robbery and treason which you ask me to transmit to him you ask me further to allow you to perform the mission of mother or sister to dress his wounds and speak soothingly to him.
by this of course you mean to be allowed to visit him in his cell and to minister to him in the offices of humanity.
p why should you not be so allowed madam.
virginia and j massachusetts are involved in no civil war and the constitution j which unites them in one confederacy guarantees to you privi leges and immunities of a citizen of the united states in the state of virginia.
that constitution i am sworn to support and am therefore bound to protect your privileges and immunities as a citizen of massachusetts coming into virginia for any lawful and peaceful purpose.
coming as you propose to minister to the captive in prison you will be met doubtless by all our people not only in a chivalrous but in a christian spirit your mission being merciful and humane will not only be allowed but respected if not welcomed.
i could not permit an insult even to a woman in her walk of charity among us though it be to one who whetted knives of butchery for our mothers sisters daughters and babes.
we have no sympathy with your sentiments of sympathy with brown his attempt was a natural consequence of your sympathy and the errors of that sympathy ought to make you doubt its virtue from the defect on his conduct.
but it is not of this i should speak.
when you arrive at charlestown if you go there it will be for the court and its officers the commonwealth s attorney sheriff and jailer to say whether you may see and wait on the prisoner.
but whether you are thus permitted or not and you will be if my advice can prevail you may rest assured that he will be humanely lawfully and mercifully dealt by us in prison and on trial.
respectfully henry a.
wise 13 4 source anti slavery tracts no.
new series boston american anti slavery society 1860.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how would you describe the tone of the two letters.
what might explain the authors strenuous efforts to demonstrate respect for one another.
historical interpretation what light do these letters shed on regional tensions in the years before the civil war.
what values and beliefs do the authors appear to share.
on what points are they divided.
captain brown had merely hinted before was now declared as his settled purpose douglass thought browns idea was crazy would result in immediate defeat and as an attack upon the federal government would array the whole country against us brown was not persuaded.
douglass left chambersburg dejected and fearful perhaps doubly so because the former slave shields green who had accompanied douglass to the meeting had decided to stay with brown.
as he told douglass i bleve ill go wid de ole man chapter 13 the politics of separation 373 13 1 13 3 i all that summer brown had been planning for his raid.
in the fall he moved from chambersburg to a farmhouse in maryland not far from harpers ferry where a lightly guarded federal arsenal stood at the junction of the potomac and shenandoah rivers.
brown and his army of 16 white and five black men began their attack on the evening of october 16 1859.
they were confident that the slaves of the region would rise up to join them.
as they entered harpers ferry they cut telegraph lines and took hostages but they were also quickly attacked.
they were encircled by angry townspeople and within hours federal troops under the command of robert e lee arrived in harpers ferry.
when brown refused to surrender the troops attacked killing or capturing most of the rebels.
only a few escaped.
brown was wounded.
he and the other captured fighters were tried on charges of insurrection and treason against the state of virginia.
the jury took less than an hour to find them all guilty and they were sentenced to hang on december 2 1859.
brown used the 6 weeks between his arrest and execution effectively.
his calm words and actions after the raid much more than the raid itself made him a hero in much of the north and a frightening figure in the south.
at his trial brown told the court now if it is deemed necessary that i should forfeit my life for the furtherance of the ends of justice and mingle my blood further with the blood of my children and with the blood of millions in this slave country whose rights are disregarded by wicked cruel and unjust enactments i say let it be done.
while in prison brown also managed to conduct interviews and write letters that were widely circulated.
he told a reporter from the new york herald you may dispose of me very easily but this question is still to be settled this negro question i mean the end of that is not yet this famous painting of john brown on his way to the gallows stopping to kiss a slave child shows brown as the hero to the antislavery cause which is the way that many in the north were beginning to see him.
mansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 374 part immediately after the october raid virtually everyone democrats republicans even many abolitionists condemned brown as an insane fanatic.
soon however public opinion started to shift.
in the north browns words and actions began to galvanize a wide spectrum of public opinion.
people who initially dismissed him as insane started much to their own surprise to be swayed by his condemnation of slavery and even more surprising to themselves to consider his claim that violence might be needed to end it.
henry david thoreaus plea for captain john brown argued that browns violence could not be compared with the violence of slavery.
the pacifist william lloyd garrison criticized the raid but came to view it as a desperate self sacrifice for the purpose of giving an earthquake shock to the slave system many northerners concluded that brown was a hero.
northern sympathy for brown sent a chill through the white south.
with the emergence of the telegraph and faster printing presses news traveled fast.
many southerners became convinced that most northerners were in league with radical abolitionists like brown and with those slaves who harbored thoughts of revolt.
many in the south started to think that abolitionists really did want to promote a slave uprising.
in response much of the south quickly became an armed camp and doubts about remaining in the union began to grow.
the election of 1860 the republican party that nominated lincoln for the senate in 1858 was still very new on a fast changing political landscape.
the first election that the new republican party contested had been in 1854 and resulted in a republican speaker of the house of representatives.
the republicans it seemed were the party of the future.
in contrast the democrat and the whig parties had struggled with opposing members that included antislavery northerners and proslavery southerners.
the kansas situation had split both parties and was the death knell of the whigs.
they never again nominated a candidate for president.
by the 1856 presidential elections the nation had three political parties two of them new.
the democrats managed to continue as an uneasy coalition.
the republicans consolidated their strength in the north but were virtually nonexistent in the south.
a third party the american party more commonly known as the know nothing party gained strength as anti immigrant hysteria swept the country.
the democrats nominated james buchanan from pennsylvania whose prime strength seemed to be an exceeding vagueness about slavery and who had been seeking the presidency since serving as polks secretary of state in the 1840s.
the republicans nominated war hero and adventurer john c fremont.
and the know nothings nominated former president millard fillmore.
fillmore carried only maryland where anti immigrant feelings were especially strong while fremont carried most of the most northern states and buchanan carried the south including the more moderate parts of the south plus illinois indiana and california winning easily.
if buchanan entered the white house with any mandate in 1857 it was to avoid the issue of slavery.
it was one the new president could not possibly fulfill try though he did.
after 1856 the know nothing party faded rapidly.
opposition to immigration did not have staying power as a political issue especially when new immigrants provided the swing votes in key states like new york.
most know nothings became republicans in an uneasy alliance with the proimmigrant faction of the party.
republicans were also divided on just how far to go in embracing the abolitionists among them.
as late as june 1859 lincoln had begged ohio senator salmon p chase to be sure that the ohio republican partys demand for a repeal of the atrocious fugitive slave law not become an issue in the national republican convention because it will explode it but after 1857 it was the democrats turn to divide as it became impossible for northern moderates like douglas and southern extremists like jefferson davis to stay in the same political organization.
everyone chapter 13 the politics of separation 375 knew that the elections of 1860 were going to involve tough political contests.
no one knew they would lead to war.
while the lincoln douglas debates of 1858 established abraham lincoln as a national political leader it was by no means certain that he would be the republican nominee for president in 1860.
lincoln himself had mixed feelings about a presidential nomination since he had hopes of a career in the u s senate.
the frontrunner for nomination was new york senator william henry seward a former whig and a founder of the republican party.
but seward also had many enemies people who thought he was too radical or who just did not trust him.
many including lincoln thought that if seward did not get the nomination on the first ballot his support would melt away.
two other prominent republicans were also in the field governor salmon chase of ohio one of the partys staunchest opponents of slavery and judge edward bates of missouri the candidate of the more moderate republicans.
and then there was lincoln respected by everyone an extraordinary speaker and more moderate than either seward or chase.
lincolns convention manager judge david davis reported to lincoln we are laboring to make you the second choice of all the delegations we can where we cant make you first choice the strategy worked.
while seward took the lead on the first ballot lincoln not chase or bates came in second.
by the third ballot it was all over as delegates made lincolns nomination unanimous.
of course being the nominee of a new political party did not guarantee victory.
seward chase and bates all campaigned hard for lincoln and after the election he appointed all three to his cabinet as secretaries of state and treasury as well as attorney general.
but in between the nomination and the victorious election there was a hard fought presidential campaign.
given the tensions in the country in the summer of 1860 it is not surprising that traditional political parties splintered.
a faction of the old whig party reemerged as the constitutional union party.
it nominated slaveholder john bell of tennessee for president and edward everett of massachusetts for vice president on a vague platform of the constitution the union and the enforcement of the laws presumably a reference to the fugitive slave act.
some saw this small party as the best hope to hold the country together through new compromises.
others ridiculed them as the old gentlemens party since most of those who campaigned for bell were well past age 60.
the democrats who had elected the last two presidents met in charleston south carolina in april 1860.
they were deeply divided.
stephen a douglas was the frontrunner for the nomination but although douglas had once been popular in the south after his opposition to admitting kansas as a slave state most southern political leaders now considered him to be a traitor to their cause.
mississippi senator jefferson davis insisted on a platform that pledged the party to protect the constitutional right of any citizen of the united states to take his slave property into the common territories.
but douglass supporters could not stomach abandoning their candidates long held commitment to popular sovereignty and would not support a platform that opened all the territories to slavery regardless of what the voters said.
after 57 ballots the convention could not agree on any nominee and adjourned to meet again in baltimore in 6 weeks to try again.
when the democrats convened again in baltimore however the same splits were evident.
one third of the delegates nearly all of the southerners and a few proslavery northerners walked out of the convention.
the remaining democrats nominated douglas and adopted a popular sovereignty platform.
the delegates who had walked out of the convention organized their own convention and nominated john c breckinridge of kentucky who was buchanans vice president adopting the platform advocated by jefferson davis.
southern democrats understood that the split in the party would benefit the republicans but they were so angry with douglas that they were willing to accept that result.
some also believed that a republican victory would build support for their real goal which was secession.
a democratic party leader and former congressman william lowndes yancey told a crowd in charleston that it was time for a new revolution and an independent southern republic part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 this political cartoon published during the 1860 presidential election depicts lincoln and douglas on the left fighting over much of the country while in the center breckinridge tries to tear off the south and on the right bell with glue pot in hand tries to put the whole thing back together.
13 1 132 132 13 4 the republican ticket did not even appear on ballots in most of the south and republican candidates would have risked their lives campaigning in the region.
lincoln campaigned against douglas in the north.
breckinridge campaigned against bell in the south.
no one had ever seen a presidential election quite like it.
despite the crazy split the north with its larger population was going to settle the election.
douglas had a chance to win the election if he and the northern democrats could carry enough northern states and some of the slave states known as border states where northern influence was strongest and the attachment to slavery was weakest see map 13 2.
douglas claimed to be the only candidate who could unite the nation.
he continued to paint lincoln as a radical and tried to frighten northern voters by saying that lincoln would bring blacks into the north as the social equals of whites who would also compete with whites for jobs.
the republicans had a lot going for them.
they were new.
they attracted young first time voters.
they were united.
their economic policies appealed to many in the north.
even so some abolitionists did not trust the republicans.
william lloyd garrison said that the republican party means to do nothing can do nothing for the abolition of slavery in the slave states frederick douglass perhaps more of a realist countered saying that a republican victory must and will be hailed as an anti slavery triumph on election day in november 1860 the breadth of the republican victory was dear.
breckenridge carried most of the south.
bell won virginia kentucky and tennessee.
although douglas received far more votes than either breckenridge or bell he carried only missouri and half the electoral votes of new jersey.
lincoln received only 40 percent of the national popular vote but it was the most of any single candidate and his 180 electoral votes were a solid majority.
as cheering crowds his hometown of springfield illinois celebrated abraham lincoln who had served one term in congress and had never held an executive position became the president elect of the united states.
what his election would mean for him and for country only time would tell.
few thought it would lead to a long and bloody war.
chapter 13 the politics of separation 377 ut4hterr t0l ky unorganized territory nebraska territory new mexico territory minnesota j x f kansas territory indian territory lincoln republican douglas democratic northern breckinridge democratic southern bell constitutional union new hampshire 5 vermont massachusetts v maine 13 8 wisconsin rhode sland x 4 iowa 4 5 michigan 8 4ho j t ark unorganized 4 texas 4 ind.
ohio 11 o3v 23 r x 1 virginia ky ttnn miss ala 7 w louisiana 8 ga 10 connecticut 6 new jersey 4 delaware 3 maryland north carolina south carolina 6 florida 3 map 13 2 the election of 1860.
this map indicating the electoral vote of each state illustrates the regional nature of the final vote in the 1860 presidential election.
lincoln carried all of the north as well as california and oregon.
breckinridge the southern democrat carried all of the deep south and beyond.
bell the candidate who called for glossing over all the differences carried the key border states of virginia kentucky and tennessee that douglas had been counting on.
in the end douglas carried only the slave state of missouri and split the electoral votes of new jersey with lincoln.
as alexander mcclure a prominent pennsylvania attorney wrote 40 years after the civil war the north believed that the south was more bombastic than earnest in the threat of provoking civil war for the protection of slavery and the south believed that northern people were mere money getters ready to yield anything rather than accept fratricidal conflict the secession of the south as some had predicted lincoln s election provided southern secessionists with just the rationale they needed.
many southerners including moderates were furious about lincolns election.
they saw the breadth of northern support for a committed free soil candidate as one more effort to exclude slavery from the territories.
they also saw it as part of a larger pattern that included northern failure to enforce the fugitive slave act and northern support for john brown.
the charleston courier editorialized that lincolns election meant it was time for a southern confederacy something desired by all true hearted southerners the night after the election a huge crowd of demonstrators in charleston demanded action and the south carolina legislature called a special convention to consider secession.
on december 20 1860 the convention voted 169 0 in favor of dissolving the union now subsisting between south carolina and other states other states in the deep south followed.
in january 1861 mississippi florida alabama georgia and louisiana all voted to leave the union followed by texas 378 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 on february 1.
none of the other states after south carolina were unanimous in their votes but over 80 percent of the delegates in each of these states voted for secession which was probably a fairly accurate reflection of the opinions of the white male population.
nevertheless a minority in most southern states even in the deep south preferred to wait and see what lincoln would actually do but as louisiana senator judah p benjamin wrote the prudent and conservative men of the south were not able to stem the wild torrent of passion which is carrying everything before it the reality was however that the demands of these prudent and conservative men of the south were for things to which lincoln would not agree.
when kentucky senator john crittenden proposed the crittenden compromise to preserve the union by extending the missouri compromise line to the pacific and thus protect slavery in the new mexico territory and california lincoln refused to consider the compromise even though his close ally william seward urged him to do so.
as he had made clear in his various campaigns he did not intend to abolish slavery where it existed but he did not want to spread slavery any further.
lincoln had also come to believe that any effort at appeasement would do nothing to control slavery but would simply open the door for continuing demands.
the pressing question in february and march of 1861 was about the slave states that had not yet voted to secede the so called border states that were closer to the north less militant in their defense of slavery and perhaps most likely to stay with the union maryland arkansas north carolina delaware missouri and most of all the strategically placed states of kentucky tennessee and virginia the largest and most industrialized state in the south.
lincoln did not want to lose them at least not all of them.
in the face of the secession crisis the wait from november 1860 to the presidential inauguration in march 1861 seemed especially long.
the outgoing buchanan administration never decisive seemed more unsure of itself than ever.
rumors of a southern invasion or an internal coup filled the capital.
many senators joined seward and crittenden in seeking a compromise that would avoid secession or war.
others in and out of congress proposed all sorts of solutions including even abolishing the office of president.
the senators and representatives of the seven states that had voted to secede by february 1 packed their belongings gave their farewell speeches and left town to organize the government of the confederate states of america a project they accomplished with amazing speed at a 6 day convention in montgomery alabama where they drafted a temporary constitution and selected a provisional president and vice president.
in the meantime the rest of the country seemed frozen.
although the states of the deep south voted to leave the union conventions in virginia arkansas and missouri did not vote on secession.
north carolina and tennessee did not even hold conventions.
but leaders in all of these states warned that any violence by the federal government against those states that had voted to leave the union would force them to depart also.
some in the north seemed happy to see part of the south depart.
the chicago tribune said that if south carolina wanted to leave let her go and like a limb lopped from a healthy trunk wilt and rot where she falls in new york horace greeleys tribune said if the cotton states shall become satisfied that they can do better out of the union than in it we insist on letting them go.
however secession angered others in the north.
one resident of illinois wrote to congress saying we elected lincoln and are just as willing if necessity requires to fight for him.
a resident of ohio wrote that lincoln must enforce the laws of the u s states against all rebellion no matter what the consequences even senator sewards wife criticized her husbands efforts at compromise telling him compromise based on the idea that the preservation of the union is more important than the liberty of nearly 4 000 000 human beings cannot be right while it is likely that many northern white voters would have been willing to preserve the union at the cost of 4 million people remaining in slavery a good crittenden compromise a last ditch effort at a compromise to amend the constitution to protect slavery in states where it existed.
chapter 13 the politics of separation 379 13 4 portion of northerners though far from all seemed to be ready to fight rather than let the union be dissolved.
in that tense and uncertain situation after months of waiting lincoln made his way from springfield to washington.
abraham lincoln was inaugurated as the 16th president of the united states on march 4 1861.
his inaugural address broke little new ground.
he said that he considered secession illegal and that he would assert federal authority especially over forts and other federal installations in the south.
he insisted that he had no interest in interfering with slavery in the states where it existed.
and he promised to enforce the fugitive slave act while also asserting that he wanted stronger protection against free people being kidnapped in the name of enforcing the law.
in closing he made a poetic plea that the union must be preserved we are not enemies but friends.
we must not be enemies.
though passion may have strained it must not break our bonds of affection.
the mystic chords of memory stretching from every battle field and patriot grave to every living heart and hearthstone all over this broad land will yet swell the chorus of the union when again touched as surely they will be by the better angels of our nature.
northern response to the speech was mixed.
garrisons liberator noted that lincolns insistence that free blacks needed protection from the fugitive slave act represented the first time any president had spoken of citizenship rights for blacks a direct contradiction of the dred scott decision.
other abolitionists were disappointed.
many moderates agreed with the jersey city newspaper that said it was hardly possible for mr lincoln to speak with more mildness confederate leaders did not see the speech as mild.
lincolns refusal to recognize the right of secession and his claim on the federal property in the south seemed to them to be a prelude to war.
two days after the speech the confederate congress authorized a call for 100 000 troops.
lincoln did not respond by making any similar call of his own.
one of his advisors orville h browning had written to the president that it was very important that the traitors shall be the aggressors t hen the government will stand justified before the entire country in repelling that aggression that policy was exactly the one lincoln planned to follow.
conflict seemed most likely to begin at fort sumter a new federal installation guarding the harbor of charleston south carolina.
sitting within view of the city where secession had begun fort sumter was a dramatic symbol of federal authority in the heart of the confederacy.
the 80 man garrison was commanded by major robert anderson a former slaveholder from kentucky whose decades in the army had made him a devoted supporter of federal authority.
soon after their vote to secede from the union in december 1860 south carolina authorities demanded that outgoing president buchanan remove the federal garrison and hand the fort over to them.
in an uncharacteristic show of strength buchanan refused and tried to reinforce the fort in january 1861.
south carolina fired on the supply ship but not the fort and the ship turned back.
by the time lincoln came to office in march anderson was running low on supplies and knew he would have to either surrender or evacuate soon.
on april 6 after some hesitation the new president announced that he was sending a supply ship with food and medicine but not arms to fort sumter.
jefferson davis was not willing to allow the federal presence in what davis now considered an independent country and ordered pierre g t beauregard the officer in charge of confederate troops in charleston to attack the fort.
on april 12 1861 at 4 30 a m shore batteries in charleston began to shell fort sumter and continued to do so for the next day and a half.
on april 13 out of food and ammunition major anderson surrendered.
anderson and the defending troops were allowed to leave and they sailed to new york where they were greeted as heroes but the confederates had control of the fort.
the confederates had won the battle but they had fired on the american flag and started a war.
part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 this popular illustration of the firing on fort sumter adds drama to the scene.
confederate guns did fire on the fort almost nonstop on april 12 and 13 and the fort s defenders with very little ammunition fired back on occasion before finally out of food and ammunition they surrendered on april 13.
president lincoln declared that a state of insurrection existed and called on the state governors for 75 000 volunteers while also ordering the expansion of the regular army and navy and recalling some troops from the west.
ihe attack and lincolns response brought unity even if temporary to most of the north.
stephen a douglas though seriously ill came to the white house to promise his support and then returned to illinois to tell democrats and republicans that they owed undivided loyalty to the union.
as the president focused on preserving the union some african americans and their supporters called the looming war a white mans war lincoln had made it clear they said that the fighting was to save the union not necessarily to free the enslaved.
nevertheless some abolitionists saw an opportunity.
senator charles sumner of massachusetts reminded lincoln that under the war power the right had come to him to emancipate the slaves ihe black owned weekly anglo african told readers that the slaves have a clear and decided idea of what they want liberty it would take time before the president or northern public opinion would agree but some supported the goal of emancipation from the first days of the war especially slaves who followed the news closely.
lincolns call for federal troops united the south.
tennessees governor announced that his state will not furnish a single man for the purpose of coercion but fifty thousand if necessary for the defense of our rights and those of our southern brothers within days of the firing on fort sumter and lincolns call for hoops every border state had begun to consider secession and four virginia north carolina tennessee and arkansas voted to join the confederacy.
ihe 88 to 55 vote to secede in virginia was far from south carolinas unanimity and the western counties of virginia later declared their loyalty to the union.
representatives from that area took virginias seats in congress until west virginia could be organized as a separate state in 1863.
missouri had its own civil war that started with mob violence in st louis where most german immigrants favored the union cause while recent arrivals from the south supported the confederacy.
ihe confederate government admitted missouri as its 12th state but union loyalists also organized their own state government.
two opposing missouri state governments sent representatives to both washington and richmond while lawlessness reigned in most of the state throughout the war.
chapter 13 the politics of separation 381 13 2 132 132 13 4 kentucky declared neutrality.
since there was probably more proslavery and pro confederacy sentiment in kentucky than in any other slave state that remained in the union lincoln courted the state carefully.
if kentucky seceded the border between the united states and the confederacy would be the ohio river dangerously far north.
if kentucky stayed in the union then lincoln and his generals would have much easier access to multiple points of attack on the heartland of the confederacy.
given its strategic importance lincoln was reported to have said that he hoped to have god on his side but he must have kentucky he got kentucky.
ihe state did not secede and sentiment for preserving the union was strong in that state though kentucky sent soldiers to both sides.
perhaps more than anywhere else the civil war in kentucky was a war of brother against brother.
four of henry clay s grandsons fought for the confederacy and three for the union.
ihe other two border states also remained loyal to the union delawares northerly location and the few slaves there made the decision almost inevitable.
marylands loyalty to the union was assured by the influx of federal troops and lincolns arrest of some pro confederacy members of the state legislature.
if maryland had joined the confederacy washington would have been cut off from the rest of the country and lincoln was not going to let that happen.
thus maryland delaware and kentucky remained as slave states within the union throughout the duration of the war while virginia and missouri were represented in both the union and confederate congresses.
after union victories in louisiana and arkansas those states were also represented in the u s congress by one set of people while others represented them in the confederate congress.
despite lincolns success in retaining some of the border states the loss of others especially virginia was a severe blow to the union.
over half of all those who fought in the confederate army came from border states including several of the souths most prominent generals.
on the day virginia voted to secede robert e lee was offered command of the union army but responded i cannot raise my hand against my birthplace my home my children lee resigned from the u s army and eventually commanded the confederate army of northern virginia.
almost as important virginia included the tredegar iron works in richmond the only factory in the south capable of making heavy shells and armor and the federal arsenal at harpers ferry and the gosport navy yard.
all of these facilities were in confederate hands by the end of april.
even after the attack on fort sumter and the secession of the border states many doubted that a real war would take place.
people in the north were confident that the south would come to its senses perhaps after an easy union conquest of richmond virginia.
people in the south were confident that the north was not really up for a fight certainly not a fight to end slavery where it had existed for over 200 years and probably not a fight to save the union either.
both sides were terribly wrong.
13 4 quick review how did lincoln s election impact the thinking of people in the south and therefore the course of u s history.
conclusion throughout the 1850s divisions between the north and the slaveholding south intensified despite efforts of some politicians on both sides to keep growing tensions in check.
the burning question that continually threatened to divide the nation would slavery be permitted to expand into new territories and states could not be amicably decided.
attempts by southerners to defend the institution of slavery and to ensure that slavery could expand into new states in the west were met by growing choruses of antislavery sentiment in the north.
once moderate opponents of slavery hardened their positions against the south as the events of the decade unfolded.
abolitionism 382 partv expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 whose adherents saw slavery as an evil that had to be destroyed continued to grow in force and many in the north regardless of their opinions about racial equality simply did not want the future of the country to be defined by slave labor.
slave labor if it were allowed to exceed the confines of the south would undermine the value of the free labor ideology of the north.
californias application for statehood endangered the balance of power in the senate between the north and the south.
in an effort to find a new middle ground the compromise of 1850 originally planned by the aging senator henry clay of kentucky admitted california to the union as a free state but gave southerners several incentives for resisting secession including a new strengthened fugitive slave act.
but the fugitive slave act infuriated many in the north and northern reluctance to enforce the law infuriated many in the south even people who themselves did not hold slaves.
the compromise of 1850 did not save the union for long.
harriet beecher stowes 1852 novel uncle tom s cabin written in response to her own anger about the fugitive slave act may have seemed to be a romanticized version of events to some but it brought the reality of the pain of slavery home to many in the north.
it quickly became a best seller and inflamed public opinion.
when congress passed the kansas nebraska act in 1854 in an effort to organize a government for the previously unorganized territory between minnesota and oregon the legislation provided new opportunities for slavery to spread even in regions north of the geographical divide between free and slave that had been established by the missouri compromise in 1820.
the result was not only national tension but a civil war in kansas so bloody that the territory came to be known as bleeding kansas in 1857 the supreme courts landmark decision in dred scott v sandford triggered further outrage in the north when it declared that the federal government had no authority to regulate the spread of slavery in any of the territories.
in that same year the panic of 1857 which hit the north far more than the south illustrated how distinct the two regions had become in their economies.
later southerners were outraged by northern sympathy for the radical actions of john brown when he attacked the federal arsenal at harper s ferry virginia now in west virginia but then part of the state of virginia in 1859.
these events deepened sectional tensions and rivalries.
as the nation responded a new political party the republican party emerged and an established political party the whigs dissolved.
at the same time abraham lincoln gained national prominence as he campaigned first for a u s senate seat and then for the presidency.
with lincolns election to the presidency in 1860 tensions came to a head a majority of southern states seceded from the union and civil war which many hoped and expected would be short began.
c hi re what areas of conflict between north and south led to the civil war.
what do most historians consider to be the single most important cause of the war.
chapter 13 the politics of separation 383 chapter 13 chapter review 13 1 from union to disunion analyze the political jockeying in congress and how reaction to the fugitive slave act and the publication of uncle tom s cabin changed the opinions of many americans south and the north making a break between them hard to avoid.
review questions 1.
historical interpretation what light does the debate over the admission of territories acquired by the united states at the conclusion of the war with mexico shed on the root issues dividing the north and south in the decades before the civil war.
crafting arguments how did passage of the kansas nebraska act contribute to the rise of the republican party and the demise of the whigs.
crafting arguments how did the fugitive slave act of 1850 affect public opinion about slavery in the north.
how would you explain the impact of the law.
bleeding kansas and dred scott v sandford analyze the causes and consequences of the battle over slavery in kansas and the supreme court s decision in the dred scott case and the impact of those events on public opinion.
review questions 4.
contextualization why did both pro and antislavery forces believe that victory in kansas was critical to their cause.
132 13 3 5.
crafting arguments why did the supreme court ruling in the dred scott case make a peaceful resolution of the conflict between the north and the south over slavery less likely.
the economy the panic of and the lincoln douglas debates explain how the economic crisis of 1857 and the growing political crises of the decade impacted each other and led the nation to divide.
review question 6.
contextualization what light do the lincoln douglas debates shed on lincoln s views on slavery and race in 1858.
from john brown to the secession of the south analyze the political impact of john brown s raid and why lincoln won the presidential election of 1860 and southern states then vote to leave the union.
review questions 7.
historical interpretation how did john browns 1859 raid on harpers ferry help radicalize public opinion in both the north and the south.
crafting arguments defend or refute the following statement after lincolns election in november 1860 war between the north and the south was inevitable 13 4 384 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 demonstrate an understanding of the strategies involved in fighting a civil war and the impact of the war on american life north and south.
1861 1865 north and south men volunteered with enthusiasm to serve in their respective armies these new confederate soldiers like their northern counterparts reflect a commitment that did not always last as the long years of fighting the war continued.
homer winslow 1836 1910.
prisoners form the front.
oil on canvas 24x38 in.
61 x 96 5 cm.
gift of mrs frank b porter 1922 22 207.
metropolitan museum of art new york ny u s a.
image copyright the metropolitan museum of art.
image source art resource ny once fort sumter had been fired on large patriotic rallies were held north and south.
of course what it meant to be patriotic varied depending on where one lived.
calls for volunteers by confederate and union authorities were quickly oversubscribed.
young men did not want to miss out on the fun and glory of what everyone thought would be a short war and an easy victory.
a confederate volunteer from mississippi wrote home in june 1861 that he was ready to fight the yankees all fun and frolic on the union side a new york volunteer wrote i and the rest of the boys are in fine spirits feeling like larks.
letters from new recruits also showed seriousness of purpose.
a new jersey soldier wrote that he joined the army because our glorious institutions are likely to be destroyed while a midwestern recruit said that his service was a duty i owe to my country and to my children to do what i can to preserve this government sentiment among soldiers in the confederacy was equally patriotic.
mississippis lucius lamar who would achieve high rank in the confederate army said thank god.
we have a country at last to live for to pray for to fight for and if necessary to die for an enlisted man in the confederate army gave a simple answer when he was asked after his capture why he a nonslaveholder fought for the south im fighting because youre down here soldiers were sent off in new uniforms with cheering parades.
the war did not long remain so lighthearted.
learning objectives fort sumter to antietam 1861 1862 explain how the early battles of the war shaped future events.
the road to emancipation analyze how the war influenced attitudes toward slavery in white and black communities leading to the emancipation proclamation and to black soldiers in the union army.
the home front shortages opposition riots and battles explain how the war s death toll and civilian shortages affected life north and south during the war.
from gettysburg to appomattox and beyond analyze the strategies and costs of fighting a long and terrible war.
14 1 14j 14 3 14 4.
chapter 16 conflict in the west 1865 1912 the tribes of the west and the u s government the impact of the transcontinental rail road 1869 the transformation of the west chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social order 1876 1913 technology changes the nation corporations and monopolies lives of the middle class in the gilded age immigration chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change 1877 1914 conflict in the new south the politics of conflict from populist movement to populist party worker protest and the rise of organized labor chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 1879 1917 the revolt of the intellectuals the transformation of cities religious responses to the gilded age progressive politics on the national stage conflict in the west buffalo bill s wild west show created the image of the american west for many people which was more fantasy than reality.
chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the post civil war changes in the american west the tribes of the west and the u s government 16 1 explain western development from an indian perspective and the way indian and white cultures shaped each other.
the impact of the transcontinental railroad 1869 16 2 analyze the building of transcontinental railroads and its impact on the nation especially the west.
the transformation of the west 16 3 analyze how indigenous people ranchers farmers miners outlaws politicians and mythmakers shaped the west and our understanding of its history.
in the midst of the civil war abraham lincoln worried about the potential for alliances between the confederate states and some western indian tribes.
he met with 14 western chiefs at the white house in march 1863.
he did not offer much but urged them to adopt the peaceful ways of the white people chief lean bear of the cheyenne reminded the president that whites were responsible for most of the violence in the west.
he did not mention the irony of lincolns statement coming in the midst of the bloodiest war in american history.
subsequent presidents had similar usually unproductive meetings.
president grant tried hard to implement what came to be known as the grant peace policy but though well intentioned that policy ultimately depended on the u s army to settle matters in the west and the army in the field was often anything but peaceful.
while the most intense interaction between white settlers and indian tribes east of the mississippi river lasted for over 200 years the major battles between the western tribes and the u s army lasted for less than 30 years.
what began as a series of bloody skirmishes during the civil war erupted into the great plains wars in the 1870s and 1880s.
by the 1890s the armed conflict was all over as tribes were defeated and moved into ever shrinking reservations.
at the same time white ranchers farmers and miners built new settlements across the west.
what began as great cattle ranches were replaced within 30 years by smaller scale farms producing beef and wheat for national and world markets.
these agricultural developments of the post civil war era depended on new technologies most of all the development of railroads that brought supplies to isolated farmers and shipped their products and on new economic and political arrangements.
this chapter examines the growth and changing nature of the american west between 1865 and 1890.
16 1 significant dates the tribes of the west and the u s government explain western development from an indian perspective and the way indian and white cultures shaped each other.
native americans fought on both sides in the civil war and sometimes used the countrys division to expand their territory forcing both north and south to divert troops from other battles.
the civil war also changed the lives of american indians.
for most whites however indian matters existed only on the margin of their attention during the war.
once the civil war ended white relationships with indian tribes especially on the great plains took on greater significance.
as many americans whites and some blacks began to look for more land in the aftermath of the war they ran directly into newly empowered indian tribes.
the comanche empire for the comanches arguably the most powerful tribe on the western frontier in 1860 the civil war was a great gift.
the u s army the texas rangers and other whites who had been harassing them for decades were called to fight against each other on distant battlefields.
the comanches welcomed their absence.
in 1700 the comanches were a small tribe who had recently moved into what is now the southwest of the united states.
they developed expertise using two european imports rifles and horses becoming the much feared lords of the south plains the comanches built a way of life based on hunting the buffalo and like the buffalo they traveled widely over the great plains.
they also made alliances especially with the utes traded with everyone and fought bloody battles especially with the apaches and the europeans while they stole horses and supplies as well as kidnapped settlers and people from other tribes.
by the early 1800s although they were without a permanent capital borders or bureaucracy the comanches ruled an empire that was equal in size and power to the united states or the republic of mexico.
nevertheless by the late 1850s the comanches seemed to be in decline.
working with texas rangers and with smaller tribes who had been comanche victims the u s army began to gain the upper hand in texas.
the comanches needed ample space for hunting trading and fighting they had no interest in being settled in any permanent locations.
in battles during 1858 over 100 comanche warriors including chiefs were killed and a large number of women and children taken prisoner.
some comanches were ready to seek peace.
the penateka comanches who had split from the larger tribe gave up warfare and settled on a texas reservation just before the civil war.
the civil war and later reconstruction opened up new opportunities for the comanches.
the war diverted troops from texas to distant battlefields and as early us 1863 comanche raiding parties began to move back into parts of texas they had left in the 1850s stealing horses and cattle.
when texas joined the confederacy comanches developed a brisk trade selling stolen texas cattle to union army agents in new mexico.
with the coming of peace in 1865 the u s army demilitarized any forces in texas that had fought for the confederacy in the civil war including the feared texas rangers.
while u s army troops were stationed in houston san antonio and along the border with mexico west texas with several million cattle wandering on huge range lands was only lightly protected.
the comanche saw their opportunity.
they developed a rich trade with prosperous new mexicans who came to be known as the comancheros because of the trade.
450 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 1858 john butterfield opens overland stage route 1862 congress passes the homestead act 1864 navajo long walk to bosque redondo 1865 civil war ends units of u s army return to patrol the west chicago union stock yards opens 1867 chisholm trail to abilene kansas medicine lodge creek treaty between u s government and comanche 1868 treaty of fort laramie with lakota sioux treaty of bosque redondo with navajos 1869 transcontinental railroad completed at promontory point utah president grant announces new grant peace policy for american indians 1872 modoc uprising in california 1873 panic and depression u s army defeat of the comanche black hills gold rush into sioux territory in the dakotas 1876 battle of the little bighorn 1877 nez perce under chief joseph surrender to u s army 1878 billy the kid and lincoln county war in new mexico el fronterizo spanish language newspaper begins publication in arizona territory 1879 beginnings of carlisle indian school 1881 gunfight at the ok corral beginning of great dakota land boom 1882 gustavus swift creates new refrigerated rail car allowing shipment of meat opening of anaconda copper mine in montana 1883 buffalo bill s wild west show four standard time zones created for the united states 1887 dawes act begins dividing reservations into private allotments 1889 oklahoma land rush north dakota south dakota montana washington become states 1890 lakota sioux ghost dance and massacre at wounded knee white cap resistance to land development in new mexico idaho and wyoming become states 1892 johnson county war wyoming stock growers association drive out smaller ranches 1896 utah admitted as a state 1907 oklahoma admitted as a state 1912 new mexico and arizona admitted as states chapter 16 conflict in the west 451 medicine lodge creek treaty an 1867 treaty between the comanches and the u s army in which the comanches agreed to settle on a reservation.
from the mid 1860s into the early 1870s great annual trading gatherings took place where comancheros often backed by investors from the eastern united states traded salt hard bread flour sugar tobacco blankets and knives as well as the ever in demand latest issue revolvers and rifles in exchange for cattle that the comanches had recently acquired in texas.
the comanches also continued to trade in people mexican and indian captives especially women who were in great demand as brides in new mexico.
while these trading gatherings integrated the comanches into u s markets the stolen cattle and the continued trade in humans were sources of serious tensions between the comanches and the governments of the united states and the state of texas.
to restore order to the southwest and open up new land for white settlement u s peace commissioners met with more than 5 000 comanches as well as kiowas naishans cheyennes and arapahoes at medicine lodge creek in texas in october 1867.
the u s delegation was led by william tecumseh sherman head of the army of the west a post he had also held during the civil war.
as a show of strength the army team included 500 well armed soldiers in dress uniform.
a newspaper reporter also at the meeting wrote that the comanches arrived with all their war paraphernalia their horses striped with war paint the riders bedecked with war bonnets and their faces painted red they also knew a thing or two about a show of strength.
after elaborate opening ceremonies and the exchanges of gifts including 6 000 pounds of coffee 10 000 pounds of bread and 3 000 pounds of tobacco from the government the u s representatives made it clear they had come to medicine lodge creek to end the comanche status as a sovereign people.
the government would help them become farmers on a reservation but would not tolerate a continuation of the old hunting trading and stealing ways.
sherman concluded you can no more stop this change than you can stop the sun or the moon.
you must submit and do the best you can the comanche chiefs were outraged by the governments demands.
several including paruasemena the leader of the penateka comanches expressed their anger in eloquent responses but in the end the chiefs signed a treaty although it was one that left much open to interpretation.
the medicine lodge creek treaty provided for a comanche reservation but also gave them the right to hunt on open plains below the arkansas river in indian territory oklahoma.
the government representatives assumed that the comanches would become farmers on the reservation while venturing out on occasional hunting trips to track the buffalo.
the comanches thought that the reservation would make a perfectly good winter campground and they were more than happy to receive government rations but they had no intention of becoming settled farmers.
along with hunting buffalo the comanches expected to continue hunting for texas cattle and trading them to new mexico buyers.
the radically different interpretations of the medicine lodge creek treaty between the comanches and the u s government became clear the next spring when several thousand comanches having spent the winter on the reservation collected their government payments and began raiding cattle and horses in texas new mexico and indian territory.
according to one report 6 255 horses and 11 395 cattle were lost to indian raids in texas between 1866 and 1873.
after several unsuccessful peace efforts the united states gave up on negotiations and ordered the army to attack and force the comanches onto a permanent reservation.
from 1871 to 1873 the army and the comanches fought.
while the army attacked american buffalo hunters decimated the buffalo herds as industries found new uses for their hides.
the buffalo had been at the heart of comanche life not only as food but also as a way to understand the universe and their destruction undermined the comanche way of life.
during the fighting from 1871 to 1873 a new comanche leader emerged.
quanah parker was the son of a comanche chief and ann cynthia parker a white texan who had been captured by the comanches.
he became the fiercest opponent of compromise with whites.
then in 1874 isa tai a young comanche spiritual leader or shaman became prominent sharing a message heard many times among different indian tribes that if they would get rid of white ways and end their dealings with white 2 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 american voices paruasemena ten bears speech at medicine lodge creek treaty meeting 1867 16 1 paruasemena was one of the indian leaders to visit lincoln at the white house in 1863.
four years later the 75 year old leader spoke to the u s peace commission at medicine lodge creek.
the passion and pathos of the speech touched many.
my people have never first drawn a bow or fired a gun against the whites there has been trouble between us my young men have danced the war dance.
but it was not begun by us.
it was you who sent out the first soldier two years ago i came upon this road following the buffalo that my wives and children might have their cheeks plump and their bodies warm.
but the soldiers fired on us the blue dressed soldiers and the utes came out from the night and for campfires they lit our lodges.
instead of hunting game they killed my braves and the warriors of the tribe cut short their hair for the dead.
so it was in texas.
they made sorrow in our camps and we went out like the buffalo bulls when the cows are attacked.
when we found them we killed them and their scalps hang in our lodges.
the comanches are not weak and blind like the pups of a dog when seven sleeps old.
they are strong and farsighted like grown horses.
we took their road and we went on it.
the white women cried and our women laughed.
but there are things which you have said to me which i do not like they were not sweet like sugar but bitter like gourds.
you have said that you want to put us on a reservation to build us houses and make us medicine lodges.
i do not want them.
i was born under the prairie where the wind blew free and there was nothing to break the light of the sun.
i was born where there were no enclosures and everything drew a free breath.
i want to die there and not within walls.
i know every stream and wood between the rio grande and the arkansas.
i have hunted and lived over that country.
i live like my fathers before me and like them i lived happily.
when i was in washington the great father told me that all the comanche land was ours and that no one should hinder us in living upon it.
so why do you ask us to leave the rivers and the sun and the wind and live in houses.
do not ask us to give up the buffalo for the sheep.
the young men have heard talk of this and it has made them sad and angry.
do not speak of it more.
i love to carry out the talk i get from the great father.
when i get goods and presents i and my people feel glad since it shows that he holds us in his eye.
if the texans had kept out of my country there might have been peace.
but that which you now say we must live in is too small.
the texans have taken away the places where the grass grew the thickest and the timber was best.
had we kept that we might have done the things you ask.
but it is too late.
the whites have the country which we loved and we wish only to wander on the prairie ti we die.
source taylor nathaniel g et al 1910 papers relating to talks and councils held with the indians in dakota and montana in the years 1866 1869.
washington government printing office.
original in the national archives records of the indian division office of the secretary of the interior record group 48.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how did paruasemena characterize the conflict between his people and the united states government.
contextualization what light does this document shed on the differences between white and indian cultural values in the 1800s.
people the buffalo would return and life would be good again.
in a great camp meeting in june 1874 several hundred comanche warriors led by isa tai and parker joined with kiowas cheyennes and arapahoes to eliminate the white presence from the great plains.
the comanche attacked the buffalo hunters.
the army counterattacked.
on september 28 1874 u s forces attacked parker s main encampment and though nearly all of the indians fled the army destroyed the camp taking the horses and burning tents blankets and food.
faced with starvation the comanches began to surrender in small groups coming to the army post at fort sill in indian territory over the course of the winter where they gave up their horses and rifles and moved to the reservations assigned to them.
isa tai was discredited among the comanches from then on.
the winter of 1874 75 was the low point of comanche life but it was not the end.
quannah parker was only 27 when he surrendered to federal authorities.
over the next 4 decades he became principal chief of the comanches and led them from warfare to farming and ranching.
parker was a tough negotiator with the federal bureau of indian affairs for expanded land allotments.
he had eight wives built a fine 10 room house and before he died he had his own telephone owned a car traveled by train and went hunting with president theodore roosevelt.
the life parker and his people lived as he grew older was radically different from the life he had lived as a youth but he helped create the foundation for tribal survival in a new era.
chapter 16 conflict in the west 453 bosque redondo a reservation in central new mexico where the majority of the navajos and mescalero apaches were confined during the civil war.
the navajos and the apaches the navajos or dine as they prefer to be called were as warlike as the comanches and dominated large swaths of new mexico colorado and kansas.
the union army ended their rule and that of the mescalero apaches too.
in august 1862 union brigadier general james h carleton arrived in new mexico in command of california volunteers but when he learned that confederates in the region had already been defeated he ordered his troops to attack the apaches and navajos instead.
in early 1863 the army invaded apache lands and soon confined some 400 apaches at a new reservation at bosque redondo in central new mexico.
carleton then appointed kit carson to lead the attack on the much larger navajo tribe of some 10 000 people.
carson told the navajos go to bosque redondo or we will pursue and destroy you.
we will not make peace with you on any other terms carson kept his word marching into canyon de chelly the sacred navajo heartland attacking navajo encampments as well as destroying orchards crops and livestock.
by the spring of 1864 some 6 000 navajos had surrendered rather than die of starvation.
u s troops pursued other resisters and eventually 8 000 navajos were forced on the long walk 300 miles south to a strange way of life at bosque redondo.
the bosque redondo reservation was a complete failure.
the mescalero apaches considered the navajos to be their inveterate enemies and the two tribes had no interest in cooperating.
the arid land of mid new mexico could not support thousands of families even if they did turn to farming as the government asked them to do.
in addition the comanches saw the confined reservation as an opportunity to attack old enemies.
after the civil war a congressional peace commission visited bosque redondo and realized that the government had created a disaster.
on june 1 1868 they signed a new treaty with the navajos that allowed them to return to a reservation in their own homelands.
a new mescalero apaches reservation in central new mexico was established by executive order in 1873 and expanded in 1883.
navajo leaders negotiated several expansions of their reservation between 1868 and 1886 so it covered a large part of new mexico and arizona up to the four corners area with colorado and utah.
they also managed to avoid the division of the reservation into individual allotments that destroyed tribal ways for other tribes.
with the shared experience of suffering at bosque redondo andthe substantial new lands the navajo tribe had become the navajo nation.
they kept their promise to stop raiding and recreated much of their old ways living on lands they considered sacred and making a living by herding sheep goats and horses.
the tribe grew from 10 000 in 1864 to 30 000 in 1900 an unusual experience for american indians.
navajos under guard at bosque redondo ca.
454 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 the modocs the nez perce and the pacific coast tribes well before the civil war the rapid influx of white settlers who came to california with the gold rush was a catastrophe for the many small tribes that dotted the state.
the california tribes had already been weakened by decades of spanish and mexican efforts to turn them into workers on the missions and the large rancheros of the state.
the new american presence only made things worse.
federal commissioners negotiated treaties with 139 tribes to create small reservations mostly in northern california but congress did not ratify the treaties and white settlers ignored them.
in spite of the efforts of federal indian agents to create reasonable safeguards for the indians of california settlers and miners ignored restrictions on indian land if they thought they could find gold or plant a settlement.
california indians were starved and all too often simply murdered.
in 1845 before the united states took control of california there were some 150 000 indians in california down from probably 300 000 when the spanish missionaries first arrived just a decade after california became a state only 25 000 remained.
in the fall of 1872 kintpuash a leader of the modoc tribe in southern oregon and northern california led his people out of a reservation the modocs had shared with the klamaths and snakes since signing a treaty in 1864.
kintpuash did not like reservation life and the modocs returned to their homelands on lost river in california.
the u s army followed and attacked them but the modocs knew the territory especially the great black lava fields that provided hiding to those who had grown up among them.
the modocs resisted killing soldiers settlers and government negotiators.
orders came from washington that the name of modoc should cease because they had violated their treaty and killed federal negotiators.
eventually the army won.
surviving modocs were relocated in indian territory far from their homeland.
the nez perce the tribe without whom lewis and clark would have perished had long lived in oregon and idaho but they were a deeply divided tribe.
one group known as the progressives signed a treaty in 1855 agreeing to live on a large reservation in idaho.
another group the so called nonprogressives refused.
they lived independently in an area encompassing the salmon river in idaho and the snake river in oregon.
for some time the nonprogressive nez perce were allowed to live in peace but as white settlement grew in the snake rivers fertile wallowa valley pressure came to force them and their leader chief joseph or hin mah too yah lat kekt onto the idaho reservation.
they resisted but by 1877 the nez perce knew they could no longer live unmolested in the wallowa valley.
they began a long retreat to preserve their independence a retreat that turned into a well chronicled but tragic journey.
initially the nez perce moved east across the bitterroot mountains into montana hoping to find sanctuary with the crow or sioux.
then they turned north hoping to cross into canada.
all along the way the u s army pursued them.
finally when they were less than 40 miles from canada the army caught up.
a few escaped across the border but the majority led by chief joseph surrendered.
the chief said i am tired of fighting.
our chiefs are killed it is cold and we have no blankets.
the little children are freezing to death my heart is sick and sad.
from where the sun now stands i will fight no more forever most of those who had made the long journey with chief joseph ended up on a reservation in indian territory although some eventually including chief joseph were allowed to return to the pacific northwest but never to their ancestral lands see map 16 1.
the lakota sioux from fort laramie to the little big horn and wounded knee the sioux by far the largest group of tribes in the northern great plains also fought fierce battles with the u s army.
teton and santee sioux had been embroiled with u s settlers and army troops through the 1860s but the largest battles of the 1870s were with the powerful lakota sioux.
in december 1866 the lakota attacked and killed u s troops.
rather than risk further fighting the government sought peace with the lakota as well as their 4w kj chief joseph of the nez perce who led the epic journey of his people.
chapter 16 conflict in the west 16 1 major battles trails cattle trail chief josephs route railroads hmmmnmm map 16 1 the plains indian wars.
as trails and then railroads brought more settlers the great battles between the u s army and the plains indians erupted all across the great plains.
cheyenne and arapaho allies.
in the 1868 treaty of fort laramie the lakota sioux led by red cloud promised to avoid war and the army agreed to abandon three provocatively placed forts.
an earlier fort laramie treaty of 1851 was negotiated simply to keep peace between the tribes and give the u s army and settlers rights of way across the plains to california and oregon.
although the 1868 fort laramie treaty could be seen as a victory for the sioux one faction led by sitting bull derided the treaty reservation life and the government annuities that were promised saying to those who signed you are fools to make yourselves slaves to a piece of fat bacon some hard tack and a little sugar and coffee indeed the treaty that sitting bull criticized did not protect the lakota or the other tribes involved.
less than a decade after the treaty was signed when gold was discovered in the black hills and miners and settlers descended on the region the government ordered the lakota to leave winter camps and settle near the agency headquarters.
the lakota resisted.
the great sioux war of 1876 77 had begun.
general george armstrong custer led a battalion of troops in an attack on the sioux who were refusing to move.
at the little bighorn river on june 25 1876 custer and his troops were surrounded by a much larger force of sioux and cheyennes.
none of the army troops survived.
it was perhaps the most famous indian victory but that success was soon followed by defeat.
less than a month after the little bighorn battle general philip sheridan led a huge force that attacked and defeated the sioux.
the government then broke up the great sioux reserve in the black hills of dakota territory creating six much smaller reservations standing rock cheyenne river lower brule crow creek pine ridge and rosebud while giving some of the best land now declared surplus to white settlers and miners.
456 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 general william tecumseh sherman led the u s delegation in negotiations with tribal leaders which led to the fort laramie treaty of 1868.
the defeats of 1876 77 along with the destruction of the great buffalo herds led to an era of depression disease and poverty for the sioux.
a little more than a decade later in 1890 the religious phenomenon that had been seen among other tribes appeared among the sioux.
a spiritual leader wovoka initiated the ghost dance movement promising a return of the buffalo and the disappearance of white people if only the sioux would take up the dance and return to their ancient ways freeing themselves of dependence on white culture.
the rise of the ghost dance frightened the white community and the army was sent to pine ridge to investigate.
a former indian agent valentine mcgillycuddy appealed for calm saying i should let the dance continue if the seventh day adventists prepare their ascension robes for the second coming of the savior the united states army is not put in motion to prevent them.
why should not the indians have the same privilege mcgillycuddy also warned that if the troops remain trouble is sure to come he was right.
one band of sioux under the leadership of big foot left the reservation while the ghost dance continued and u s troops went after them.
when big foot and his band were caught they returned to pine ridge without a fight but maintained their freedom.
the next day however those who had followed big foot were asked to surrender themselves as prisoners.
ghost dance leaders convinced them to make a stand.
it was a fatal move.
gunfire erupted on the reservation and between 100 and 200 some estimate as high as 300 indians were killed.
armed indian resistance in the west ended at wounded knee.
the sioux faced a bleak future after 1890 and it was decades before they made some of the same adjustments as the navajos and comanches.
government policy the grant peace plan and the dawes act the rapid expansion of the nation after the civil war added complex new issues to the government s indian policy.
the u s army represented the u s government to indians west of the mississippi.
before the civil war the armys goal was to limit warfare with and among the tribes while allowing white settlers transit across the great plains to california and oregon.
few whites settled on the great plains before the 1860s and the government was content to leave the plains indian tribes to themselves unless like the comanches they fought directly with the army.
the first treaty of fort laramie in 1851 did not limit indian land use except to try to keep the peace by keeping tribes ghost dance part of a religious awakening among the lakota sioux in 1890 in which they believed that if they returned to their traditional ways and ceremonies the whites would be driven from their land.
chapter 16 conflict in the west 457 16 1 artist frederick remington depicted the 1890 ghost dance which represented a hope for a new age.
homestead act law passed by congress in 1862 providing 160 acres of land free to anyone who would live on the plot and farm it for 5 years.
apart from one another.
no reservations were established.
rather in exchange for gifts the army asked the tribes to avoid conflict with one another with military forts and with the transit routes for the mail and for settlers.
asking for anything more was beyond the limits of what the 270 soldiers at fort laramie could reasonably ask in a meeting attended by perhaps 10 000 american indians including the sioux arapaho cheyenne assinboins shoshones arikaras hidatsas mandans and crows.
after the civil war the pressure for space for white settlement greatly intensified.
at the same time u s army units that had been fighting the civil war were now available for service in the west.
among these units were segregated african american units that were sent to the west and came to be known as buffalo soldiers because their white commanders thought their hair was like that of the buffalo.
even though most military units were demobilized after the war there were more than sufficient numbers of soldiers white and black remaining in the army to provide a formidable fighting force in the west.
in 1862 a republican congress had passed and president lincoln had signed the homestead act fulfilling a major republican campaign promise to make more federal land available for white settlement.
the act provided 160 acres of federal land to a family that would settle and maintain the land for 5 years.
the act however did not specify where the land would come from.
much of the initial homestead settlements were in minnesota iowa nebraska and kansas all on lands that had been prime buffalo hunting locations for various tribes.
unlike before the civil war when most whites had moved across the great plains and kept going under the protection of u s army after the civil war whites were coming to the plains to stay and larger army forces were coming with them.
in addition to farming the discovery of mineral wealth in places like the black hills of the dakotas brought more whites and further racial conflict.
immediately after the war the same congress that was taking control of reconstruction also created its own indian peace policy and assigned the army to implement it.
the battles with the lakota sioux led those in congress to seek a peaceful way of proceeding so they created the indian peace commission to negotiate treaties with the plains tribes.
the congressional commission developed the idea of tribal reserves or reservations large tracts of land that would they hoped be set aside for the indians protecting the tribes from encroaching white civilization while ensuring their eventual assimilation into white culture.
it was same policy that had been used in negotiating with tribes that originally lived east of the mississippi but with one big difference.
the majority of eastern tribes had been forced onto reservations in the west specifically in oklahoma or indian territory.
there was no place further west to push the western 458 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 16 1 american voices charles w allen report from wounded knee 1890 charles w alien a white newspaper editor who had spent most of his life among the sioux and was friendly with them reported the event he saw while visiting his wife s family at the pine ridge reservation on december 29 1890.
the first part of this report is taken from allen s autobiography published in 1938.
the second part is from a newspaper article he wrote for the chadron democrat three days after the events took place.
presently all the indian men began coming in bunches of from two to a dozen or more stringing leisurely along then taking their seats in a circle on the grass before the commander and his staff then general forsyth addressed in a firm but conciliatory manner h e told them that for the time being they were prisoners and as such they were to give up their arms peaceably he then told them to go back to their lodges bring all their firearms and turn them over to him.
the indians departed for their camp in a reluctant obviously sulky mood after what seemed an unreasonable length of time the indians came strolling back pretty much as they had come to the first meeting except that they seemed purposely to adopt a more independent swagger in approaching the council field.
many of them were painted hideously and conspicuously grim of visage quite a number of their wives had accompanied the braves to this meeting robed in long blankets reaching almost to the ground and each took a position immediately behind her husband the women who stood close behind their men concealed under each blanket a repeating rifle and well filled cartridge belt chief big foot had been escorted from his tent and urged his followers to maintain peace and comply with the general s orders i also observed a hotchkiss gun that had been placed in commanding position on a small knoll at the north edge of the camp not far from the site on which the catholic church now commemorates the tragedy gen forsyth ordered a detail of dismounted troops under capt.
wallace to close in and surround them at a distance of about twenty paces during this procedure which was very interesting an indian ghost dance master arrayed in full paraphernalia began to make medicine holding his hands up to the sun and calling upon the messiah to visit his wrath upon the soldiers.
he would take up hands full of dirt and scatter it then hold up his hands as if momentarily expecting the earth to open and swallow up the troops.
it was evident that he was getting the indians worked up and he finally told them to be brave and that bullets would not hit them if the soldiers did shoot at them.
the commander was told of what he was saying and he ordered him to sit down which order he finally complied with after he had walked clear around the circle as though he owned the earth they had proceeded to disarm but some eight or ten of these when the brave who had been inciting them jumped up and said something and fired at the soldier who was standing guard over the arms that had been secured.
the first gun had no sooner been fired than it was followed by hundreds of others and the battle was on.
the fighting continued for about a half hour and then was continued in skirmish for another hour.
source charles w allen from fort laramie to wounded knee in the west that was edited with an introduction by richard e jensen originally published 1938 republished lincoln university of nebraska press 1997 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis as allen told the story who was responsible for the fighting at wounded knee.
historical interpretation in what ways did wounded knee mark the end of an era in american history.
tribes so the government tried to move them onto as limited an amount of land as possible.
at the same time of course confining the tribes on reservations would ensure that most of the land of the west could be opened for white development.
the plan was not a great success.
tribes like the sioux nez perce and comanches resented the confinement of reservation life and often wandered far beyond their assigned bounds.
when ulysses s grant became president in 1869 he initiated a new indian peace policy that became known as grants peace policy.
grants thinking was shaped by the terrible bloodshed he had seen in the civil war and by his identification with the emancipation of slaves.
he wanted to end the corruption that he saw in the indian bureau and he wanted to treat the indians with dignity.
his goal was peace.
at the same time grant wanted room for white settlement and was certainly not planning to keep whites out of the vast tracts of western land that the indians used for hunting.
in his first annual message to congress in december 1869 grant said there was no turning back the clock that the past cannot be undone and the question must be met as we now find it meeting the question he believed meant assimilating indians grant s peace policy a new effort by president grant to end the plains indian wars by creating a series of reservations on which tribes could maintain their traditional ways.
chapter 16 conflict in the west 459 dawes act an 1887 law terminating tribal ownership of most reservation land and allocating some parcels to individual indians while the remainder was opened for white settlement.
into white society or as the president asked cannot the indian be made a useful and productive member of society by proper teaching and treatment.
since most of the indians did not want to become useful and productive members of white society grants policy may have been doomed from the beginning but he tried to find a humane solution to the clash of quite different cultures in the american west.
when grant announced his peace policy he said ihe building of rail roads and the access thereby given to all the agricultural and mineral regions of the country is rapidly bringing civilized settlements into contact with all the tribes of indians 1 see no remedy for this except in placing all the indians on large reservations and giving them absolute protection there.
grant then appointed a member of the seneca tribe ely s parker as the first native american commissioner of indian affairs the first nonwhite to hold a high government position.
grant also turned to christian missionaries not the army or the indian office to take the lead in managing reservation affairs.
he declared the reservations off limits to the army even troops who were chasing indians with whom they had been in battle.
ihe missionaries people like the quaker lawrie tatum who was appointed to lead the comanche and kiowa reservation tried to make the peace policy work.
but government supplies were slow in coming and often of shoddy workmanship.
many indians resisted the confinement of reservation life.
the army was frustrated by the rule that they could not follow indians into the reservation asylum even as they were expected to police the non indian territories.
general sheridan condemned the peace policy saying if a white man commits murder or robs we hang him or send him to the penitentiary if an indian does the same we have been in the habit of giving him more blankets the indians seeing through the references to peace considered the whites as thieves who were stealing their land.
although the indian peace policy remained in force the army simply ignored it.
shermans defeat of the comanches in 1874 75 was in violation of the policy that army units could not enter reservations but the general was praised not reprimanded.
within a year after custers 1876 defeat the army had subdued nearly all of the sioux.
crazy horse one of the sioux who was at the little big horn the day custer died became an army scout and was killed at an army post in september 1877.
sitting bull was arrested in 1881 after returning from exile in canada.
he toured briefly with buffalo bill codys wild west show in the 1880s and then retired to the standing rock reservation where as the ghost dance movement grew he was killed in a standoff with other sioux sent by the army to arrest him.
but the grant peace policy had unofficially died long before the old chief met his end.
within a decade of the last major indian wars in the 1870s and the settlement of most western indians on reservations the u s government again began to change policy.
by the 1880s reformers in and out of government were concluding that the assimilation of indians into white society a goal many shared would not happen as long as they maintained their ancient ways on reservations.
if the key to indian survival was for them to become independent farmers who attended churches and schools just as whites did then why reformers asked should they live on reservations.
why not give them all the benefits of the homestead act and allow indians like whites to gain free title to their own 160 acre farm and american citizenship.
in response to these arguments congress passed the general allotment act known as the dawes act for its prime sponsor massachusetts senator henry l dawes in 1887.
ihe dawes act divided the reservations into 160 acre tracts to be assigned to each family.
after a 25 year waiting period indian families could sell the land like their white neighbors.
indians who took possession of a homestead also became u s citizens.
at first glance the dawes act might seem like an enlightened piece of legislation and at least some of its sponsors certainly believed that it was.
the dawes act had other provisions however that led to negative results.
indian culture was tribal and communal and hunting was a major activity however the dawes act pushed indians to be farmers and to join an individualistic culture that many found to be quite alien.
beyond that the most immediate impact of the act 460 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 was that after each family on a reservation was allotted its 160 acres all surplus land could then be sold by the government to white families.
later after the 25 year waiting period indian families sometimes sold their land giving them a profit but alienating them from their tribe.
a few tribes the navajos and the senecas were able to avoid implementation of the dawes act and retain communal ownership of their reservations.
but for many the act was an economic and cultural disaster.
in 1881 155 million acres were set aside as reservations belonging to indian tribes.
as a result of the dawes act indians controlled only 78 million acres by 1900.
while the dawes act broke up tribal lands other federal perspectives undercut indian culture.
few white authorities believed that the first amendment protections of religious freedom applied to indian religion especially because indian religion and indian warfare were often linked.
it was not until 1978 that congress declared traditional indian religions to have first amendment rights.
sending indian young people to special schools was also seen by officials as one of the surest ways of implementing grants promise to favor any course towards them which tends to their civilization and ultimate citizenship in 1875 the army ordered 72 indian prisoners among them cheyenne arapahos kiowas comanches and caddos moved from fort sill in indian territory to a new federal prison in st augustine florida.
lieutenant richard henry pratt a civil war veteran who was put in charge of the prisoners decided to create a model indian school.
he hired sarah mather from mt.
holyoke college and the two began what they believed was an essential mission to teach the prisoners american style dress the english language and protestant christianity.
ihe isolation of the prisoner students made the process easier.
soaring eagle a cheyenne warrior said it is good to go to church.
when i go home i hope to sit down and sing gods hymns of course soaring eagle and the other prisoners knew that about the only chance they had to actually go home was to comply with the schools policies.
pratt and mathers experiment drew widespread praise.
they were authorized to expand their efforts and open the carlisle indian school in old army barracks in carlisle pennsylvania.
twenty five indian boarding schools eventually both catholic and protestant were built on the carlisle model between 1879 and 1902.
using federal tax dollars these schools taught religion western customs and values to their indian students.
indian students resisted the goal of the boarding schools to transform them though such resistance was harshly punished.
francis la flesche an omaha who attended a presbyterian mission school in the 1860s reported that he and his friends spoke english during the day but at night when the missionaries were gone they continued to tell each other the omaha stories and speak the omaha language.
carlisle indian school a boarding school for native american children opened in carlisle pennsylvania to teach white ways and separate indian children from tribal culture.
m t 16 2 i quick review how did actions after the civil war in particular reassigning u s army units to the west and offering land for white settlement through the homestead act irrevocably change life for indians in the west.
the impact of the transcontinental railroad 1869 16j analyze the building of transcontinental railroads and its impact on the nation especially the west.
when he proposed his indian peace policy in december 1869 grant said that it was needed because t he building of rail roads is rapidly bringing civilized settlements into contact with all the tribes of indians only 7 months earlier at promontory point utah leland stanford governor of california and president of the central pacific railroad and t c durant vice president of the union pacific railroad had driven the last spike made of california gold to connect the first rail line that spanned the north american continent.
the dream of a transcontinental railroad gained widespread support in the 1850s.
an army survey in 1853 offered four possible routes across the country variously ending in transcontinental railroad the union pacific rail line from california and the central pacific line connected with chicago and other eastern cities it was the first rail line to allow train travel all across the united states.
chapter 16 conflict in the west 46 when crews building the union pacific railroad and the central pacific railroad met at promontory summit utah in may 1869 the nation celebrated the completion of the first transcontinental railroad.
chinese crews working in the isolated mountains of california had to blast tunnels and build bridges to complete the rail line.
portland san francisco los angeles or san diego each of which was considered.
even more serious debate focused on where the routes should begin.
illinois senator stephen a douglas wanted them to start in chicago while mississippi senator jefferson davis wanted them to begin in memphis or new orleans.
it had been douglas s dream of a route starting in chicago that originally led him to propose the kansas nebraska act.
but before the issue of the best transcontinental rail route could be settled the civil war had intervened.
once the war began in 1861 the departure of southerners from congress meant that a more northerly route became the obvious choice of the remaining members.
ihe pacific railroad act passed easily in 1862.
ihe california based central pacific started building east from san francisco and sacramento while the union pacific started building west across the great plains from various terminals in kansas nebraska and missouri all of which were already connected to the east coast by existing rail lines.
ihe federal government provided a 400 foot right of way federal loans and major land grants to the two railroads.
construction moved very slowly during the war but the coming of peace in 1865 brought a rush to complete the work.
ihe hard physical labor of actually laying track was done mostly by irish workers on the union pacific and by chinese laborers on the california based central pacific.
those starting in the east were sometimes able to lay track at the rate of four rails per minute covering 500 miles and reaching cheyenne wyoming by november 1867.
those starting in california had the far more difficult task of crossing the sierra nevada mountains.
they had to build snow sheds and blast through solid rock to make their way.
finally in the spring of 1869 the lines connected and the nation was knit together as never before.
ihe first rail connection across the continent was only the beginning.
by the early 1890s four major lines reached across the country connecting to a large network of midwestern and eastern rail lines.
the major cities within california oregon and washington were connected by their own lines.
all of the countrys large cities and most of the mediumsized ones were connected by rail.
a city without a rail link was doomed to wither.
technological changes helped extend the railroads.
george westinghouses invention of an air brake system in 1873 made trains safer and the rides smoother as it became possible to stop all of the cars of a train at once rather than needing to coordinate the work of a brakeman on each car.
eli janney invented a safer system for coupling and decoupling railway cars saving the lives of innumerable railway workers.
safer construction of tracks and bridges the replacement of iron rails with steel and new improved locomotive production all improved speed and safety.
although travel to the california gold rush in 1849 took 6 to 8 weeks or more by the 1870s a person could travel across the united states in 10 days and if one could afford it do so in the comfort of a pullman sleeping car.
the railroads linked communities with a speed that created a new sense of time.
when a traveler moved by horse or wagon the exact time of day did not matter that much.
trains however needed to follow a schedule if passengers and freight were to depart and arrive on time and collisions were to be avoided.
schedules particularly coordinating trains over great distances required something no one had considered before standardized time.
although some objected like the cincinnati editor who asked why his city should shift its clocks so as to harmonize with an imaginary line through pittsburgh the clear majority of the country readily agreed to the plan.
on sunday november 18 1883 known as the day of two noons all but the most isolated american communities adjusted their clocks to place them in one of the four time zones into which the nation was being divided time zones that still regulate daily life today.
what had once been isolated regional economies quickly became part of a national commercial network because of railroads.
the cost of moving food and other goods dropped dramatically.
people followed the same time schedule.
the railroads that crossed the continent 462 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 ended at docks where ocean going steamships carried food lumber and other materials from the united states to asia and south america.
within three decades of acquiring the west coast the united states was connected to a pacific market of international trade and commerce that would create work for many from lumberjacks in oregon and washington to miners in idaho or the dakotas to wheat farmers across the midwest creating wealth for a few and linking the nations economy to the rise and fall of world markets.
after 1890 a glut of wheat in argentina could impact the life of a farmer in nebraska and a drop in the value of silver in japan could hurt a miner in idaho.
even though the united states was not quite yet a major world power it was connected to the world as never before see map 16 2.
quick review how did railroads improve transportation and communication in ways that other innovations such as canals and steamboats could not.
the transformation of the west 16 3 analyze how indigenous people ranchers farmers miners outlaws politicians and mythmakers shaped the west and our understanding of its history.
the defeat of the indian tribes and the homestead act along with extraordinary changes in time speed and transportation brought on by the railroads transformed the american west.
land that had been part of mexico in the 1840s and that people from the east coast only wanted to get across in the 1850s became the site of vast new ranches settled farms and rapidly expanding towns.
by the 1880s and 1890s a new region was becoming part of the nations cultural economic and political networks.
of course not all of the new settlers in the american west got along with each other.
cattle ranchers depended on vast wide open spaces to feed and move their herds.
farmers seeking to establish 160 acre homesteads depended on barbed wire to fence off their land and keep cattle out.
older residents of what had been the northern parts of mexico had relied on sometimes vague property lines and depended on communal grazing lands while the newly arriving americans wanted precise lines and built fences across the land that had once been held in common.
settlers seeking to establish farms or build towns depended on law and order while others outlaws and gunfighters thought that the best way to make ones fortune was to take it from others.
as these groups battled for control they soon came to create political organization if not always social order.
cowboys cattle the open range and barbed wire white families seeking to make their fortune or at least a living raising cattle moved into southwest texas in the 1850s expanding throughout the west by the 1860s and 1870s.
allowing the cattle to graze the vast open areas enabled herders to manage larger numbers than if they had to confine them to pens with feed.
texas longhorn cattle the result of interbreeding cattle of spanish origin and anglo american stock seemed especially perfect for the region.
they could survive on easy to find grass on the wide plains did not need additional feed and were resistant to texas fever the tick born disease that killed other cattle.
further north in kansas nebraska and the dakotas other cattle ranchers also discovered that cattle thrived on the bunchgrasses of the northern prairies which dried out by mid summer but retained its protein and fed cattle well even when they had to find it through the snow.
by the time the civil war called most of the cattlemen off to distant battlefields and left the cattle to fend for themselves there were probably 5 million cattle in west texas.
although the comanches took their share of the abandoned cattle many remained by the end of the war and some herds grew substantially having been allowed to breed without being slaughtered for food for several years.
in the summer of 1865 returning veterans reconnected with families and sought to reestablish the herds on which their families depended.
lee moore remembered helping his veteran father reassemble a herd in southwest texas we didn t call it roundup chapter 16 conflict in the west 46 16 1 c an i oregon 1859 promontory point j wyoming f v890 w sadwoodsc 4 minnesota.
w weri0 r u 27 great fsima city b hill basin nevada 1864 rock springs i salt lake city q utah.
1896 los angeles pacific ocean railroads cattle drives gold ib silver sarttafe.
railroad env rio grande f railroad missouri 1821 aimsas 1836 7 arizona.
territory i santa fe cobi iei paso san angelo mexico gulf of mexico ssra 817 200 300 miles j i o 100 200 300 kilometers map 16 2 connecting the nation.
rail lines and cattle trails connected far flung parts of the west.
gold and silver mines cattle ranches and wheat farmers were suddenly part of a worldwide market.
in those days.
we called it cow hunts and every man on this cow hunt was a cattle owner just home from the war and went out to see what they had left and to brand up.
most of those trying to reassemble herds in 1865 could not be called ranchers.
they did not own or maintain ranches as such.
rather they allowed their cattle to graze freely on the open texas land officially owned by the federal government though contested by various indian tribes.
they identified their cattle by branding them when they were young.
unbranded cattle known as mavericks were free for the taking.
the few who did own ranches managed vast operations like the huge king ranch where richard king owned 84 000 acres at the end of the civil war eventually expanding to 1 270 000 acres.
the king ranch was one of several huge ranches in texas and new mexico but much of the cattle raising in the 1860s and 1870s was a much more informal affair that depended on respect for cattle brands rather than fenced private lands.
several developments account for the huge increase in cattle ranching in the decades after the civil war.
americans started to eat a lot of beef and in prosperous times they part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 464 could afford to do so.
cookbooks reported new ways to prepare beef while telling readers that pork which had fed much of the nation in earlier times was unwholesome and hard to digest.
hiram latham a publicist for the union pacific railroad wrote a pamphlet trans missouri stock raising in 1871 that declared the only way to support the nations manufacturing workers was to ensure they had a large supply of clothing and cheap food food that needed to include a healthy amount of beef see map 16 3.
in spite of the ease of raising cattle particularly in texas colorado wyoming montana it was a long distance from those areas to the mouths of most americans whether on the pacific coast or in the midwest or on the atlantic coast.
in 1867 joseph g mccoy founded abilene kansas one of the nations first cattle towns to facilitate the loading of cattle onto transcontinental trains that would speed the beef to consumers.
jesse chisholm began herding cattle along what came to be known as the chisholm trail from texas across indian territory to abilene to connect with those railroad lines.
in 1867 some 30 000 cattle made their way along the chisholm trail and over the next 20 years 2 million more followed.
not surprisingly abilene and other towns at the end of the drive became wild places when the cattle drive reached town.
cowboys young single men who had spent many months following the herds were ready for a party when they got to town.
the infamous longbranch saloon and the dodge house hotel both in dodge city kansas hosted many celebrating cowboys.
these environments offered some of the only economic opportunities for women in the cattle industry and those opportunities were less than reputable.
prostitution was often the only way to survive and sometimes was a route to independence.
a wichita newspaper reported on the ten bawdy houses in newton kansas in 1871 here you may see young girls not over sixteen drinking whisky smoking cigars cursing and swearing most prostitutes in the cattle towns were very young between 14 and 23 and from the eastern united states europe and even indian territory.
few stayed in the business for very long.
as the demands for beef increased and cowboys brought more cattle into the railroad towns developments in rail transport made the cattle industry more profitable.
in 1882 gustavus swift created a new fleet of refrigerated railroad cars.
beef spoiled or took on an odd and unappetizing look in earlier refrigerator cars when it was packed in ice.
swift kept the ice separate and above the beef so the beef stayed cold without touching ice.
a few chicago packinghouses swift armour morris and hammond along with smaller ones in kansas city omaha and forth worth came to dominate the nations meatpacking industry.
by 1900 82 percent of the nations cattle were killed and packed in such places.
the chicagos union stock yards first opened in 1865 to distribute cattle to these facilities became the hub for feeding the world.
as the beef industry became more centralized in the 1870s and 1880s it continued to depend on the muscle of cowboys who cared for cattle kept track of them when they drifted away and handled the roundups and cattle drives.
the greatest era of the cowboys of the american west was between the civil war and 1900.
the cowboys who did the work of the cattle industry were mostly poor mostly young and of many different backgrounds.
in spite of the lonely days and only rare occasions to celebrate cowboys themselves often did all they could to contribute to the romantic legend that surrounded them.
nat love for one was born a slave in tennessee in 1854.
after the civil war he moved west and worked as a cowboy.
he was good at the work and in 1876 won roping and shooting contests in deadwood south dakota that gave him a prize of 200.
from then on he was known as deadwood dick and his own autobiography as well as the popular dime novels that told deadwood dick stories made him a legend even if some of those who repeated his story left out the crucial fact that deadwood dick was an african american cowboy.
in the 1860s many of the cowboys in texas were white confederate veterans and those in kansas or montana were union veterans.
still there were a relatively large number of african americans and american indians among them.
cattle companies especially in texas soon began replacing the anglo cowboys with those of mexican descent whom they could pay substantially less.
in 1883 white cowboys in texas 1o map 16 3 cattle trails and rail lines.
cattle were driven north from texas and parts of kansas and nebraska to rail lines where they could be moved to world markets.
16j 16j struck for higher wages but the panhandle cattlemans association quickly broke the strike and found new sources of labor among poor single men of all races who wanted any job or who thought the work might be glamorous.
as the cattle business came to be controlled by larger ranches and corporations in the 1880s and 1890s cowboys became less independent and more like hired workers in other industries liable to be assigned to fence building one day and cattle branding the next.
nevertheless herding cattle over great distances required skill especially using a rope to lasso and understanding the behavior of herds.
ihe most successful cattle producers knew that they had to provide for their staff.
cowboys had originally carried their own food but cattle owners began to supply the food from specially constructed wagons accompanied by a cook who provided the meals on the range.
the first rancher to carry food and bedding for the roundups and trail drives was charles goodnight and in his honor the wagons came to be known as chuck wagons although the cattle industry prospered it also experienced significant changes and downturns.
branding cattle using a hot iron to create a scar on the left flank of a calf that was easy to identify was key to identifying cattle who roamed over very large areas of range perhaps a hundred miles or more.
while branding continued by the 1880s cattle owners began using barbed wire fences to set off their ranges.
barbed wire fences kept herds in more contained areas and protected the best grass.
of course protecting the grass meant identifying who had the rights to certain areas which brought cattle ranchers into conflict with each other and with the federal government since most of the western ranges were federal lands.
the conflict often turned violent perhaps most l6 v becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 smbibbksssi x jgg.
mubhmwhhhi 1001 bwbwib io i i most of a cowboy s life was hard lonely work.
dramatically in the johnson county war of 1892 when the wyoming stock growers association hired gunfighters to force smaller ranchers out of the state.
success also depended on the price of beef staying high and a ready supply of cattle both of which were problematic.
ihe winters of 1880 81 1884 85 and 1886 87 were all unusually harsh.
cattle died for lack of food or they drifted in front of a storm until they piled up against a barbed wire fence and died.
in addition economic recessions in the 1870s and again in the late 1880s led americans to eat less beef.
by the mid 1880s the market for the 20 million cattle in the american west was declining.
after a recovery another depression in the 1890s made it hard to predict what the value of cattle would be in any given year.
by the end of the 1890s the era of open ranges roundups and huge cattle drives was coming to an end.
growing demand for high quality beef and new knowledge about the best feed enabled the cattle industry to shift to smaller scale ranches where a rancher could maintain a few hundred cattle ensure that they were well fed and cared for and bring them to market at the best moment.
the male world of the cowboys was replaced by ranch families.
men still did most of the work with the cattle while wives and daughters tended houses and gardens doing the inside work but in isolated communities rigid gender lines were hard to maintain.
a woman who lived on a wyoming ranch in 1899 wrote the heavy work of the ranch naturally falls to men but i think most ranch women will bear me out in saying that unless the women be always ready to do anything that comes along the ranch is not a success cowboys still worked on these ranches and urban americans still ate beef but the world of beef production and life on the plains was quite different than it had been only a short time before.
latino resistance in the southwest mary a fulgenzi a long time resident of san miguel county in new mexico territory recalled the time in the late 1880s when tensions in her county exploded in the early days of las vegas the wealthier people wanted to take possession of most of the lands.
they fenced in any land they fancied whether it belonged to them or not.
the poor people also needed land to graze their stock and felt that they should have their share for according to the land grant lands not allocated to individuals were to be used by the community in general.
throughout much of the west the battle between those who wanted to fence and control the land and those who wanted free grazing land for their herds was one of the great divides.
the emergence of cheap barbed wire changed the face of the west.
the specific details about contained and open grazing were different in different places and for chapter 16 conflict in the west 16 1 16 j explore the new economy of the west 1850 1893 on 16 3 my historylab what new economic patterns emerged in the west.
the second half of the 1800s brought quick expansion of the united states into the west.
railroads quickly spread across the region spurring town development and creating a giant national marketplace that stretched from coast to coast.
the federal government established post offices through the west to help further connect the nation.
settlers streamed from the east in search of cheap land on which to raise their crops and livestock.
the west became an important agricultural region as farm products then moved along the railroad network linking western towns with eastern and international markets.
this patriotic lithograph titled across the continent westward the course of empire takes its way represents the expansion into the american west made possible by the nation s first transcontinental railway which was completed in 1869.
growing population in the west 1860 1890 montana n a 142 924 idaho n a 88 548 wyoming n a 62 555 colorado 34 277 413 249 new mexico 93 516 160 282 arizona n a 88 243 utah 40 273 210 779 i nevada 6 857 47 355 washington 11 594 357 232 oregon 52 465 317 704 california 379 994 1 213 398 source united states resident population by state iabor lpa census 1990 poptrdl htm key questions use myhistorylab explorer to answer these questions cause how did railroad expansion shape population growth in the west.
map the growth of the railroad network and the development of western towns and cities.
analysis how did western agriculture develop during the late 1800s.
map the importance of agricultural commodities produced in the west.
response how did the federal government s presence manifest itself as settlers moved west.
trace the spread of post offices.
part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 different groups of people but across the west there were clashes between those who wanted to fence off private property and those who wanted open prairies.
at the heart of the battle in san m iguel county were two different views of the nature of land ownership.
the majority of jmexicanos as people of nlexican descent in new mexico preferred to be called at the time saw themselves as las masas de los hombres pobres the masses of the poor.
their assumption was that any land that was not specifically part of the home or the irrigated farmland of one family was held in common open grazing land that all could use.
by the 1880s however anglo americans with very different views of land ownership were arriving after the atchison topeka and santa fe railroad opened a line in 1879.
representatives of investors from the east coast of the united states and from britain who could not imagine any alternative to private ownership of land began buying up land and fencing off their property to create their own cattle ranches.
for some longtime residents if the fences were threatening their way of life the remedy was simple get rid of the fences.
when the ranchers did not comply with requests to take down their fences a secret organization called the white caps cut the fences destroyed the posts and opened the range again.
in response to widespread fence cutting the territorial governor requested federal troops.
in spite of federal troops most citizens of san miguel county were sympathetic with the fence cutters.
by the summer of 1890 san miguel countys dissidents were running for political office and soon controlled the balance of power between republicans and democrats in the territorial legislature.
what had started as an outlaw movement had become part of the political process.
latino resistance took different forms across the southwest.
in new mexico which retained a mexicano majority well into the 1900s it was possible for resistance to move into the political process and prevail.
in texas where racial tensions were especially sharp and where the white majority grew rapidly older latino communities had fewer options.
police power rested with the texas rangers who were seen by the latino community as simply the force of the anglo community.
while the rangers saw their opponents as outlaws many in the mexican american community saw them as heroes.
perhaps most famous was the case of gregorio cortez 1875 1916 who came to texas from the mexican city of matamoros.
cortez shot the sheriff of manor texas in 1901 when he tried to arrest cortez for a crime he did not commit.
after a long manhunt by the texas rangers cortez was arrested and sentenced to life in prison but eventually pardoned by the governor of texas.
for generations latino songs and ballads known as corridos celebrated cortezs story within the mexican american community.
mexican american resistance also took other forms.
carlos velasco immigrated from sonora to tucson arizona and in 1878 launched el fronterizo one of many spanish language newspapers in the southwest.
the paper continued to be published until 1914 successfully supporting the election of mexican americans to local office and promoting mexican customs pride and links across the international border.
farmers and farm towns as the cattle industry was transitioning to a more settled ranching industry farmers were also arriving on the great plains in numbers never before thought possible on the arid grasslands.
large numbers of them were responding to massive advertising by the railroads who also owned much of the western lands.
new techniques of farming enabled these farmers to cultivate areas where only buffalo herds had roamed only a short time before.
those who began creating new homesteads and businesses as well as new lives in these lands of the west came from widely varying backgrounds.
they included people of different faiths americans from eastern regions of the united states immigrants from europe and mexico former slaves and indians among others.
joseph fish a mormon lived a little upstream from salt lake city in the village of parowan utah where he worked as a miller and a tanner as well as farmed exchanged work with neighbors pulled sagebrush built fences and harvested wheat and oats to make his living.
chapter 16 conflict in the wesi io 1 i uj i 16 3 gro and ole svendsen moved from norway to emmet county iowa in 1863.
ole cut and sawed timber broke ground and harvested wheat.
gro made and sold butter and taught her children in norwegian and english.
drops in agricultural prices and grasshoppers undermined their profits but they carried on.
for others the challenges were too great.
in the 1880s a group of ukrainian jews created a utopian community in south dakota but the transition to the plains of south dakota was too difficult and the community failed.
many other settlers and homesteaders also failed and wagons traveling west to kansas emblazoned with kansas or bust met other returning wagons that said busted by gosh but people kept coming.
thomas johnson a former slave from kentucky joined over 300 former slaves known as exodusters in settling nicodemus kansas a town that was attracting people across the post reconstruction south with advertisements that said all colored people that want to go to kansas on september 5 1877 can do so for 5 00 initially there was not much to this town.
the wife of the first pastor said that she began to cry when she first saw it but people stayed on eventually building it up.
rosie and henry ise arrived at a new homestead in osborne county kansas in 1873 with their team of horses and their small herd of cattle.
the ises were lucky.
they were moving to an already established homestead that had a small cabin with a bed a stove and boxes for chairs.
it also had a sod chicken house and a patch of corn wheat and oats already planted.
mariano g samaniego moved north from the mexican state of sonora in the 1850s to tucson arizona.
he did not establish a homestead but opened a clothing store.
later he earned a college degree from saint louis university and then expanded his business supplying the union army during the civil war.
by the 1880s samaniego shifted his focus to cattle ranching and was known as a respected leader of the mexican community in arizona.
steven arrow and big eagle took advantage of the homestead act and acquired their own homesteads in south dakota separate from the reservation land.
they were an exception to thinking historically cutting fences in new mexico as los gorras blancas or the white caps formed a secret militia and cut fences in an effort to retain the traditional communal grazing lands in the face of new development in san miguel county new mexico they also announced the reasons for their illegal activity.
in march 1890 members of the organization rode through the town of las vegas new mexico posting nuestra platforma a platform announcing their goals that said not wishing to be misunderstood we hereby make this our declaration.
our purpose is to protect the rights and interests of the people in general especially those of the helpless classes.
we want the las vegas grant settled to the benefit of all concerned and this we hold is the entire community within the grant.
we want no land grabbers or obstructionists of any sort to interfere.
we will watch them.
there is a wide difference between new mexico s law and justice.
and justice is god s law and that we must have at all hazards be fair and just and we are with you do otherwise and take the consequences.
the white caps 1 500 strong and growing daily source robert j rosenbaum mexicano resistance in the southwest dallas southern methodist university press 1998 p 166.
thinking critically 1.
compare and contrast how do the rights and interests described in this platform fit with the rights and interests of private property that many new arrivals brought with them to new mexico.
historical interpretation how does a mexican american perspective change or complicate the traditional story of the history of the west in the post civil war era.
70 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 many different people filed homestead claims including lizzie chrisman and her three sisters who established a daim and a sod hut in nebraska in 1887 the american indian experience but a sioux falls merchant said of the sioux homesteaders that they gave more indication of civilization and industry and a show of living like white people than the same number of norwegian families located a few miles below fifteen percent of homestead claims were filed by single women.
married women could not file their own claim being already part of a household.
elinore pruitt stewart wrote any woman who can stand her own company can see the beauty of the sunset love growing things and is willing to put in as much time at careful labor as she does over washtubs will have independence plenty to eat all the time and a home of her own in the end.
the move by farm families into the west was relatively steady.
the homestead act of 1862 made 160 acre tracts available to those who settled and congress later allowed larger homesteads in the more barren lands.
the railroads advertised for farmers to settle on their lands.
james j hill arranged for the settlement of over 200 000 farmers on lands the great northern railroad owned in montana alone.
people who had moved west wrote to friends and families and invited them to join them.
some farm families moved often in search of better prospects.
other families put down deep multigenerational roots providing stability to their communities.
farms and homesteads dotted minnesota nebraska kansas and northwestern iowa in the 1860s as well as california oregon and washington territory.
stage coach and wagon transport companies maintained links between rail centers and the isolated farms and towns.
throughout the 1870s and 1880s settlements continued to increase.
between 1881 and 1885 67 000 new settlers claimed homesteads in north and south dakota in the great dakota land boom in 1889 homesteaders rushed in to oklahoma when the federal government declared a large swath of the former indian territory to be separate from any tribal reservation and opened it to white settlement.
as farmers and small town businesses filled the land indians felt the pressure on their reservations.
some sold land under the provisions of the dawes act while the government sold off other previously tribal lands.
in addition cattle ranchers were forced to confine herds that had previously roamed freely.
long standing mexican communities in west texas new mexico arizona and california lost economic and political power to newcomers who had little respect for the older inhabitants of the region.
even so the number of new farmers kept growing.
in 1850 there were 1 5 million farms in the united states just 119 000 of them west of the mississippi river.
by 1910 there were 6 4 million farms in the nation and a very large number of them west of the mississippi.
chapter 16 conflict in the west 471 successfully growing crops in these new areas required discovering which ones thrived best.
while corn grew well in the eastern united states the hot temperatures and the lack of water made it hard to grow in much of the west.
mennonite settlers brought russian hard winter wheat with them and in kansas and the surrounding golden belt this wheat became the staple crop by the 1880s.
in other areas spring wheat did better while in the high plains sorghum crops resisted drought well.
experimentation luck and watching what worked for the neighbors all were essential to the success of farming in areas never before farmed.
farming was not for the poorest people.
it cost money to start a farm even the most modest homestead.
an 1862 farm publication estimated that the cost of starting a farm was 968.
homesteaders had to cover expenses in getting a family to a new place as well as in breaking the sod clearing forest building fences buying farm implements purchasing livestock and seed and building a house.
nevertheless there were thousands eventually hundreds of thousands of american families who saved or borrowed funds and began the farms that fed much of the world and settled much of the north american continent.
mining and miners the gold rush to california was the first rush of people to seek wealth in the minerals of the west but it was far from the only mineral rush.
as early as 1859 henry comstock found silver along the carson river in nevada and thousands of california miners rushed east into nevada to seek new opportunities for wealth.
comstock himself sold his claim but corporate interests made fortunes in nevada.
in 1874 thousands of miners many fresh from the now played out california goldfields and the nevada silver mines made their way to the black hills of south dakota.
the land was part of the sioux reservation but neither the u s army nor the sioux were able to stop many of the more than 15 000 prospectors who had come for gold.
some of them got rich many of them died in the effort and all of them helped launch some of the most intense of the plains indian wars.
mining and the quest for mineral wealth continued to lead to fortunes and to death in the west.
in 1882 a poor irish immigrant marcus daly persuaded california investors to back his claim to a silver mine near butte montana.
very little silver was ever found at the anaconda mine but it turned out to be one of the richest deposits of copper in the world making millions for daley his backers and the anaconda copper company.
others found mining wealth in gold silver copper and lead mines in idaho montana colorado and as far away as arizona and alaska.
the mineral wealth of the west seemed endless and many from around the world sought to find it though only a very few gained any real wealth.
seemingly overnight new towns emerged wherever there was mining for copper silver and gold including carson city nevada deadwood south dakota and anaconda montana.
like the cattle towns these overwhelmingly male mining towns made up of transients could be violent places where the smallest disagreement could erupt into violence.
in addition ethnic rivalries often divided the miners.
as in californias gold fields chinese miners were soon driven out of most mining operations in spite of the fact that chinese immigrants were 10 percent of montanas population and 25 percent of idahos in the 1870s.
when not driven out the chinese were forced to take low level jobs working water cannons or doing laundry for other miners.
miners of european origin also drove mexican american miners out of the fields.
mining was male work and typically did not lead to a settled life.
in 1860 the mining camps of virginia city and gold hill nevada reported a population of 2 300 men and 30 women.
the towns also reflected the transient nature of the population.
in 1879 leadville colorado had four banks four churches and 120 saloons plus a fair share of brothels.
while some mining towns later became important commercial centers many soon became empty ghost towns once the mining played out.
most prospectors sought wealth from their individual discoveries but most of the money in mining was made by large corporations like the anaconda copper company that could afford expensive mining equipment to extract deeply buried ore work in the mines dangerous.
jobs were often divided by ethnicity with chinese and 72 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 latino miners given the least skilled and lowest paying jobs and miners from europe getting the better paying positions.
nevertheless with little attention to safety all of the miners faced explosions floods cave ins and asphyxiation from poisonous gasses.
only the emergence of new unions among the miners began to address the dangers if not the ethnic divides in the 1890s see chapter 18.
outlaws gunfighters and mythmakers legends of the old west the west of the late 1800s could be a very violent place.
contrary to hollywood images cowboys and indians tended to keep their distance from each other.
it was the army that fought the indian wars not the cowboys.
but there was plenty of violence among whites.
ranch owners and land developers hired professional gunfighters to eliminate people they saw as troublemakers.
angry people on the margins or those pushed to the margins of society struck back violently cutting fences in new mexico or becoming outlaws and counting on the vast distances and easy anonymity of the west to protect them.
cowboys in town at the end of a long and dull cattle ride shot each other.
much of the violence was local and personal some was between people wanting very different development in the region especially between cattle ranchers and farmers and some was also a carryover from the civil war.
in tombstone arizona the local elite hired wyatt earp and his brothers virgil morgan and warren along with doc holliday to make the town safe enough to encourage investors from california and the east coast.
the local elite and the earp brothers all had strong union army and republican party connections.
they were bothered by an outlaw group ex confederate cattle rustlers led by the clanton brothers and mclaury families.
on october 26 1881 at the o k.
corral the two sides met.
both clanton brothers and one of the mclaurys were killed and tombstone became a more respectable place.
another crime wave took place in missouri kansas oklahoma and arkansas.
during the civil war confederate raiders led by william quantrill and including jesse and frank james terrorized union supporters in missouri and kansas see chapter 15.
quantrill was killed before the war ended but the james brothers continued a long reign as postwar outlaws starting with a bank robbery at liberty missouri on february 13 1866 and continuing in the new and lucrative arena of train robberies well into the 1880s.
many robbers like the james brothers found widespread though quiet support by farm families who would never attempt illegal behavior but who hated the railroads and the large commercial ranchers.
these families privately cheered when those more powerful forces suffered losses at the hands of these outlaws however violent and self serving the particular rebels might be.
in new mexico the so called lincoln county war of 1878 pitted two groups of ranchers seeking to dominate the county.
both hired outlaws one of whom was a young teenager named henry mccarty who changed his name to william bonney a famous pirate and who came to be known as the kid after the lincoln county war ended the hired outlaws drifted away.
after trying unsuccessfully to find honest work and after being promised a pardon but then having it revoked by new mexicos governor the kid turned to cattle rustling and robbery until he was shot by lincoln county sheriff pat garrett.
but billy the kid who was 21 when he died had killed 10 people in his short and violent life.
his legend grew far beyond his life as a whole publishing industry came to thrive on the retelling and expansion of his legend.
stories of gunfighters like billy the kid and wyatt earp became legends of the american west but the person who did the most to create the legend of the wild west was a former army scout named william cody who created his highly successful buffalo bills wild west show in the 1880s.
according to his autobiography cody was born in iowa in 1846 but his family soon moved to kansas where his father was killed by the border ruffians from missouri in the battles of bleeding kansas.
cody took a job herding cattle to support his family when he was 11 years old.
during the civil war he was part of a local militia that protected the territory from attacks by quantrill and the james brothers.
later he hunted buffalo and served as a scout.
on one occasion cody scouted for a party that included james gorden bennett of the new york herald one of chapter 16 conflict in the west creede colorado was a typical western mining town with quickly built buildings and a transient virtually all male population.
annie oakley 1860 1926 won fame for her shooting ability and often traveled with buffalo bill s wild west show.
the nations great publicists.
bennett fictionalized cody as the hero of one of the popular dime novels of the time buffalo bill the king of the border men which gave cody the chance to launch his wild west rocky mountain and prairie exhibition buffalo bills wild west show was everything eastern crowds wanted it to be.
it included scenes from indian battles indian dancing stagecoach robberies and always the shooting prowess of annie oakley who epitomized the good frontier woman of wholesome character who could outshoot any man.
in the 1880s sitting bull himself traveled with the show giving it an authentic aura for many who were anxious to see the leader who had defeated custer in 1876.
the wild west show was a long way from any true representation of the west.
although the indians performed amazing feats of horseback riding they nearly always ended up fulfilling stereotypical images in the minds of their white audiences.
similarly while the true cowboys were an ethnically diverse lot white mexican indian and african american all of codys cowboys were white.
the u s army units in the show were also white in spite of the active role of african american buffalo soldiers in the west.
annie oakley who was an amazing shot with a rifle lived in ohio and never traveled further west except on tour with the show.
indians almost never had the battles with the cowboys that cody portrayed indians fought with the army and cowboys avoided those battles.
however indians facing desperate poverty on the reservations found work in the shows that brought needed income and they were allowed to dance traditional dances in the shows that were banned by federal authorities on the reservations.
codys shows were performed all across the united states and in europe twice before queen victoria and one of his riders performed in outer mongolia.
prince albert i of monaco came to cody wyoming to hunt with buffalo bill.
when the show declined in popularity cody reinvented himself once again as an advisor to the new hollywood studios as did wyatt earp on realistic ways to portray the old west in the new medium that was sweeping the nation.
in the process an image of the wild west was formed that still persists.
becoming states for much of the 1880s much of the western united states was organized into territories that were directly controlled by the federal government rather than as states that sent senators and representatives to congress and voted in presidential elections.
74 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 california was admitted in 1850 just after the war with nlexico and the discovery of gold.
minnesota was admitted in 1858 and oregon in 1859.
kansas became a state in 1861 nevada in 1864 nebraska in 1867 and colorado in 1876.
more than a decade later in 1889 and 1890 six new western states were all admitted almost at once the former territories of north dakota south dakota montana washington idaho and wyoming.
utah was admitted in 1896 oklahoma in 1907 and new mexico and arizona in 1912.
several unique issues account for the time lags.
in some cases local elites found that they could prosper by controlling the federal appointments and federal funds in their territory while bypassing the democratic processes that statehood brought.
many in congress also liked and profited from these arrangements.
ihe federal government owned much of the land in western states and until the indian wars came to an end the u s army was the chief protector of western citizens.
ihe u s geological survey and the u s army corps of engineers mapped and shaped the land of the west.
through the territorial stages and beyond the federal government was a more important part of life in the west than in the east.
some of the states posed unique issues.
long before it was admitted as a state the territorial legislature in wyoming granted the 1 200 women living in the territory the right to vote.
when wyoming became a state in 1890 it also became the first state to grant women the right to vote allowing women in wyoming to vote for president while their sisters elsewhere could not.
three years later the state of colorado granted women the right to vote.
after that campaigns for womens votes stalled.
a commitment to womens rights was not universal in the west but it was more popular there than elsewhere see map 16 4.
a more complicated issue arose in utah and delayed statehood for years.
the area around the great salt lake had been settled by mormon families in 1846 and 1847 when it was still part of mexico see chapter 10.
after the region became part of the united states in 1848 the federal government initially left the mormons on their own and brigham young served as territorial governor as well as spiritual leader.
however in the late 1850s president buchanan forced young out of office and appointed a non mormon governor.
the issue for buchanan was the mormon commitment to plural marriage.
mormon men but not mormon women were encouraged to take more than one spouse.
the majority of mormon men had only one wife but a significant number had two and brigham young himself had 27 wives and 56 children.
as with more traditional families some extended mormon families succeeded quite well while others were torn.
when questioned the majority of mormon women including women whose husbands had other wives defended their arrangement.
plural marriage horrified most people in the rest of the united states however.
while presidents lincoln and johnson had been too preoccupied with war and reconstruction to worry much about the mormons presidents grant hayes garfield and arthur all promised to deal with the mormon question as early as 1862 congress passed the morrill anti bigamy act making it a federal crime to take multiple wives but utah was far away and mormon juries were not about to convict anyone accused of that crime.
in spite of all of the controversy and hostility generated by the issue of plural marriage the mormon community prospered.
by the 1860s there were enough people living in utah territory to qualify for statehood.
by 1870 the population stood at 87 000.
unlike other parts of the west where white men far outnumbered white women utah had a balanced gender ratio.
women and men prospered in a community of strict morality and hard work including work for women outside of the household.
women ran their own industries cooperative stores as well as relief societies and charities.
the rest of the united states remained dissatisfied with utahs practices however and eventually the mormon leadership decided that statehood was more important than maintaining plural marriage.
in 1890 the mormon church announced the end of plural marriage and although there were those who continued to practice it the majority of members went along with the decision.
with that key issue resolved utah 16 1 io 163 chapter 16 conflict in the we was admitted as a state in 1896.
one of the first moves by the new state legislature was to again give women the right to vote and hold office making utah the third state after wyoming and colorado to do so.
issues of race delayed the admission of the last three western states.
oklahoma had been established as indian territory when andrew jacksons indian removal policies forced some northern tribes and the five southeastern tribes to move there.
by the late 1800s the tribes had put down roots developed new communities and were thriving.
other western tribes had also been forced to settle in indian territory.
nevertheless the dawes act and other federal policies opened much of the western part of the territory to white settlement.
in 1905 representatives of the tribes proposed establishing two separate states sequoyah in the eastern portion would be made up of the indian reservations.
oklahoma in the west would be made up of the white areas.
indiana senator albert j beveridge chair of the senate committee on territories wanted to have just one territory dominated by americans by which he did not mean indians and president theodore roosevelt agreed.
oklahoma was admitted in 1907 as a single state.
the territory of new mexico initially included all of arizona and new mexico.
the population quickly reached the level required for statehood but unlike the other areas acquired from mexico especially texas and california the majority of the people living number of children per woman map 16 4 early states granting women suffrage.
before 1920 a number of states especially in the west granted women the right to vote as indicated on this map.
part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 in new mexico territory were of mexican descent.
in spite of the fact that they were now u s citizens congress was not prepared to admit a self governing state with a mexican american majority.
in 1902 senator beveridge proposed uniting them again and admitting them as a single state since that would ensure a larger american or non mexican population but that proposal failed.
president william howard taft signed legislation in 1912 admitting new mexico and arizona as the 47th and 48th states of the union.
well before new mexico and arizona became states the political economic and cultural shape of the vast region known as the west was settled.
the original inhabitants who had fought with each other and with whites and had hunted buffalo across the plains or lived comfortably on the rich resources of the pacific coast were moved to distant reservations where they were alternatively ignored and challenged by federal authorities while building new cultures for themselves and the surrounding communities.
by 1900 much of the west was divided into settled communities of farms large and small and growing towns connected by railroads.
there was still plenty of desolate empty country to be found but the west of the 1800s was a receding memory.
quick review what were the major concerns involved in admitting new states in the west.
how were these issues similar to or different from those involved in admitting states in the east.
conclusion ihe american west changed dramatically between 1865 and 1890.
in the midst of the civil war abraham lincoln had urged tribal leaders to adopt the peaceful ways of the white people without noticing the irony of such a plea in the midst of the civil war.
ihe end of the civil war brought two of the most violent decades in the west as units of the u s army fought with various tribes trying to force the native americans to give up their traditional hunting and nomadic ways to settle on reservations.
by the 1890s conflict between whites and indian tribes was over as tribes were defeated and moved into ever shrinking reservations.
while the impacts of white settlement and the civil war on american indians varied from tribe to tribe in the long run they were a disaster.
after the civil war white ranchers farmers and miners built new settlements across the west.
what began as great cattle ranches were replaced by smaller farms producing beef and wheat for national and world markets.
ihe agricultural developments of the post civil war era depended on new technologies most importantly railroads that brought supplies to isolated farmers and shipped their products to world markets.
what had once been isolated regional economies quickly became part of a national and international commercial network because of railroads and the united states was connected to the world as never before.
as more and more people settled the west access to vast regions for grazing cattle became limited and tensions began to mount.
still the west was largely rural and disputes were often settled by hiring outlaws rather than by more traditional means.
farmers came to the west for many reasons including the desire for land the search for better economic opportunities than were available in the east and a longing for adventure.
although most farmers established homesteads in hopes of establishing permanent roots mining towns sprang up around impermanent mines and they were often violent places.
once a distant frontier by 1890 the american west was becoming part of the nations cultural economic and political networks and by 1912 the last of the western territories had become a state.
the large areas that had been governed as territories were not settled and populated enough to be considered as states but some of these areas posed unique issues.
however despite debates over economic issues voting rights of women concern about the plural marriage of mormon communities and the racial diversity of parts of the southwest all of the once isolated territory of the american west had been divided into new states that were admitted to the union by 1912.
chapter how do the typical depictions of the american west in the late 1800s differ from the realities of life in the region.
chapter 16 conflict in the west chapter 16 chapter review 16 1.
the tribes of the west and the u s government explain western development from an indian perspective and the way indian and white cultures shaped each other.
review questions 1.
cause and effect what new opportunities did the civil war create for the comanche people.
contextualization what does the ghost dance phenomenon tell us about how the sioux of the 1890s saw their recent history.
historical interpretation why did the u s government come to believe that it needed new approaches to indian policy in the 1870s and 1880s.
whose interests did the new policies serve.
the impact of the transcontinental railroad 1869 analyze the building of transcontinental railroads and its impact on the nation especially the west.
16 2 16 3 5.
craft an argument what factors might explain the widespread support for a transcontinental railroad in the 1850s and 1860s.
the transformation of the west analyze how indigenous people ranchers farmers miners outlaws politicians and mythmakers shaped the west and our understanding of its history.
review questions 6.
cause and effect what factors contributed to the boom in cattle ranching in the second half of the 1800s.
contextualization what motives brought white farmers to the west in the decades following the civil war.
historical interpretation how did issues of race and gender impact the admission of western states into the union.
review questions 4.
historical interpretation how did railroads contribute to the growth of a national economy.
part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 if anything symbolized the new industrial might that began to characterize the united states in the gilded age it was the production of steel at one of andrew carnegie s plants.
on may 10 1876 ulysses s grant then in his 8th year as president traveled to philadelphia to open the centennial international exhibition of industry.
the event celebrated the 100th anniversary of the signing of the declaration of independence with a massive show of the nations progress in science technology and industry.
the exhibition covered 285 acres on the banks of philadelphias schuylkill river and included pavilions from each state and from many foreign countries.
among them colorado and kansas displayed corn 20 feet high and germany displayed a giant artillery piece from the krupp works.
between the pavilions were refreshment stands selling popcorn waffles soda water root beer and german lager bier as well as a fountain built by the sons of temperance which was serving ice water.
the focus was on the great mechanical achievements of the united states symbolized by the giant corliss steam engine that provided power for all the exhibits in machinery hall and that seemed to be without vibration or noise because its boiler was outside the building as well as by the many mowers reapers sewing machines typewriters fans for ventilating mines and the pullman sleeping cars.
most of all the fair told the world that the united states had arrived as a manufacturing and technological giant.
the event represented a cross section of the nation in 1876 both as it was and as it wanted to be filled with new inventions including alexander graham bells new telephone which bell demonstrated to chapter objective understand how the united states became an industrial giant at what cost and with what impact on its diverse peoples and cultures.
learning objectives technology changes the nation explain the inventions of the late 1800s and their impact.
corporations and monopolies analyze the role of the new giant corporations in american life.
lives of the middle class in the gilded age analyze daily life popular ideas and political direction for the middle class during the gilded age.
immigration explain the reasons immigrants came to the united states in such large numbers during the gilded age and what their experience was.
chanter 17 the gilded aqe building a technological and industrial giant and a new social order 17 1 17 j 173 17 4 significant dates 1859 edwin drake discovers oil in titusville pennsylvania 1870 standard oil company launched by john d rockefeller and henry m flagler 1871 thomas edison demonstrates universal stock printer treaty of washington settles u s canadian border and claims between united states and britain 1873 panic of 1873 economic panic and depression senate rejects united states acquisition of dominican republic 1875 dwight l moody launches religious revivals 1876 alexander graham bell patents the telephone thomas edison establishes research laboratory in menlo park new jersey president grant opens philadelphia centennial exhibition 1877 cornelius vanderbilt richest man in america dies in new york city 1878 edison demonstrates new phonograph 1879 edison s first successful incandescent lamp burns for 16 hours on november 17 1882 edison illuminating company lights southern manhattan chinese exclusion act 1886 1888 george westinghouse and nikola tesla discover alternating current to transmit electricity 1887 first electronic trolley cars built 1890 greatly increased immigration from eastern europe and asia begins 1892 ellis island immigration station opens in new york harbor 1893 panic of 1893 major u s depression 1896 edison demonstrates first moving pictures u s steel becomes the largest corporation in history 1902 victor talking machine company begins mass producing recording disks 1903 wright brothers make first flight at kitty hawk north carolina 1913 henry ford s moving assembly line begins operation at highland park michigan an appreciative audience that included the emperor of brazil.
it was a fitting opening to an era in which business manufacturing and technology would dominate the nations political economic and cultural life bringing prosperity and power that was previously unimagined.
it would also hring clashes between those who benefited and those who did not which frightened many and nearly tore the nation apart.
this chapter explores how the nation came to be that giant at what cost to its people and the world and with what results in the culture or rather the many different cultures of the country.
technology changes the nation 17 1 explain the inventions of the late 1800s and their impact.
alexander graham bell saw himself as a teacher more than an inventor.
while teaching deaf students at boston university bell sought new ways to help deaf people hear.
in july 1874 he discovered that if a person were to speak into a vibrating set of reeds it created a fluctuating current that could at the other end of an electronic wire be turned back into the same sound through another set of tuned reeds.
he patented his new invention in march 1876 and demonstrated it first by calling his assistant thomas watson from the next room.
later he showed it at the massachusetts institute of technology and then at the worlds fair.
while bell returned to teaching others organized the bell telephone company.
by 1880 there were 30 000 telephone subscribers.
by 1900 the number had grown to 1 3 million and by 1920 to 13 million.
in four decades bells experiment had become a necessity of modern life.
for most americans the telephone replaced the telegraph developed by samuel f b morse from earlier inventions in 1835.
by the 1840s telegraphs were relaying messages and news in morse code consisting of dot and dash signals over miles of telegraph wires 215 000 miles of wires by 1900.
but the telephone quickly made the telegraph outdated.
before bell gained fame for his telephone thomas edison was already on his way to being known as the greatest inventor of the era.
edison was born in milan ohio in 1847 the same year as bell.
at 16 with little formal schooling he became a telegraph transmitter.
several people in the telegraph industry were trying to design what they called a diplex a way to send two messages one in each direction on the same telegraph wire at the same time.
in 1873 edison produced both a diplex and a quadruplex that could send two messages simultaneously each way on a single wire greatly increasing the value of every telegraph line in the nation and securing edisons fame and fortune.
while he was toying with that invention edison had also invented the edison universal stock printer in 1871 a greatly improved version of the stock ticker tape machine.
in 1876 edison established an independent research laboratory at menlo park new jersey.
the many employees there were made to understand that they worked only at edisons direction and he got all of the credit.
eventually he had 1 000 patents to his name thus becoming the most productive american inventor of all time.
he tinkered with ways to record a human voice and music.
on april 18 1878 he demonstrated his new phonograph at the national academy of sciences in washington dc and later that night at a midnight show at the white house.
edisons most important invention was the electric light bulb.
in the 1870s large meeting halls were lit by arc lamps and gas lights were popular in many places.
the rest of the nation city as well as country depended on kerosene lamps or candles when the sun went down.
the electric light bulb changed things across the country.
given edisons fame he was able to assemble a consortium of financiers led by j pierpont morgan to support his research.
after toying with different options the edison labs created a bulb that lit a room for 16 hours on november 17 1879.
almost immediately everyone wanted electric lights and edison wanted everyone to have power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 ki 80 part vi becoming an industrial world them.
he made london paris and new york the priority cities because he knew that what happened in those places would quickly be reported elsewhere.
within 2 years all three cities had buildings lit by electric lights.
on september 4 1882 edison pulled the switch that lit a number of buildings in southern manhattan including the house of morgan the new york stock exchange and the headquarters of the new york times and new york herald.
the inventions just kept coming.
george westinghouse and nikola tesla found that alternating current was a much more efficient way to transmit electricity than the direct current that edison used.
edison was initially skeptical but by the 1890s alternating current produced at generating plants from new york to california was powering much of the nation.
frank j sprague introduced the first electric streetcars in richmond virginia in 1888 and these cars which were cheaper and cleaner and safer than horse drawn or steam cars caught on quickly.
in 1892 the general edison electric company merged with a rival to create general electric the company that not only produced light bulbs but also all things electric.
by 1896 using film developed by george eastman of rochester new york edison moved from small scale to large screen moving pictures and in 1902 the victor talking machine company began mass producing recording disks and players.
the country was radically different because of edisons work and that of other prolific inventors who gave the country elevators invented by elisha g otis machine tools from pratt and whitney steam boilers from babcock and wilcox newspaper linotype compositors and typewriters.
a total of 440 000 patents issued between 1860 and 1890 transformed modern life.
in the 1890s a number of independent manufacturers began experimenting with gasoline powered vehicles putting a gasoline engine on bicycles or carriages which led to automobiles.
although by 1899 only 2 500 automobiles were produced per year many were predicting that the new vehicles would replace horse drawn carriages.
they were right.
by 1916 1 million automobiles were produced in the united states which created massive change as work with horses declined and a new set of jobs in the automobile industry began as more and more americans experienced the freedom that an automobile gave them.
the key to the vastly expanded production of automobiles was the vehicle itself which was relatively simple given other inventions that existed.
rather expanded production was possible only after inventing a way to produce large numbers of cars at low cost.
the genius who revolutionized the production of automobiles was henry ford.
ford a former machinist built his first automobile in 1896 after many others had done so but it was his invention of the assembly line that made possible the mass production of cars at reasonable costs.
ford took the idea of interchangeable parts first developed for guns by eli whitney and applied it to cars.
then he created a process whereby those parts could be assembled in a routinized fashion that greatly speeded production thus lowering cost even if it made the role of most workers extremely boring.
ford opened a plant for the production of the model t ford in highland park michigan in 1910 and added a moving assembly line in 1913.
each worker was assigned one small task to be repeated over and over.
as ford described it every piece of work in the shop moves.
there is no lifting or trucking of anything other than materials worker after worker did his assigned task over and over again.
at the end of the process a fully assembled model t emerged from the assembly line.
ford paid his workers well.
they found the work mind numbing but valued the pay high enough that they too could afford their own model t he transformed an industry bringing the cost of an automobile to within the reach of many americans and spawning a whole set of new industries from highway construction to automobile repairs.
the success of the automobile dramatically expanded the nation s need for oil now refined into gasoline to power the rapidly growing numbers of vehicles see table 17 1.
chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social order gilded age term applied to america in the late 1800s that refers to the shallow display and worship of wealth characteristic of the period.
table 17 1 factory sales of passenger cars per year year numbers of vehicles sold 1900 j 4 100 1905 24 200 1910 181 100 1915 895 000 1920 1 905 500 i j while ford walter chrysler and the founders of general motors were creating the automobile industry in detroit michigan other inventors were tinkering with additional ways to advance transportation.
wilbur and orville wright two bicycle makers from dayton ohio were determined to develop a flying machine.
on december 17 1903 on a deserted beach at kitty hawk north carolina their machine took off.
by 1908 orville wright had a contract with the army signal corps to conduct test flights at fort myer virginia.
the wright brothers conducted test flights around the country including los angeles and chicago.
air travel did not transform the lives of most americans as quickly as the automobile because it remained inefficient and dangerous for some time.
nevertheless watching people actually leave the ground on machines confirmed for many that in the realm of technology anything was possible.
17 1 quick review how did the inventions of the late 1800s and early 1900s better connect the nation.
corporations and monopolies analyze the role of the new giant corporations in american life.
the kinds of inventions that were appearing in the 1880s and 1890s like the earlier railroads and telegraph systems could not be produced by a family business.
railroads crossed the continent.
electric generation required huge investments.
telephones were useful primarily if they connected large numbers of people.
most of the countrys earliest corporations had been for public benefit building universities and hospitals or for temporary partnerships for specific ventures.
new corporate structures emerged during the jacksonian era in response to larger more expensive ventures to process cotton and manufacture other materials.
after the civil war those corporate structures achieved a level of size and power undreamed of by earlier generations of manufacturers.
managing the investments involved in the great new industries also required a new kind of financing.
in the absence of a federal bank nothing had replaced the bank of the united states that jackson had abolished in the 1830s see chapter 10 private bankers played an increasingly important role.
post civil war corporations and banks were of a size and a level of power the nation had not seen before.
they made a few americans extremely wealthy richer than any american ever had been before and they made other americans very nervous about the new concentrations of wealth and the accompanying power.
the outsized wealth of the era sometimes lavishly spent inspired the humorist mark twain to name this post civil war era the gilded age a reference to coating items with gold.
for some the gilded age produced an excess of money taste and power for others it created poverty.
482 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 financing and controlling the railroads jay cooke cornelius vanderbilt and others at the end of the civil war the most powerful banker in the united states was jay cooke who saved the unions finances during the war see chapter 14.
in the early 1870s however he almost wrecked the nations economy.
cooke financed the northern pacific railroad see chapter 16 telling european investors that a rail line from duluth minnesota to the pacific coast would connect the worlds breadbasket to shipping across the pacific and across the atlantic.
he insisted there is nothing on the american continent equal to it there is no end to the possibilities of wealth here the promise of wealth was enticing and investment poured in.
however there were too many railroads and few were making profits.
at the same time the end of the seemingly faraway franco prussian war 1870 1871 caused world grain prices to drop precipitously as european countries produced more of their own wheat.
the result was further reduced profit on the rail lines that hauled american wheat.
a government investigation into the union pacific railroads shaky finances during this period undermined public confidence in rail investments.
as a result cooke could neither sell new railroad bonds nor meet obligations on the old ones.
on september 18 1873 jay cooke and company declared bankruptcy and closed its doors.
the news that the nations most prestigious banker could not meet his obligations undermined financial confidence launching what was known as the panic of 1873.
the nation magazine described wall street great crowds of men rushed to and fro trying to get rid of their property almost begging people to take it from them at any price the stock exchange closed for 10 days.
banks collapsed.
railroad construction stopped.
by 1874 500 000 people had lost their jobs and breadlines were seen not only in new york but also wherever railroad construction and the demand for steel rails wooden ties or products that moved by rail had been boosting the economy.
the depression of 1873 demonstrated the boom and bust cycle of the new economy and the degree to which railroads and banking connected all parts of the nations financial structure.
as the economy recovered after 1873 the man who profited more than any other was already very rich cornelius vanderbilt.
after robert fulton invented the steamboat in 1807 vanderbilt created a steamboat empire first in new york harbor and then around the world.
after 1815 vanderbilts steamers began to travel to boston new orleans and during the california gold rush to nicaragua to meet other steamers that took gold seekers up the coast to california.
controlling the transit to california was far more profitable than seeking gold there.
his style of doing business was illustrated on one occasion when in an argument with competitors he said gentlemen you have undertaken to cheat me.
i wont sue you for the law takes too long.
i will ruin you during the civil war vanderbilt kept his ships moving between new york and union held new orleans and beyond to south america in spite of confederate efforts to stop them.
after the civil war vanderbilt shifted from steamships to railroads.
vanderbilt did not build railroads he bought them.
in addition he created new and much more profitable ways to manage them.
vanderbilt created corporations of a size not previously known in the united states and launched a managerial revolution.
the corporations that vanderbilt led involved levels of managers reporting to powerful central offices.
the new bureaucracies could ensure safety trains that ran on schedule were less likely to collide and trains that ran on well laid tracks were less likely to derail.
they also created great new wealth even as they reduced the role of any one individual manager or boss.
vanderbilt was hardly alone in fostering either of these developments but he was certainly an innovative leader.
in 1863 vanderbilt bought a major interest in the new york harlem railroad a small line that ran to the heart of manhattan.
vanderbilt improved its tracks cars and service and purchased the connecting hudson river railroad.
then in 1867 he forced 17 2 panic of 1873 a major economic downturn launched when the country s leading financier jay cooke went bankrupt during which thousands lost their jobs and from which the country took years to recover.
chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social order 41 the directors of the states largest railroad the new york central to sell to him or be shut out of new york city.
his new york central railroad empire made cornelius vanderbilt the richest man in america when he died in 1877.
others also became major speculators in the united states in the 1860s and 1870s.
daniel drew along with jay gould and jim fisk came to be known as corporate pirates.
they simply extracted wealth from a company.
as a young man drew herded cattle from farms to slaughterhouses.
he once claimed to have perfected a technique of feeding salt to his cattle and then just before reaching the slaughterhouses giving them all the water they wanted so they would arrive looking plump and thus fetch a good price.
in later life he certainly did the same thing with stocks buying companies issuing stock far beyond the companys value called watering the stock in honor of his experience with cattle and then leaving the company almost bankrupt while he walked away with the profit from the stock sales.
later in 1869 drew gould and fisk teamed up to corner the nations gold supply see chapter 15.
first they convinced president grant to appoint daniel butterfield to the key treasury post overseeing the nations gold supply.
they then bribed butterfield to join in their conspiracy.
as they kept buying and hoarding gold the price kept going up and up because of the demand they were creating.
grant discovered or at least guessed what butterfield and the trio were up to and he ordered the government to sell up to 4 million in gold bringing the price back down.
the trio sold their gold just before grant issued his order.
although they no longer controlled the gold supply they emerged very well off.
many others who had invested in gold were ruined and what became known as black friday created a significant drag on the nations economy.
henry adams grandson and great grandson of presidents who was just beginning his own career as one of the nations major intellectuals wrote for the first time since the creation of these enormous corporate bodies one of them has shown its power for mischief and has proved itself able to override and trample on law custom decency and every restraint known to society without scruple and as yet without check.
it would be another 30 years before there were effective checks on the corporate gamblers.
the fortunes that the vanderbilts drews and others like them made in the 1870s and 1880s allowed them to spend lavishly creating the public image of gilding a lily a flower that when cut would be thrown away in a few days with gold a lot of gold.
in grand parties in new york and at summer cottages or mansions in newport rhode island or elsewhere they showed off their wealth to the delight of some and the disgust of others.
new industries rockefeller s oil carnegie s steel and morgan s banking before the 1800s were over however a new generation of corporate leaders exceeded the most optimistic hopes of the vanderbilts and their generation.
among them was john d rockefeller who though he did not discover any oil nor invent new ways to refine oil into kerosene or gasoline did discover new ways to make money from oil amassing more money from the fuel than anyone had previously imagined possible.
mark hanna a childhood friend who later became president mckinleys closest advisor remembered saying of john d that he was sane in every respect save one he was money mad when rockefeller was 20 years old he heard news that got as much national attention as john browns raid on harpers ferry that same year.
on august 28 1859 edwin drake struck oil while drilling a well near titusville pennsylvania.
rock oil as the oil that came from the ground was called as opposed to whale oil and oil refined from coal was in great demand.
before the invention of electric lights in 1879 kerosene lights were the brightest and most popular form of illumination.
they were significantly 84 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 u a fji john d rockefeller 1839 1937 created the standard oil company which came to have monopoly control of the sales of oil in the united states making rockefeller an extraordinarily rich man as he drove competitors out of business.
brighter than candles and safer than gas lights.
with kerosene lights families could read in the evening and the mills could start earlier and operate later.
in addition the machinery that the country was using from railway engines to factory presses and looms needed to be lubricated with oil to avoid seizing up.
however the oil had been scarce and expensive.
drakes oil well significantly changed the potential supply of oil.
a rush ensued to sink oil wells in western pennsylvania.
rockefeller however did not like the dirt or the risk of drilling in which some struck it rich while others with a dry well or two went bankrupt.
he also did not like the risk of fighting as a soldier and quickly paid the 300 for a substitute to fight for him in the union army.
he focused instead on refining the oil that others produced.
with two partners rockefeller built a refinery in cleveland where he could take advantage of nearby supplies of crude oil and get his products to market by using great lakes shipping and the rail lines between the east coast and chicago that ran through cleveland.
rockefeller was determined to dominate the cleveland refining market.
he kept his products better and his prices lower than any of the competition.
he quickly bought out his partners one of whom later commented john had abiding faith in two things the baptist creed and oil he might have added that rockefeller also had great faith in his own ability to strike a good bargain and manage his business which meant cutting costs in every possible way.
he brought in a new partner henry m flagler who was as religious and as cost conscious as himself.
rockefellers cleveland refinery was soon shipping more oil than any other in the region which gave him great influence with the railroads.
jay gould offered a rebate to rockefeller if he would ship on the erie system and rockefeller accepted but then convinced the eries primary competition the lake shore railroad to give an even better one.
when word of the secret rebates leaked out other oil producers complained but rockefeller and flagler had already made enough money to buy several of the competitors.
chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social order 17 2 horizontal integration the merger of competitors in the same industry.
in 1870 the rockefeller flagler partnership became the standard oil company and the two set out to gain control of the nations oil business.
they bargained with oil producers to keep costs low.
they bought up every rival refining company they could leaving producers with little option but to sell their oil to standard oil at whatever price standard oil was willing to pay.
when a company would not sell to them they went into direct competition cutting prices until the competitor either sold to standard oil or went out of business.
they created the standard oil trust a separate corporation to buy up virtually every other refinery in the nation.
while competition kept prices low rockefeller thought competition was a terrible waste of effort and a drain on his profits and he meant to end it.
by the 1880s companies under the control of standard oil refined nine out of 10 barrels of oil produced in the united states.
this control over oil production came to be known as horizontal integration or in cases like standard oil where nearly all of the industry was integrated a horizontal monopoly.
standard oil kept growing.
rockefeller produced his own tank cars and leased them to the railroads making it difficult for competitors to transport oil.
when pipelines started replacing oil tank cars standard oil bought the pipelines.
in the 1890s tired of haggling with oil producers standard oil simply started buying oil wells and became the largest producer and refiner of oil in the nation.
in the 1890s the united states had no meaningful antimonopoly laws in force and rockefellers tireless work had made him the master of oil from its production to its refining to its sales.
just as edisons light bulb was starting to reduce demand for kerosene henry fords automobiles created a demand for gasoline refined from the same crude oil as kerosene.
automobiles would dwarf all previous markets for standard oils products.
in addition the worlds navies were also turning from sail to oil powered steamships.
after 1900 everyone knew that with the development of these gas and oil powered vehicles standard oils greatest days were still ahead see map 17 1.
andrew carnegie was only a little older than rockefeller.
in 1848 when he was 12 years old his family came to the united states from his native scotland after his father a successful linen weaver was thrown out of work by the mechanization of the industry.
andrew carnegies first job was in a textile mill in allegheny pennsylvania where he earned 1 20 per week.
he soon moved to higher paying jobs and eventually became the personal assistant to the division superintendent of the pennsylvania railroad a position in which he quickly learned the inner workings of american industry.
like rockefeller carnegie paid someone to serve as his substitute in the union army a practice that was entirely legal though ethically questionable during the civil war.
in 1863 he decided to leave salaried work because he was confident he could make more money by investing and he valued his independence.
he advised others that the key to success was put all your eggs in one basket and then watch that basket carnegies basket was steel which he quickly realized was coming to dominate american commerce.
in the early 1870s carnegie persuaded several investors to join him in opening a new state of the art steel mill just outside pittsburgh.
pittsburgh was near the coal fields and steel mills used a lot of coal.
the location was also near rivers and competing railroad lines so no one rail line could squeeze carnegies profits.
having established himself as the head of a giant corporation carnegie like rockefeller set out to dominate the field.
he found ways to track and cut costs.
seeing him around the plant looking at inventories one foreman said there goes that damned bookkeeper he replaced wood buildings which could burn with iron ones he developed an assembly line approach to steel production and he constantly updated and replaced equipment.
carnegie built or bought everything needed for the steel business from the coal mines to the coke ovens that prepared fuel to the iron mines that produced iron ore.
he purchased railroads and steamships to transport the coal and ore to pittsburgh.
in addition he did whatever was needed to keep workers salaries as low as possible.
he once said show me your cost sheets.
it is more interesting to know how well and how cheaply you have done this thing than how much money you have made other steel mill owners who worried only about profits were defeated by carnegies constant focus on costs.
power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 486 part vi becoming an industrial world superior canada maine type of plants v a blast furnace 0 rolling mill steel work bridge building plant companies hi the carnegie co hi federal steel co hi national steel co hi national tube co american steel and wire co of new jersey american tin plate co hi american steel hoop co 6sb american sheet steel co ih american bridge co hi lake superior iron mines independent firms o blast furnace 0 rolling mill companies republic iron and steel co h bethlehem steel co lackawana iron and steel co pennsylvania steel co of new jersey hi cambria steel co crucible steel co of america tennessee coal iron and railroad company hi jones and laughlins ltd o michigan i.
0 veland i ohio kentucky tennessee alabama louisiana vermc l.
ontario yiass.
new york pennsylvania t west virginia nj.
o w delaware virginia north carolina south carolina georgia gulf of mexico pittsburgh atlantic ocean florida lake erie k j x cleveland v map 17 1 the nations s industrial heartland.
the giant corporations of the gilded age tended to concentrate in the northwest of the united states.
the factories of the region attracted immigrants from around the world and within the united states while also concentrating wealth and increasing the country s transportation networks.
by the late 1890s carnegie steel was the largest single company in the steel business.
in contrast to the standard oil trust which was the model of horizontal monopoly controlling all of the nations oil refining carnegie steel was the model of vertical integration controlling all means of steel production from raw materials through sales.
for carnegie those means included the materials of coal and iron in the ground the mining and transport of the materials and the production and sales of the steel that came from these materials.
like rockefeller carnegie became a very rich man.
chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social orde vertical integration the consolidation of numerous production functions from the extraction of the raw materials to the distribution and marketing of the finished products under the directigjj of one firm.
more important than enjoying a lavish lifestyle and sometimes supporting various charities emerging corporate leaders used their money to ensure their political influence and power.
while rockefeller and carnegie were the best known and probably the most successful builders of monopoly trusts other leaders built monopolies and grew almost as rich.
in 1892 the new york world listed 3 045 millionaires in the united states.
gustavus swift dominated meat charles pillsbury grain henry havemeyer sugar frederick weyerhaeuser lumber and james b duke tobacco.
in addition companies in other fields established trusts as they replaced competition with easier and more profitable coordination the cottonseed oil trust the linseed oil trust the lead mining trust the whiskey distilling trust and the cord rope manufacturing trust.
free enterprise as previous generations had known it was quickly being replaced by a single corporation or trust that had many employees who simply took orders while the trust dominated the market for its product ending competition and setting prices that consumers large and small had no choice but to pay or do without the product.
the owners of these trusts had enough political power to make sure that no government intervened.
while rockefeller and carnegie were amassing their fortunes another american was amassing the greatest economic power that the country had ever seen.
although never as personally wealthy as rockefeller or carnegie john pierpont morgan was the banker that everyone else including the richest industrialists and often the u s government looked to.
like rockefeller and carnegie morgan was born in the 1830s and like them he paid for a substitute rather than let the civil war divert him from banking.
in the financial chaos of the civil war morgan launched j p morgan company.
during the war morgan made great profits.
he once sold reconditioned army rifles back to the federal government at a considerable profit.
working with european banks morgan helped finance the transcontinental railroad in the united states and the suez canal in the middle east both of which were completed in 1869.
using his skill and formidable resources morgan helped pick up the pieces of the american economy after the collapse of jay cooke company had launched the panic of 1873.
in 1877 after cornelius vanderbilt died morgan helped vanderbilts son william sell off some shares of the new york central railroad.
in return morgan got a 3 million fee but more valuable to him a seat on the board of directors of the new york central.
he helped others with similar sales and gained seats for himself on other equally powerful boards.
as a result morgan knew more about american industries than any other banker.
in particular he knew that the railroads were overbuilt and he was determined to reduce the competition among them.
in the late 1880s two of the largest railroads the new york central and the pennsylvania railroad ran competing lines from philadelphia to pittsburgh and from new york to chicago.
morgan decided to be a very forceful peacemaker.
he invited or summoned the principal directors of each railroad to his yacht the corsair and then ordered the captain to sail up and down the hudson until finally in exhaustion they agreed to a settlement.
ihe result of the agreement some called it collusion was better organization and higher profits for both lines especially for stockholders and directors like morgan himself who also always collected a hefty fee for his services but at considerable cost to shippers who had benefitted from the cutthroat competition.
the panic of 1893 showed morgans power as much as prosperity did.
in may 1893 the national cordage company known as the rope trust which was producing far more rope than the market demanded and issuing far too many promissory notes went bankrupt launching a major drop in stock prices among related businesses.
in an economy as deeply interconnected as the u s economy had become a drop in one area meant a drop in many others.
in the course of the ensuing depression the philadelphia and reading northern pacific union pacific and santa fe railroads as well as a host of other businesses all followed into bankruptcy.
people much lower on the economic scale also felt the depression sometimes more so.
in the fall of 1893 a methodist minister from lincoln nebraska told the part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 american voices andrew carnegie wealth 1889 17 2 in this article known as the gospel of wealth carnegie ff justified his vast fortune he would be the richest person in america by 1901 and laid the foundation for his late in life generosity that built carnegie libraries and created the carnegie corporation of new york in 1911.
the price which society pays for the law of competition like the price it pays for cheap comforts and luxuries is also great but the advantage of this law are also greater still for it is to this law that we owe our wonderful material development which brings improved conditions in its train we accept and welcome therefore as conditions to which we must accommodate ourselves great inequality of environment the concentration of business industrial and commercial in the hands of a few and the law of competition between these as being not only beneficial but essential for the future progress of the race the question then arises what is the proper mode of administering wealth after the laws upon which civilization is founded have thrown it into the hands of the few.
there are but three modes in which surplus wealth can be disposed of.
it can be left to the families of the decedents or it can be bequeathed for public purposes or finally it can be administered during their lives by its possessors why should men leave great fortunes to their children.
if this is done from affection is it not misguided affection.
observation teaches that generally speaking it is not well for the children that they should be so burdened.
neither is it well for the state as to the second mode that of leaving wealth at death for public uses it may be said that this is only a means for the disposal of wealth provided a man is content to wait until he is dead before it becomes of much good in the world besides this it may fairly be said that no man is to be extolled for doing what he cannot help doing.
there remains then only one mode of using great fortunes.
under its sway we shall have an ideal state in which the surplus wealth of the few will become in the best sense the property of the many because administered for the common good and this wealth passing through the hands of the few can be made a much more potent force for the elevation of our race than if it had been distributed in small sums to the people themselves.
this then is held to be the duty of the man of wealth first to set an example of modest unostentatious living shunning display or extravagance to provide moderately for the legitimate wants of those dependent upon him and after doing so to consider all surplus revenues which come to him simply as trust funds which he is called upon to administer and strictly bound as a matter of duty to administer in the manner which in his judgment is best calculated to produce the most beneficial results for the community the man of wealth thus becoming the mere agent and trustee for his poorer brethren bringing to their service his superior wisdom experience and ability to administer doing for them better than they would or could do for themselves.
such in my opinion is the true gospel concerning wealth obedience to which is destined some day to solve the problem of the rich and the poor and to bring peace on earth among men of good will source andrew carnegie wealth north american review vo.
391 june 1889.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis in carnegie s view what importance should be attached to economic inequality.
how did he believe the wealthy should use their fortunes.
crafting an argument defend or refute the following statement.
andrew carnegie s views on wealth were nothing more than a thinly veiled effort to justify exploitation and social injustice.
story of an honest methodist farmer who sold his years harvest for 31 and with this he paid his taxes and half his grocery bill and went home without dinner because there was not a nickel left in his pocket a lot of honest methodist baptist and presbyterian farmers were in the same boat as well as factory workers and members of the rising middle class who lost their jobs and their hopes in the 1893 depression.
as european investors watched the collapse of the u s economy they started withdrawing gold held in u s banks.
the european run on the u s gold supply almost bankrupted the u s government.
at the beginning of 1895 the federal gov ernments gold supply kept in vaults in new york city was 100 million.
by the end of january it was down to 50 million and falling quickly as investors withdrew their gold.
in early february morgan traveled from new york to washington dc in his private rail car to offer help.
president grover cleveland a democrat did not want the political embarrassment of being rescued by or being seen under the control chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social ordei 112 173 of j.
however by the time the two met morgan informed cleveland since morgan always had the most up to date financial information that there was but 9 million in gold still available and that a 10 million draft was on its way.
the banker told the president you cant meet it.
it will be over before three oclock morgan also had a solution to offer.
he reminded the president and the treasury secretary of a long forgotten piece of civil war legislation that said the secretary of the treasury may purchase coin with any of the bonds or notes of the united states authorized by law at such rates and upon such terms as he may deem most advantageous to the public interest he then offered 65 million in gold in return for 30 year government bonds.
the president asked morgan whether he could promise that the deal which not only provided gold but put the full faith and credit of the house of morgan behind the credit of the united states would end the rush on the treasury and morgan said yes sir i will guarantee it the deal worked.
european bankers who had lost faith in the united states had faith in morgan.
they bought the bonds and stopped demanding payments in gold.
the government had been protected from going the way of national cordage and the reading railroad.
the publisher joseph pulitzer called the deal an excellent arrangement for the bankers but f or the nation it means a scandalous surrender of credit and a shameful waste of substance morgan made a fortune on the deal but also saved the u s economy.
in the absence of any federal bank the house of morgan essentially served that role until the federal reserve bank was created in 1916.
no project of j p morgans was as great however as the one he launched in 1900.
it began with the kind of competition that morgan always hated.
illinois steel which morgan had helped finance was making a direct run at carnegie steel for control of the market.
charles schwab one of carnegies partners organized a holiday dinner with morgan to see whether they could work out a deal to end the competition.
carnegie had talked of retiring and his wife was anxious for him to enjoy life and devote himself full time to his charities.
carnegie was asked his price and after a nights sleep offered to sell carnegie steel for 480 million.
morgan agreed and later shook carnegies hand saying mr.
carnegie i want to congratulate you on being the richest man in the world morgan schwab and elbert gary the head of illinois steel then negotiated with rockefeller whom morgan disliked personally to buy out rockefellers ownership of iron deposits in the mesabi range and the ore boats that went with them.
in march 1901 morgan announced the creation of the u s steel corporation bringing together carnegies formidable assets illinois steel the rockefeller iron mines and other assets worth a total of 1 4 billion the largest corporation ever seen at the time.
the giant monopoly corporation was now the dominating fixture of the u s economy.
quick review how did the businessmen of the gilded age and their tactics revolutionize american industry.
whom do you think had the greatest impact.
lives of the middle class in the gilded age analyze daily life popular ideas and political direction for the middle class during the gilded age.
173 during the gilded age what came to be known as middle class values emerged in the united states.
more americans than ever before achieved a level of comfort and social respectability that while it was a long way from the wealth of the rockefellers carnegies and morgans was also a long way from the poverty of most of rural america or those who worked on the railroads or in the refineries.
as americans moved from farms to towns some of the urban residents became comfortable professionals and managers and in the process created a set of norms for middle class respectability that had not been known before.
part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 middle class life and expectations john lewis came to the united states from great britain before the civil war and got a job in the wholesale grocery business in new york city by the 1870s lewis was the proprietor of his own store and a solid member of americas emerging urban middle class.
while achieving a middle class life for himself and his family lewis wrote letters to his brother in england describing his life.
for the christmas of 1875 lewis took the train to visit relatives in philadelphia.
in addition to the feasting which greatly impressed lewis he also noted the christmas tree decorations as large and fine a tree as can be accommodated being procured and set up it is covered with every conceivable shape into which coloured and gilt paper and card can be cut and little pictures glass balls chains garlands c anything to make a gay and imposing display.
lewis also noted that the enjoyment of the trees seemed to be a prime adult occupation while the children wanted candy.
he noted the candy stores are among the gayest and most prosperous and the consumption of their wares by women and children all the year round is enormous and is often spoken of by writers as a great national failing in maintaining his own store traveling easily from city to city celebrating holidays with feasts decorations and parties lewis was participating in the emerging middle class culture of the late 1800s.
before the civil war christmas celebrations among american protestants were limited affairs but after the war the fondness for that holiday and the economic resources to celebrate more grandly than ever before grew rapidly.
a larger group of people had the resources to own homes decorate them and travel to visit relatives than in any previous generation in the united states.
those in the rising urban middle class were redesigning not only their private homes but also their expectations particularly for city buildings and services that supported their emerging tastes and desires.
huge new department stores offered the opportunity to shop for the things that middle class people like john lewis wanted in their lives.
the architect daniel burnham the leading voice of what came to be known as the city beautiful movement designed public buildings in a classical style that showed a permanence and beauty that this emerging class expected.
city beautiful planned major revitalization efforts in washington dc cleveland san francisco and chicago designing buildings such as the grand new boston public library based on the model of a renaissance palazzo the new building for the library of congress which was completed in 1897 and the new new york stock exchange that opened in 1903 classical style that characterized the movement.
chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social or 173 the architect louis sullivan burnhams professional rival sought a much simpler and he said more american style of architecture that reflected the energy of a culture that constructed buildings soaring to heights previously unimagined.
sullivan hated classical renaissance style and preferred more simple lines.
frederick law olmsted designed major new park systems including central park in new york bostons chain of connected parks around the city known as the emerald necklace and the mall in washington dc all of which spoke to the commitment to beauty and permanence for a new and growing class of people who had the time and inclination to use such public spaces for leisure and uplifting pastimes.
while architects designed new buildings and park systems designed to show permanence and prosperity other urban planners found ways to make cities more livable for the growing middle class or to help the middle class to escape what they found difficult to live with.
these planners found new ways to bring pure water into city neighborhoods perhaps most important to the life and health of city dwellers.
cholera and other waterborne diseases had long been a fact of city life.
once a cholera epidemic began to spread wealth and class did little to protect people from it.
cities like small towns tended to depend on well water and on small individual cisterns that collected rain water for their water supply.
however in growing urban areas stagnant cisterns were a breeding ground for disease and wells easily became contaminated.
beginning in 1842 new york started building a reservoir for water to be piped into the city from rural areas to provide a healthier water supply.
as new york grew a large new plan the new croton aqueduct was built from 1885 to 1893 to bring water to all of the citys neighborhoods.
other cities followed the same pattern.
water which had been a source of disease became one of the healthiest aspects of urban life.
even as city life improved many in the middle class wanted to put some distance between themselves and the cities.
railroads which had initially connected cities over long distances began to build shorter lines that would allow people who worked in cities to live in suburbs a new development in american life during the gilded age.
they commuted between their homes in semirural settings and their work in the commercial centers of urban america.
cities also quickly took to adding electric lights that kept cities alive at night electric elevators that allowed much taller buildings to be built and electric trolleys that made it easier to get from one part of a city to another.
the cities of the gilded age were cleaner brighter and faster paced than anything known in the united states before that time.
gilded age religion the gilded age saw new levels of religious activity among white middle class protestants.
most of the middle class were indeed both white and protestant and they viewed themselves as living in a christian america by which they meant a protestant christian culture.
between 1860 and 1900 the major protestant denominations the methodists baptists presbyterians congregationalists and episcopalians tripled their membership from 5 million to 16 million.
americans not only joined protestant churches but also participated in nondenominational religious organizations including the ymca as well as bible mission and social reform societies.
the theology that was being preached changed with the times becoming more individualistic and more optimistic.
and no one represented the changes in white american protestantism as much as the great revivalist of the era dwight l moody.
like many americans of his generation the same generation as rockefeller carnegie and morgan moody grew up on a farm but moved to a city.
when the civil war began moody gave up his shoe business to work full time for the ymca.
he led a sunday school for poor immigrant children and supported the ymcas social service missions.
by 1875 moody had an international reputation.
he launched the northfield and mount hermon schools as well as a new bible training school in chicago in 1886 that eventually became the moody bible institute.
part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 electric lights electronic trolleys and fast moving trains not only speeded transportation but also created a new kind of energized night life in cities like new york.
w louis sonntag jr the bowery at night watercolor 1895.
copyright museum of the city of new york.
another prominent minister lyman abbott described moodys preaching in 1899 saying as he stood on the platform he looked like a business man he dressed like a business man he took the meeting in hand as a business man would if other business men were dominating the culture and the economy a preacher who acted like a business man could be a success.
moody did not shout.
he gave a simple message focused on the need for conversion and the love of god.
the preacher was deeply critical of both sides in the growing debates that pitted liberal biblical scholarship against those who insisted the bible was the literal truth.
he did not see any fresh views on either side of the argument and wondered whether both could not just let us get on with the practical work of the kingdom the sins moody denounced were attending the theater disregarding the sabbath and believing atheistic teachings.
coming home to jesus was the key for moody and home and jesus often represented the same thing.
he preached a gospel perfectly fitted to the growing sense of individualism in the united states.
in describing his mission he said i look upon this world as a wrecked vessel.
god has given me a lifeboat and said to me moody save all you can ira d sankeys music was as important as the preaching at moodys revivals.
some of the most popular hymns that sankey led people in singing were written by fanny j crosby who wrote over 8 000 of them.
the hymns like the popular pass me not 0 gentle saviour reflect an individualistic faith in which the focus is on divine comfort and love far more than on sin divine judgment or great social change.
protestant americans sang these hymns during sunday morning services and at home around a piano which those of the emerging middle class could now afford.
electoral politics between 1876 and 1896 electoral politics reflected the dominant middle class inter ests of the era.
while groups within the major parties and new political parties like the populists see chapter 18 protested against the poverty and corruption that was part chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social order 17 3 stalwarts a faction of the republican party in the 1870s and 1880s who wanted the party to stay true to its earlier support for reconstruction in the south and who were less connected to the emerging big business interests than others.
mugwumps a reform faction of the republican party who supported cleveland the democratic nominee over the republican blaine in the 1884 election.
of the backdrop of the gilded age the major parties republicans and democrats alike reflected the ideas and aspirations of the middle and upper classes.
in a nation where a few were growing exorbitantly wealthy and a larger number were moving into new comforts the leaders of the political parties had no interest in challenging the status quo.
in the 1870s and 1880s the republican party was the political voice of most corporate leaders and most protestants outside of the south.
but the party was split between the heirs of the antislavery wing of the party stalwarts they called them selves and others who believed that it was time to forget about slavery and the goals of reconstruction and simply embrace the nations growing prosperity.
the party was also split along lines of personal animosity none deeper than the hatred between roscoe conkling stalwart leader of the new york delegation in the congress and james g blaine a congressman from maine since 1862 who had quickly risen over many more senior members to be speaker of house.
blaine was among those ready to focus on the future embrace the economy that rockefeller carnegie and morgan were creating for the nation and forget about reform efforts whether in the form of the now fading reconstruction goals or the needs of the urban poor.
blaine was a man of great charm and eloquence but often seen as being too smooth and probably a participant in some of the worse corruption of the grant administration.
after the tensions of the 1876 hayes tilden election see chapter 15 the republicans did not want to renominate president hayes and turned instead to another civil war veteran and compromise candidate from ohio james a garfield who defeated the democrats union war hero winfield scott hancock in the november 1880 election.
unlike many in either political party garfield was committed to civil service reform ending the use of government jobs to reward political favorites and to uniting stalwarts and their opponents.
his running mate was the new york customs collector chester a arthur better known for his ability to find government jobs for friends than for any reform agenda.
three months after the inauguration garfield was shot by a disgruntled office seeker and although he seemed to be healing from his wounds he died on september 19 1881.
arthur became the president and as some said served a less undistinguished term than expected.
in 1884 blaine was determined to stop arthurs renomination.
he tried hard to convince yet another war hero william t sherman to run for president but shermans unequivocal response was if nominated i will not run if elected i will not serve eventually the republicans gave blaine his turn as their candidate.
governor grover cleveland was the democratic nominee.
cleveland had fought corruption when he was mayor of buffalo new york a reputation that propelled him to the governors office in 1882 and only 2 years later to the white house.
given clevelands reputation for honesty and blaines for corruption a number of long time republicans campaigned for the democrats.
these party crossovers became known as mugwumps a word they claimed came from an indian word for big chief but that their opponents said meant someone whose mug was on one side of a fence while their wump was on the other.
in the midst of the 1884 campaign a preacher from buffalo revealed that cleveland had fathered a child with a young widow maria halpin and then paid child support.
cleveland supporters said that halpin had many boyfriends and that cleveland was only protecting the others some of whom were married.
the nominee ordered his campaign to tell the truth while the nation faced serious economic choices the campaigns fell to chanting blaine blaine james g blaine continental liar from the state of maine against ma ma wheres my pa just before the election another preacher who supported blaine castigated the democrats as the party of rum romanism and rebellion a phrase that may have cost the republicans key catholic votes in new york state where cleveland won by only 1 100 votes which gave him a majority in the electoral college.
94 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 cleveland was not significantly different than the republicans who served before him though he did take a strong stand against the annexation of hawaii and other expansionist efforts that republicans had been pursuing.
but as african americans in the south suffered from ever increasing segregation and inequality white and black farmers faced poverty and workers began efforts to organize unions to end starvation wages cleveland like the republicans tended to ignore their needs or when pushed sided with the corporations and their owners see chapter 18.
in a close race cleveland was defeated for reelection in 1888 by the republican nominee civil war general and presidential grandson benjamin harrison whose main campaign issues were clevelands veto of a pension bill for all civil war veterans and clevelands return of civil war banners to southern states.
a tactic called waving the bloody shirt reminding everyone in the north that republicans had won the civil war while democrats represented the states of the confederacy seemed to win elections for republicans.
yet 4 years later cleveland in a return match defeated harrison and served a second term from 1893 to 1897 the only president in history to serve nonconsecutive terms.
it was clevelands bad luck to begin his second term just as the panic of 1893 began and while his negotiations with j p morgan may have avoided even worse disaster the economic crisis of 1893 hurt many americans.
ihe political stability of the 1870s and 1880s seemed to be coming to an end in the 1890s.
global connections american influence around the world grew dramatically during the gilded age.
americans had been sending missionaries to foreign countries since the early 1800s but far greater numbers went abroad in the 1880s and 1890s.
dwight l moody called on young converts to consider careers as foreign missionaries and some of them launched the china inland mission to convert china.
another moody convert john r mott organized the student volunteer movement that eventually sent over 5 000 missionaries to india africa china japan and the middle east the movement later became the world student christian federation.
individual churches and religious bodies sent their own preachers teachers and medical missionaries to all parts of the globe.
missionaries brought western values a respect for human rights especially womens rights.
however they also brought american commercialism interests 1 k while political leaders like hayes garfield and cleveland vied for the presidency many reformers were coming to the conclusion that the business trusts led by people like rockefeller carnegie and morgan really controlled the country.
this political cartoon from 1889 showed who many thought actually ran the senate and the country.
chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social order perhaps unwittingly to cultures that may or may not have wanted them.
the missionaries were quickly followed by merchants and industrialists though missionaries sometimes led the protests against the commercialization of international relations.
returning missionaries became the voice of the world in many american communities describing people and cultures unfamiliar to american audiences.
missionaries were far from the only americans to visit other parts of the globe during the gilded age.
as the united states grew in population and industrial production it became a player of growing importance in world markets second only to great britain.
after the panic of 1873 many worried that the rapid growth in u s industrial productivity could become a problem rather than a boon.
if the country produced more and more and depended only on domestic markets then prices and income were doomed to keep falling.
the only solution some argued was to find foreign markets lots of foreign markets to be sure that american products were sold all over the world bringing new income to american producers.
exporting goods was nothing new to the united states but after 1870 many u s business leaders intensified exporting efforts to sustain the nations economy.
the total value of u s exports jumped from 234 million in 1865 to 1 5 billion in 1900 and the country was transformed from a debtor to a creditor nation.
in terms of commercial efforts the united states had long been interested in cuba.
southern senators regularly suggested making the island a slave state before the civil war and in 1854 the american ambassadors to europes leading powers issued the so called ostend manifesto demanding that spain sell cuba to the united states.
after the civil war cuba was no longer of value as a slave state but interest in the island never disappeared from american politics.
when a rebellion against spanish rule broke out in cuba in 1868 perhaps 100 000 cubans died as a result while the islands economy was devastated.
u s merchants took advantage of the situation and bought sugar plantations mines and ranches in cuba while u s diplomats forged an agreement with spain for free and open trade between the island and the united states.
by 1890 the united states was the dominant economic force on the island and trade with cuba was important for the u s economy.
the united states also had longstanding interests in mexico.
during the civil war napoleon iii had sent french troops to mexico installing austrian archduke maximilian and his wife carlotta as rulers of the country.
secretary of state seward warned the french that their meddling was an act of hostility and u s general philip sheridan informed mexican revolutionaries that he had placed a substantial supply of weapons at the border and would look the other way if they disappeared.
the supply vanished and maximilian was overthrown by a new government led by reform minded benito juarez.
maximilian was executed by a revolutionary firing squad in june 1867.
later porfirio diaz who did not share juarezs reform agenda claimed dictatorial power in mexico.
diaz was anxious to expand u s investment in mexico and americans bought railroads mines and oil exploration companies.
by 1900 americans had some 500 million invested in mexico enough to make the country a major trading partner and indeed to give american businesses significant influence in the mexican economy and political life.
some feared mexico was becoming almost an economic satellite of the united states.
u s commercial interests extended far beyond the americas.
in the 1870s belgium s king leopold ii created a private colony around the congo river in africa.
it was a brutal affair.
residents of the congo were pressed into slave labor on the vast rubber plantations that were meeting growing demands for rubber and they were making leopold very rich.
anxious to gain a new market some businessmen persuaded president arthur to recognize king leopolds rule as the legitimate government of the congo in 1884 however arthurs successor grover cleveland reduced u s involvement in light of the violent conditions.
part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 in europe the growth of u s exports almost provoked a trade war between the united states and europe s leading economic powers including britain germany and france.
bad harvests in europe starting in 1879 led to significant demand for american food lifting the u s economy out of the last vestiges of the panic of 1873.
but european governments became nervous about their growing dependence on u s food and claimed that u s pork and beef was not safe leading to a huge fall off in exports.
the new york herald urged avenging the american hog with a boycott of french wine and german sugar but an eventual compromise led meat exports to be doubled.
in asia a u s navy squadron sailed to korea in 1867 but was sent away.
but the u s navy kept trying as it had with japan and china and in 1882 korea agreed to open itself to u s markets.
the two governments signed the treaty of chemulpo after which korean officers studied at the u s military academy at west point and the brooklyn navy yard.
while korea remained a relatively small trading partner the determination to open a country known as the hermit kingdom was typical of the era.
from korea to latin america the congo and europe the united states emerged from the gilded age as a trading partner of some importance not only in familiar countries but also in parts of the world previous generations had barely heard about.
b quick review how did the expansion of industry contribute to changes in noneconomic arenas during the gilded age.
immigration 17 4 explain the reasons immigrants came to the united states in such large numbers during the gilded age and what their experience was.
in the 75 years between 1815 and 1890 15 million people immigrated to the united states the great majority from northern europe britain ireland germany scandinavia switzerland and holland.
in the next 25 years from 1890 until the start of world war i in 1914 15 million additional immigrants came to the united states and those immigrants came from new places 80 percent of them from italy greece russia the empire of austria hungary romania and turkey and others from japan china and korea as well as mexico and other parts of latin america.
with their arrival they changed the complexion of the nation.
what all these immigrants had in common was a push pull experience in which various factors pushed them to leave their home countries and at the same time other factors pulled them to try a new life in the united states.
the push from around the world when sadie frowne described the desperate poverty of poland or when the lithuanian antanas kaztauskis expressed his familys fear that he was about to be drafted into the russian army they were relating reasons that pushed hundreds of thousands of people to move not only from southern and eastern europe italy greece poland russia and so on but also from china japan and korea to start new lives in the united states.
most of those who emigrated to the united states between 1890 and world war i did so in large part because something often grinding poverty and fear of persecution pushed them to get out of the places where they and their families had lived for many generations and the pull of hoped for new lives and new prosperity attracted them to the united states see map 17 2.
nowhere was the push to leave greater than in russia and russian dominated parts of eastern europe including the ukraine lithuania and poland.
abraham cahan who came to the united states from russia as a young man explained what chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and ocean australia main groups chinese 370 000 japanese 275 000 from canada 2 200 000 from europe 30 000 000 main groups 5 000 000 4 500 000 4 500 000 2 600 000 2 600 000 2 000 000 from latin america 900 000 germans irish italians poles english jews south america 0 1 500 3 000 miles 0 1 500 3 000 kilometers map 17 2 immigration to the united states.
between 1820 and 1914 but especially between 1880 and 1914 immigrants transformed the united states this map shows where they came from and how many arrived.
pogroms government directed attacks against jewish citizens property and villages in tsarist russia beginning in the 1880s a primary reason for russian jewish migration to the united states.
drove him the government itself had set off the pogroms in order to save the throne from a revolutionary upheaval.
by making the jews the scapegoats it had confused the common people so that in the end the peasants were certain that the jews and not the czar were the cause of their troubles golda meir who became a school teacher in milwaukee and one day would be prime minister of israel remembered i can still recall distinctly hearing about a pogrom that was to descend on us with the rabble that used to surge through town brandishing knives and huge sticks screaming christ killers as they looked for the jews.
pogroms anti jewish attacks became increasingly common in russia at the end of the 1800s.
they were not only tolerated but also often actively encouraged by the russian government and the russian orthodox church.
after the assassination of czar alexander ii in 1881 the government ordered that all jews in russia must move to the pale of settlement a region that stretched from the baltic in the north to the black sea in the south.
jews were not allowed to travel into the rest of russia.
within the pale though there was a thriving jewish community and culture there was desperate poverty.
jews were not allowed to own land.
another immigrant remembered there were ten times as many stores as there should have been ten times as many tailors cobblers barbers tinsmiths leaving russia seemed the only solution to such conditions.
for italian peasants there were no pogroms but there was plenty of violence and poverty.
when italy was united as a nation in 1871 following a movement known as the risorgimento wealth and industry were concentrated in the north and the mezzogiorno as southern italy was known was a land of poverty where massive soil erosion made farming almost impossible.
in 1906 mount vesuvius erupted destroying towns and some of the rich grape growing farmland that remained.
facing 498 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 american voices sadie frowne a polish sweatshop girl 1906 17 1 sadie frowne s account of her move from a small village in russia to become a garment worker new york city s lower east side is representative of the life experience of thousands of immigrants.
my mother kept a little grocer s shop in the little village where we lived at first.
that was in poland somewhere on the frontier she had a wagon in which she used to drive about the country selling her groceries and sometimes she worked in the fields with my father.
when i was a little more than 10 years of age my father died.
he was a good man and a steady worker and we never knew what it was to be hungry while he lived.
after he died troubles began for the rent of our shop was about 6 a month and then there were food and clothes to provide.
we needed little it is true but even soup black bread and onions we could not always get.
mother wrote to aunt fanny who lived in new york and told her how hard it was to live in poland and aunt fanny advised her to come and bring me she said we should both come at once and she went around among our relatives in new york and took up a subscription for our passage.
we came by steerage on a steamship in a very dark place that smelt dreadfully.
there were hundreds of other people packed in with us men women and children and almost all of them were sick.
it took us 12 days to cross the sea and we thought we should die but at last the voyage was over and we came up and saw the beautiful bay and the big woman with the spikes on her head and the lamp that is lighted at night in her hand goddess of liberty.
so i went to work in allen street manhattan in what they call a sweatshop making skirts by machine.
i was new at the work and the foreman scolded me a great deal.
in poland i and my father and mother used to go to the synagogue on the sabbath but here the women don t go to the synagogue much though the men do.
they are shut up working hard all week long and when the sabbath comes they like to sleep long in bed and afterward they must go out where they can breathe the air.
some of the women blame me very much because i spend so much money on clothes.
they say that instead of a dollar a week i ought not to spend more than 25c a week on clothes and that i should save the rest.
but a gir must have clothes if she is to go into good society at ulmer park or coney island or the theater.
those who blame me are the old country people who have old fashioned notions but the people who have been here a long time know better.
a girl who does not dress well is stuck in a corner even if she is pretty and aunt fanny says that i do just right to put on plenty of style.
source sadie frowne a polish sweatshop girl in hamilton holt editor the life stories of undistinguished americans as told by themselves originally 1906 republished new york routledge 2000 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis according to the author what led to her mother s decision to move to america.
synthesis what elements of the author s story make it typical of immigrant stories of the period.
poverty criminal gangs and chaos some 4 million italians almost all from the south left italy between 1880 and 1914.
unlike the jews coming from russia many of the italian immigrants hoped one day to return home after making some money and perhaps one in four did return.
those who came whether temporarily or permanently settled in major american cities and took on some of the hardest work at the bottom ranks of the american economy.
russian jews and southern italian catholics were far from alone.
all across europe the population was growing faster than the land could support.
immigration provided a way out.
political upheaval in many places led to violence.
turkish violence against the christian minority especially the massacres of 1894 1895 and 1896 led many armenians to leave for america.
roman catholics in orthodox areas like lithuania and orthodox believers facing persecution in catholic or muslim countries wanted to move.
chinese immigrants had been coming to the west coast since the gold rush of 1849 but poverty and continued political turmoil kept them coming though the numbers were slowed significantly after 1882 when congress passed the chinese exclusion act.
until 1882 immigration had been a relatively easy matter for the chinese.
if one could afford the passage one simply booked it and then walked off the ship in san francisco.
chinese exclusion act federal legislation that suspended chinese immigration limited the civil rights of resident chinese and forbade their naturalization.
chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social ordfl ii part vi this italian woman with her children at ellis island the main atlantic coast port of entry for immigrants represented the way many families came to the united states.
a father would come first and later after making some money send for his wife and children who followed on their own.
however many in california and other parts of the west were threatened by the chinese who by their sheer numbers increased the competition for jobs or mining claims.
after a string of anti immigrant petitions led congress to change the law the first time an entire nationality was barred from the country only chinese who could prove to the satisfaction of new immigration agents that they were either returning citizens or that they brought with them educational economic or diplomatic skills were allowed into the united states.
japanese immigrants however began to arrive especially after 1885 when the emperor ended a ban on emigration and increased taxes to build up the government causing many farmers to lose their fields.
in addition about 300 000 french canadians moved from quebec into the united states between 1860 and 1900 especially into new england and new york.
remote villages in mexico experienced almost constant revolutionary violence in the late 1800s and early 1900s as regime followed regime.
as a result many mexicans moved across the rio grande into the united states to find jobs on farms mines or fields in texas and california greatly expanding an earlier mexican american community that had been in the united states since the changing border made them americans in the 1840s.
eventually some 4 million italians 2 million russian jews one third of all of the jews in russia and 9 million other immigrants from almost every other part of the planet came to the united states in the 30 year period before 1920.
the pull from an industrializing united states while there was good reason to leave russia or italy or japan or mexico among other places in the late 1800s there were also reasons to want to come to the united states.
the pull of opportunity was as important as the push of poverty and oppression.
although stories of the wealth to be found in the united states often led to terrible disappointment the conditions in the united states were often still significantly better than what immigrants had left behind.
prospective immigrants learned about jobs and opportunities from many sources.
in a small village in lithuania antanas kaztauskis heard a man who lived in his village talk about the success of his son who was working in the stockyards in chicago and who had sent his father a lithuanian language newspaper from chicago where the old man read of the rights of life liberty and the getting of happiness american employers often short of workers during economic boom times advertised for help even publishing a guidebook where to emigrate and why in 1869.
steamship companies advertised for passengers who could now they claimed take advantage of quicker travel times 14 days in 1867 and perhaps 6 days by 1900 all in safer and healthier conditions.
in japan farmers heard that a plantation laborer in the kingdom of hawaii could earn six times more than in japan.
it might be possible in a few years of working in hawaii or the united states to save enough to return home buy new land and make a fresh start in japan.
many japanese women saw the opportunity to start a new life as a picture bride for a japanese immigrant who was already in hawaii or the united states.
in a culture in which arranged marriages were the norm and in which women were encouraged to become educated and make their own way in the world the idea of women traveling to a new land starting a new life with a new husband did not seem so strange.
riyo orite said of her experience i was engaged at the age of 16 and didn t meet orite until i was almost 18 1 had seen him only in a picture at first.
being young i was unromantic.
i just believed that girls should get married p eople around me praised the match mexicans who returned after spending time in the united states came back to families and friends with shoes and good suits of clothes others who moved north wrote to family and friends come.
come over it is good here jesus garza remembered as i had heard a lot about the united states it was my dream to come here and many did come.
becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 the reality jobs cities and americanization when immigrants arrived in the united states they did not always find what they had been expecting or hoping for.
italian immigrants often summed up their experience back in the old country the young and naive immigrants had been told that the streets of america were paved with gold.
but when they got here they discovered three important things first the streets werent paved in gold second they werent paved at all and third they were expected to pave them.
few immigrants were quite as naive as the story implies but the popularity of the story in italian immigrant communities says a lot about the reality of the immigration experience.
when arriving immigrants from europe first landed the authorities were not always welcoming.
new york was the prime point of entry.
in 1892 the federal government built a new immigration center on ellis island in the harbor which replaced the old one at castle garden at the tip of manhattan.
ellis island combined quarantine customs and reception.
twelve million people came through ellis island before it closed in 1954.
it could be an intimidating experience as clerks asked a battery of questions trying to be sure that no physically or mentally ill people or troublemakers were allowed into the country.
they did not make life easy for anyone.
nevertheless only about two percent of those who arrived at ellis island were actually turned away.
those who were not permitted to enter typically either carried disease or came across in some way as unlikely to be able to support themselves.
during this process at ellis island the clerks often gave immigrants a new anglicized name.
a russian named cooperstein became cooper a finn named huttama became hanson or a greek named kiriacopoulis became campbell.
in one case a german jew became so confused with all the questions he was being asked that he forgot his own name.
when he responded to the clerks question about his name with ich vergesse i forget the clerk registered him as ferguson.
steamships from europe also docked in boston or philadelphia where the government established similar centers.
immigrants from canada and mexico were sometimes processed at border crossing points while at other times they simply walked or rode across the long borders between the countries.
in the southwest people had long traveled back and forth across the rio grande and they did not stop doing so.
on the pacific coast most immigrants came through the port of san francisco.
in 1910 the federal government created a processing center on angel island in san francisco bay that was designed to be a kind of west coast ellis island.
over the next 30 years 175 000 immigrants entered the united states through angel island the vast majority of them chinese.
similar but smaller stations were created in other ports especially seattle.
although angel island might have been designed as a counterpart to ellis island it was a very different place.
at both islands immigrants faced frightening medical inspections and batteries of questions from federal immigration agents.
but while most of those coming through ellis island left within a day many on angel island were kept for weeks or months occasionally for years.
from the time of the passage of the chinese exclusion act in 1882 until changes in u s policy in 1943 only chinese immigrants who could prove that they were returning u s citizens or the children of u s citizens were allowed into the country.
the chinese immigrant population was essentially frozen at its 1882 levels.
however the destruction of all federal records in the earthquake and fire in san francisco in april 1906 meant that if someone claimed to be a u s citizen it was hard to disprove the claim.
so called paper sons came to the united states with high hopes that they could answer the required questions and gain admission to a country where they could make some money and avoid the wars and famine in china.
some succeeded.
others were deported back to china.
as a result angel island became a place of constant tension.
paul chow whose parents had come through angel island remembered the fear the place evoked in his family.
whenever my mother would mention it shed say angel island shhh he said.
i thought it was all one word angelislandshh chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social order arrival at angel island in san francisco might mean long waits in confining conditions for asian immigrants like these japanese women.
melting pot an often popular idea that somehow immigrants from other countries should quickly lose their culture and language and melt into being just like other americans.
although the phrase melting pot became a popular way to describe the influx of immigrants during the height of the immigration boom the reality in united states was not quite what the popular phrase indicated.
the term melting pot came from a play by israel zangwill produced in new york in 1908 in which the hero wants to forget the pain of his life as a jew in czarist russia and announces that he is happy to be in america gods crucible where he can be part of the great melting pot where all the races of europe are melting and reforming in fact many of those who arrived had no interest in melting into a common american culture but were instead creating a richly diverse nation of far more ethnic and cultural variety than had ever been seen before.
for jews arriving in new york the next step after leaving castle garden or ellis island was often to make their way to the lower east side of manhattan the heart of the jewish community.
to be in the lower east side in the 1880s and 1890s was as rose cohen said as though we were still in our village in russia there was little actual cultural melting going on though people slowly took on more and more american ways.
while one found friends there living conditions were hard in some of those most crowded blocks in the country.
the american magazine described lower east side tenement housing in 1888 they are great prison like structures of brick with narrow doors and windows cramped passages and steep rickety stairs the narrow court yard in the middle is a damp foul smelling place supposed to do duty as an airshaft in the hot summer months these fire escape balconies are used as sleeping rooms by the poor wretches who are fortunate enough to have windows opening upon them.
bathrooms were at the end of the hall and were shared by multiple apartments.
most apartments were packed with people as families crowded into tiny rooms and took in borders who would help pay the rent.
one 1908 survey found that 50 percent of families slept three or four persons to a room and another 25 percent had five or more persons per room.
jewish immigrants found work where they could.
jewish peddlers sold nearly everything fruit vegetables fish clothing kitchen utensils filling streets like part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 p wi w cigarettes i m f js 1 x 17 j j n l av v w hester street in new york s lower east side was the heart of the city s immigrant community.
delancey street with pushcart after pushcart all selling something different and trying to convince passers by to purchase.
even more jewish immigrants found work in the garment industry.
many russian jews had survived as tailors the singer sewing machine was a major export from the united states to russia.
in america skill with a needle meant a job.
the demand for uniforms for the union army led to the establishment of standard sizes for clothing first for men and later for women and this change allowed the development of mass produced rather than individualized clothing.
because of the development of standard sizes the garment trade was able to shift from made to order work for the elite to mass production of clothing for everyone.
mens suits and pants womens dresses and shirtwaists as blouses were called were produced in the thousands making the clothing business a major industry.
at first garment work was done at home as families or small groups took in piece work and returned the finished products.
later larger factories known as sweatshops brought together sometimes hundreds of workers who were expected to sew at a fast pace for long hours to ensure that they kept their jobs and the owners made a decent profit.
one could walk for blocks in southern manhattan and see nothing but such sweatshops small poorly ventilated shops or apartments crammed with workers often family members who pieced together garments.
garment workers sewing by hand in a small new york city sweatshop in1908.
photograph by lewis hine.
chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social order work going on from early morning to late evening.
in spite or perhaps because of the harsh living and working conditions new york s jewish community grew strong.
russian jews had no intention of returning to russia where pogroms and poverty reigned.
they established synagogues foreign language newspapers provided news and some 300 hebrew schools maintained their language and culture.
italian immigrants also created their own neighborhoods.
in chicago taylor street became the heart of little italy.
in milwaukee the third ward on the east side was the heart of the italian community where some 20 italian grocery stores existed on brady street alone.
in boston the north end and east boston housed italian communities.
and in new york many italian immigrants like russian jewish immigrants moved to the lower east side of manhattan.
thinking historically the pull of nostalgia the push to continue in 1906 the jewish daily forward a yiddish language newspaper serving jewish immigrants began carrying an advice column in which the editor abraham cahan responded to letters.
one writer a recent immigrant from russia said oh my poor dear parents how saddened they were at my leaving.
the leave taking their seeing me on my way was like a silent funeral i came to america and became a painter.
my great love for hebrew for russian all my other knowledge was smeared with paint.
during the year that i have been here i have had some good periods but i am not happy because i have no interest in anything.
my homesickness and loneliness darken my life i want to run back and i beg you to be my counsel as to how to act.
the editor was blunt noting that almost all immigrants yearn deeply for dear ones and home at first but that the young man must not consider going home but try to take root here.
he should try to overcome all these emotions and strive to make something of himself so that in time he will be able to bring his parents here.
that same year hamilton holt editor of the new york independent published the life stories of undistinguished americans as told by themselves 27 accounts of the immigrant experience including several by those who considered a return to their homeland but who had decided against it.
an italian immigrant who shined shoes in new york city who wrote we had said that when we saved 1 000 each we would go back to italy and buy a farm but now that the time is coming we are so busy and making so much money that we think we will stay.
a swedish immigrant who prospered as a farmer in minnesota wrote father and mother kept writing to the children in america that now they had made their fortunes they should come home and live but they put it off am going over to sweden soon to keep christmas there but will come back again and maybe bring other people with us.
some swedes go to the old country every christmas.
a modern researcher erika lee found that her great great great grandfather moy dong kee had come to california in 1854 before the chinese exclusion act limited chinese mobility.
though he stayed in the united states for 52 years he was able to make at least three trips to visit his family who remained in china.
he finally retired to china in 1906 at the age of 72.
some immigrants indeed traveled back and forth often.
others made their fortunes in america and then returned to their homelands.
perhaps a quarter or more of all italian immigrants eventually returned to italy an unusually high percentage among immigrant communities but a little money earned in america could translate into land ownership in italy.
in other immigrant communities especially among russian jews facing pogroms and conscription into the czarist army very few ever returned.
the pull of nostalgia and the usually stronger push to continue to make a life in their new adopted home was part of the life of almost every immigrant.
source isaac metzker a bintel brief sixty years of letters from the lower east side to the jewish daily forward new york doubleday 1971 pp.
117 118 cited in robert d marcus et al america firsthand volume two readings from reconstruction to the present boston bedford st.
martins 2004 pp.
thinking critically 1.
crafting an argument what do the reasons immigrants gave for wanting to leave or wanting to stay tel you about their reasons for immigrating in the first place.
contextualization why might some immigrants have found it easier than others to return to their home country.
why was such a trip almost impossible for others.
81 04 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 since most italian immigrants came from the rural poverty of southern italy they had few marketable skills when they got to the united states.
like russian jews some became pushcart owners selling fruits and vegetables.
others opened restaurants.
more than a few became the laborers who built the cities where they lived new york chicago milwaukee and boston all have water and sewer lines dug by italian laborers.
gender roles were perhaps more rigidly defined in the italian immigrant communities than elsewhere.
italian families tried every way they could to encourage married women to stay at home and to depend on the men to earn a living for the family.
for the 900 000 french canadians who emigrated to the united states between 1840 and 1930 the move south meant escape from rural poverty and a chance for a new start especially in the mills of new england.
more than most immigrant groups those coming from quebec tended to bring their priests nearly all french canadians were catholic doctors lawyers and grocers with them all of whom were sure that life might be better or at least marginally more prosperous in rapidly industrializing new york and new england than in the isolated farms of quebec.
like the italians and the french canadians mexican immigrants often moved back and forth between the united states and home communities but in their case that move meant crossing only a river rather than an ocean.
nevertheless more and more immigrants from mexico eventually made permanent homes in the united states creating the barrios which were often extensions of mexican communities that had long stretched along the border from texas to california.
mexican american communities like those of european immigrants often reflected quite different home regions.
one immigrant remembered we came to know families from chihuahua sonora jalisco and durango.
some had come to the united states even before the revolution living in texas before migrating to california the barrio was also home in other ways.
immigrants from mexico could find familiar food including tamales frijoles tortillas and menudo.
they could see traditional clothing enjoy traditional holidays and festivals and feel much less like strangers in someone elses land.
for all catholic immigrants the catholic church was an essential link with their faith and their past.
at the end of the u s civil war there were 42 dioceses and 3 000 catholic churches in the united states.
by 1900 there were 70 dioceses and 10 000 churches many serving specific ethnic communities.
the italian parish the polish parish the mexican parish and the german parish might be in very close proximity but they served their own group often offering parochial schools and classes in a home language that was important to parents coping with children growing up in an english speaking society.
those who entered the united states from asia found different kinds of work in their own ethnic communities.
chinese immigrants such as lee chew found work when they could when i got to san francisco a man got me work as a house servant in an american family and my start was the same as that of almost all the chinese in this country.
the chinese laundryman does not learn his trade in china there are no laundries in china all chinese laundrymen here were taught in the first place by american women just as i was taught.
for the japanese in hawaii an independent country until 1898 housing and work were found on the sugar plantations which were new to them.
hawaiian companies encouraged whole families to immigrate believing that dependable married men made better workers though both women and men were given jobs in the fields.
japanese communities were able to establish themselves with their own traditions religious practices including buddhist temples japanese language schools for chil dren and festivals including the emperor s birthday when work ceased in spite of the frustration of the plantation owners.
in time japanese portuguese chinese and chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social orden m 1 native hawaiian workers got to know one another other exchanged food and developed real if tenuous friendships.
17 4 quick review which were more important in bringing immigrants to the united states in the late 1800s and early 1900s the push factors or the pull factors.
give at least three reasons to justify your answer.
conclusion ihe well named gilded age was a time of great extremes.
in the decades after the civil war americans built bigger corporations cities and buildings than ever before.
some made huge fortunes and lived a life of lavish spending.
other americans created a new middle class.
still others especially immigrants living in tightly packed urban communities lived on the edge of poverty while also creating new cultures with their own values and norms.
all of them created a vastly different nation than any previous generation had known.
during the gilded age america emerged as an industrial giant.
technological innovation and vast reserves of coal oil steel and timber along with well established but expanding railroad networks fueled a growing economy.
new forms of corporate ownership developed to direct and manage large scale industrial operations and private investment banks grew immensely rich and influential along with the industrialists whose ventures they helped to finance.
the few who managed to generate great wealth often spent lavishly on homes and possessions as a reflection of their power and position sealing the reputation of the period as one of shameless excess gotten by ruthless economic exploitation.
while a few grew enormously wealthy a new middle class also emerged in the gilded age.
made up mostly of the families of men who worked at the middle levels and managed the large new corporations the middle class created its own new lifestyle.
city services from a healthy supply of water to new high rise buildings with elevators to giant department stores catered to the needs of this growing middle class.
many in the middle class also sought some distance from the cities and the rail and trolley lines facilitated the growth of suburbs in which large private homes replaced apartments and people enjoyed a mix of urban and rural amenities.
from religion to sports to politics the united states catered to the new middle class.
the rapidly expanding new industries needed workers and the call for workers exerted a pull on people living in far distant places including russia italy china and japan.
at the same time developments in these and other countries were creating a push that led many to want to leave.
whether it was the anti jewish pogroms in russia or the grinding poverty of italy or the civil wars that wracked china the chance to leave for a better life was so appealing that the united states experienced a massive era of immigration between 1880 and 1914.
once in the united states immigrants were not always welcomed.
many native born americans distrusted what they saw as foreign cultures.
many immigrants resisted giving up old ways.
but the jobs though low level and low pay were there and immigrants began working in agriculture and in the booming urban sweatshops that were clothing the country and the world.
as a result of all of these changes by 1900 the united states was a very different place than it had been only a few short decades earlier.
chapter review what were the three biggest differences in the united states in 1900 as a result of the events trends and innovations of the gilded age.
06 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 chapter 17 chapter review technology changes the nation lives of the middle class in the gilded age 17 1 explain the inventions of the late 1800s and their impact review questions 1.
crafting an argument in your opinion what was the most important technological innovation of the late 1800s.
historical interpretation how does the rise of the automobile industry illustrate the connection between technological innovation and industrial growth and consolidation in the late 1800s and early 1900s.
173 analyze daily life popular ideas and political direction for the middle class during the gilded age.
review questions 6.
contextualization how did architecture and urban design of the late 1800s reflect middle class values and aspirations.
synthesis what connections can you make between the growth of american business and changes in american religious life in the late 1800s.
corporations and monopolies 17 2 analyze the role of the new giant corporations in american life.
review questions 3.
historical interpretation what does the panic of 1873 tell us about the role of speculation in the american economy of the late 1800s.
comparison compare and contrast american manufacturing in the early 1900s and the late 1900s.
what had changed.
historical interpretation what does j p morgans involvement in the panic of 1893 and in its resolution tell us about the nature of american industry at the turn of the century.
17 4 immigration explain the reasons immigrants came to the united states in such large numbers during the gilded age and what their experience was.
review questions 8.
cause and effect what factors explain the migration of large numbers of eastern european jews to the united states at the turn of the century.
comparison what did immigrants hope to find in america.
how did their expectations compare with reality.
historical interpretation what might explain the formation of ethnic neighborhoods in the late 1800s.
what advantages did such neighborhoods provide to new immigrants.
chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social order 184 18 2 183 chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of how the rapid industrialization after the civil war impacted the lives of diverse people and the rise of distinct resistance movements.
learning objectives conflict in the new south analyze how the combined impact of industrialism and the end of reconstruction created the unique character of the new south.
the politics of conflict from populist movement to populist party analyze how agrarian unrest and protest came to have a significant impact on american politics.
worker protest and the rise of organized labor explain the tensions in industrial america that led to major labor strife between the 1870s and 1914.
drivers and mules with young laborers in a west virginia coal mine in a 1908 photo by lewis hine.
when he accepted the nomination of the newly growing socialist party for president in the 1912 presidential elections eugene v debs said the worlds workers have always been and still are the worlds slaves.
they have produced all the worlds wealth and supported all the worlds governments.
they have conquered all things but their own freedom.
it was the goal of the socialist party debs said to win that freedom.
debs had an expansive goal for his political organization a party for women and men blacks and whites struggling farmers as well as factory and railroad workers.
when the presidential election was held in november debs won some 900 000 votes or 6 percent of the total.
although that percentage was small it reflected nonetheless unusual support for a nontraditional candidate.
in a nation in the midst of rapid social change debs sought to speak for those being hurt by the changes.
although he failed to rally as many as he hoped to his political banner his campaign reflected the deep tensions in the united states in the late 1800s and early 1900s.
in the face of extraordinary 8 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 v 18 1 significant dates technological and industrial change many were angry.
this chapter traces the reasons so many americans were angry in the years between 1877 and 1914 and the results of that anger in reshaping the political and cultural life of the nation.
chapter 19 traces the ways that yet other americans began to tackle the problems of this era.
conflict in the new south analyze how the combined impact of industrialism and the end of reconstruction created the unique character of the new south.
in 1886 the young editor of the atlanta constitution henry grady was invited to new york city to speak at the prestigious new england society of new york one of the citys most elite groups.
coming 20 years after the end of the civil war the invitation was quite an honor for a southern newspaper editor.
the society like grady was ready for a fresh start regarding the nations regional differences.
grady was in new york to tell his audience that a new south had been born.
the new south was not like the old version.
it had been born grady said out of the defeat of the souths brave armies in the late war and the ending of slavery.
a new day had begun.
but it had begun under leaders who though moving in new ways were proud of their past and wanted to be clear the south has nothing for which to apologize the south has nothing to take back the new south meant several things to grady.
first grady was saying that that the south was done apologizing for the civil war for slavery and for the increasingly rigid social political and economic segregation that was developing in place of slavery.
on race relations the south grady said wanted to be left alone.
grady was also announcing that the south had come of age economically.
it was building railroads and industrializing at an impressive pace and southerners wanted to be fully integrated into the economic prosperity of the rest of the nation.
on the economic front the new south that grady was discussing was indeed different from the old south.
economic development and economic optimism 1877 great railroad strike 1882 agricultural wheel farmers organization launched 1886 haymarket bombing henry grady announces the new south charles w macune elected president of the farmers alliance beginning its rapid growth 1890 new mississippi state constitution effectively excludes blacks from voting farmers alliance establishes headquarters in washington dc united mine workers of america founded in columbus ohio 1891 the people s party populists launched 1892 homestead strike 1893 american railway union organized 1894 coxey s army marches on washington dc pullman strike u s supreme court s plessy v ferguson decision william jennings bryan runs for president on democratic and populist party tickets 1905 industrial workers of the world organized niagara movement organized 1909 national association for the advancement of colored people launched i i the pre civil war south had been dominated by agriculture.
in the new south sawmills factories mines and railroads were being built and old wooden buildings were being replaced with new brick ones in many towns.
optimism was growing though not everyone was celebrating.
the decline in the price of cotton was devastating farmers and for most african americans segregation and exclusion made life almost unbearable.
nevertheless for a fortunate subset of white southerners the years between 1875 and 1900 were a time for optimism.
before the civil war the south had far fewer miles of railroad track than the north.
catching up on railroad construction was a key element in defining the new south.
the new railroads brought all sorts of change.
the investment in building railroads much of it northern or european money brought work to many southerners not only those who did the actual work of laying track but also those supporting them.
as one mississippi resident noted the women and children were busy producing vegetable crops chickens eggs milk and butter and the men were butchering and delivering fresh meat and other supplies to the men working on the railroad once the new lines were in place there were also jobs working on the railroads.
the work was dangerous and injuries were common but the pay was better than anything many southerners had seen.
the rail lines provided southerners with important new connections to the outside world see maps 18 1a and 18 ib.
a generation earlier rail lines had connected many parts of the north but when the rail lines finally reached an isolated town like harrison arkansas in february 1900 the local newspaper announced harrison is a rail road town at last henry hammond an astute observer of southern life pointed out that country people who formerly were satisfied with their weekly paper who went to town annually or semiannually in some instances not more than two 1911 triangle shirtwaist fire 1912 bread and roses strike in lawrence massachusetts 1914 colorado miner s strike new south an ideology developed by some elite southerners that declared an end to the nostalgia for slavery and plantation life and a beginning for the economic development of the south while protecting the growing racial segregation of the region from any northern interference.
chapter 15 reconstruction 417 i 1865 lincoln dies andrew johnson becomes president j last battles of the civil war in cameron u j j county texas i president johnson announces plans for a presidential reconstruction.
juneteenth emancipation announced in texas j thirteenth amendment ratified ku klux kian formed in tennessee 1866 civil rights act passed over johnson s veto 1867 first congressional reconstruction act passed 1868 houses pass articles of impeachment against president andrew johnson andrew johnson is acquitted by one vote in the senate fourteenth amendment ratified 1869 ulysses s grant inaugurated as 18th president of the united states 1870 fifteenth amendment ratified first enforcement act passed by congress u s department of justice created to enforce reconstruction laws 1871 ku klux kian act passed by congress u s army troops seize louisiana statehouse return republican legislature 1873 colfax louisiana massacre supreme court decision in the slaughterhouse cases limits the reach of the fourteenth amendment 1874 grant orders 5 000 troops to new orleans to return republican governor 1875 civil rights act of 1875 1876 united states v cruikshank 1877 rutherford b hayes inaugurated as president slow ending of reconstruction after january 1863 the emancipation proclamation made the union army an army of liberation for slaves during the war itself.
many slaves did not wait for the union army to arrive.
when joseph davis fled the plantation that he and his brother jefferson davis owned at davis bend on the mississippi river in 1862 slaves took over the property and began running it themselves much to the surprise of general grant who arrived at davis bend with the union army in 1863.
even for those still in slavery throughout the war word passed quickly.
in mississippi while the war was still far away one slave responded to a planters greeting howdy uncle with an angry call me mister other slaves refused to work unless they were paid or simply left often in search of family members sometimes just because for the first time in their lives they could.
in the aftermath of the civil war women and men who had been considered the property of others found that they could buy property.
they could refuse to work for people who only recently had coerced their labor.
they could travel without the hated passes from white masters.
sometimes they were reunited with family members from whom they had long been separated.
people for whom literacy had been illegal now learned to read and write.
they became teachers started their own schools and opened colleges and universities.
slaves and free blacks who had never dreamed of voting became voters and officeholders members of state legislatures and members of the united states congress.
they passed laws creating a system of public education and dreamed of better days ahead.
the story of the era known as reconstruction its high hopes and its violent and tragic ending is the focus of this chapter.
federal reconstruction policy 15 1 radical republicans a shifting group of republican congressmen who favored abolishing slavery and advocated full rights for former slaves in the south.
explain the political development of federal reconstruction policy.
in december 1864 senator charles sumner of massachusetts thought lincoln had agreed that former confederate states must grant all citizens the same right to vote as whites which meant the right of males to vote to be readmitted to the union.
but while lincoln had come to believe that blacks who fought in the union army had won the right to vote he also believed that the constitution gave states the right to determine who voted and he did not yet seem ready as far as anyone knew to interfere.
when lincoln died in april 1865 his own party was divided on the question of the vote for african americans and on how best to handle the readmission of the confederate states within the nation.
with the war just ending the majority of republicans in and out of congress were still moderates.
many had begun the civil war with the intention only to save the union and had been won over in the course of the war to believing that the end of the war had to mean the end of slavery.
still that revised intention was just a single goal they were not committed to voting rights or the award of land for newly freed african americans.
other republicans who were coming to be known as radical republicans often called simply the radicals in congress were determined that the norths victory in the civil war meant that the country should give formerly enslaved people not only their freedom but also the right to vote and to hold office.
in addition they believed the country should provide land to those who had previously worked other peoples land as their slaves.
in other words formerly enslaved people should be given all the rights of white americans.
418 partv expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 american voices jourdon anderson letter to colonel p h anderson 1865 15 1 fter jourdon anderson and his wife mandy were freed from slavery on a tennessee plantation belonging to colonel p h anderson they moved north and settled in dayton ohio.
a year later with the war over and the confederate army disbanded colonel anderson wrote to his former slaves asking them to return as employees.
jourdan anderson responded to his former master as to my freedom which you say i can have there is nothing to be gained on that score as i got my free papers in 1864 from the provost marshall general of the department at nashville.
mandy says she would be afraid to go back without some proof that you are sincerely disposed to treat us fairly and justly and we have concluded to test your sincerity by asking you to send us our wages for the time we served you.
this will make us forget and forgive old scores and rely on your justice and friendship in the future.
i served you faithfully for thirty two years and mandy twenty years.
at 25 a month for me and 2 a week for mandy our earnings would amount to 11 680.
add to this the interest for the time our wages has been kept and deduct what you paid for our clothing and three doctors visits to me and pulling a tooth for mandy and the balance will show what we are in justice entitled to.
if you fail to pay us for faithful labors in the past we can have little faith in your promises in the future.
we trust the good maker has opened your eyes to the wrongs which you and your fathers have done to me and my fathers in making us toil for generations without recompense.
here i draw my wages every saturday night but in tennessee there was never any pay day for the negroes any more than for the horses and cows.
surely there will be a day of reckoning for those who defraud the laborer of his hire.
jourdon anderson p s.
say howdy to george carter and thank him for taking the pistol from you when you were shooting at me.
source john david smith black voices from reconstruction 1865 1877 gainesville university press of florida 1997 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what examples can you find in the document of jourdon anderson s sense of humor.
historical interpretation why would colonel anderson invite jourdon anderson back to work on the plantation where he had been a slave.
how do you think the former slave owner responded to this letter from jourdon anderson.
a similar kind of split existed over the proper ways to readmit states to the union.
lincoln and many other republicans had argued throughout the war that the southern states had never left the united states after all preserving the union had been the initial reason that the north went to war in 1861.
if the southern states had never left there was little to do at wars end but for them to conduct elections for local and national office and resume their place in the nation.
others however especially the radical republicans argued that after 4 years of fighting against the union the states of the former confederacy were effectively out of the country and could be readmitted only after some period in which the federal government sought to reconstruct state governments to ensure that those who led the rebellion traitors as the radicals always called them would not lead the new state governments and that the full civil rights of african americans would be ensured.
the difference of opinion was significant and compromise was not easy.
while lincoln pondered the question of the vote and argued that the debate over the term readmission was a distraction from the work at hand he did take another step that would have far reaching significance in what was to come.
lincoln proposed establishing a federal bureau of freedmen refugees and abandoned lands.
chapter 15 reconstruction 419 i freedmen s bureau agency established by congress in march 1865 to provide social educational and economic services as well as advice and protection to former slaves.
presidential reconstruction name given to the immediate post civil war era 1865 1866 when president andrew johnson took the lead to return full rights to the former confederate states.
congressional reconstruction name given to the period 1867 1870 when the republican dominated congress controlled reconstruction era policy.
sometimes it is also known as radical reconstruction.
the freedmens bureau as it came to be known would last longer and do more than lincoln ever imagined when he signed the legislation authorizing it in march 1865.
lincoln placed great faith in the new government established in louisiana after the union victories there.
the new legislature pledged loyalty to the union created a public school system and after it was proposed ratified the thirteenth amendment abolishing slavery.
it had not however granted former slaves the right to vote.
lincoln pondered the question of whether louisiana could be brought into proper practical relation with the union sooner by sustaining or by discarding her new state government.
his own answer was clear he believed that the louisiana government could eventually extend the vote and would provide a model of transition back into the union for other confederate states.
the more radical members of congress did not want to give louisiana full rights as a state until it had guaranteed that blacks would be given the right to vote.
they blocked counting louisianas electoral votes in the 1864 election and the seating of the states new senators.
they would soon do more.
the post civil war era is often described as including three distinct time periods.
the first period is referred to as presidential reconstruction in 1865 66 when president johnson sought to return states to their prewar status with only the institution of slavery being abolished.
the next period is known as the more radical congressional reconstruction sometimes radical reconstruction which began when congress began to challenge johnson in 1867 and generally continued through this illustration from harper s weekly shows agents of the freedmen s bureau trying to settle a dispute between white and black southerners.
the freedmen s bureau took an active role in the lives of citizens in a way that the federal government had never done before managing disputes organizing schools and ensuring political rights for recently enfranchised african americans.
420 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 the end of grants two terms in 1877.
the last period known as redemption by its defenders but not by those who lost rights in the process began with the election of rutherford b hayes in november 1876 and involved the withdrawal of federal troops from the south as well as the return of white only governments.
that last period culminated in the 1890s with the virtual disenfranchisement of all blacks in the south.
although this typical chronology is far too simplistic it does provide an accurate framework for the reconstruction process.
the reality of the process was much more complex.
many factions battled from 1865 well into the 1880s and 1890s.
johnson was challenged even during his first years in office.
congressional reconstruction had many ups and downs.
grant generally agreed with the congressional radicals those congressional leaders and their black and white allies in the south who sought to transform the former confederacy into a racially integrated region with equal rights.
nevertheless in every year between 1867 and 1877 those who sought a radical reconstruction of the south met resistance often very effective resistance in the south and a growing inclination of northerners to look the other way as they grew tired of the effort.
perhaps most important the end of reconstruction did not come all at once.
it was a long process involving defeats and successes throughout the country.
redemption a term used by opponents of reconstruction for the era in which the federal government ended its involvement in southern affairs and southern whites took control of state governments and ended black political rights.
15 1 the presidential reconstruction of andrew johnson 1865 1866 when andrew johnson became president on april 15 1865 he had served as vice president for only 6 weeks.
even so he came to the presidency with far more experience than lincoln had in 1861.
like lincoln johnson grew up in poverty but he had risen in tennessee politics from city alderman to member of the state legislature to congress to two terms as governor to the u s senate.
when tennessee seceded from the union in 1861 johnson apart from any other senator from a confederate state stayed loyal to the union and stayed in the senate.
he had long seen himself as a spokesman for the honest yeomen of tennessee and he hated what he called the states papered bloated slaveocracy during the civil war johnson served with distinction as military governor of tennessee in those parts of the state where the union army had taken control.
when the republicans met in 1864 to nominate lincoln for a second term incumbent vice president hannibal hamlin offered little to the ticket his home state of maine was sure to go republican and he had played virtually no role in the war.
the choice of johnson as lincolns running mate a border state senator and governor might add essential votes.
although two previous vice presidents had succeeded to the presidency no one expected it to happen again.
when johnson became president after lincoln died many of those known as the radical republicans in congress embraced him.
these so called radicals wanted to be sure that the end of the civil war did not bring merely a return to a version of the prewar status quo minus slavery but instead wanted the whole south to be reconstructed to assure economic educational and political equality for the former slaves.
the radicals were often a minority in the congress and the country where many were willing to accept second class status for former slaves but the radicals chapter 15 reconstruction 421 black codes laws passed by states and municipalities denying many rights of citizenship to free blacks and to control black labor mobility and employment.
had the clearest agenda for what they wanted to see happen and every act of postwar southern resistance tended to strengthen their hand.
in 1864 johnson had said treason must be made odious and traitors must be punished and impoverished and he repeated similar views to members of congress who met with him right after lincolns assassination.
ohio senator benjamin f wade said by the gods there will be no trouble now in running the government another was overheard saying i believe that the almighty continued mr lincoln in office as long as he was useful and then substituted a better man to finish the work when johnson announced his plans for reconstruction on may 29 1865 there was widespread disappointment.
johnson supported the thirteenth amendment already passed by congress and ratified by several states and insisted that support for the amendment be a condition for the readmission of any confederate state to the union.
but johnson refused to go beyond that.
he made it clear that he had little interest in political rights for former slaves.
in contrast to his earlier claims johnson declared a full amnesty and pardon for most of those who had taken part in the rebellion as long as they were willing to pledge loyalty to the union and support the end of slavery.
the amnesty included restoration of all land taken by the union army.
there were exceptions to johnsons amnesty however.
major confederate officials and individuals who owned more than 20 000 in taxable property had to seek individual presidential pardons.
at first glance the policy seemed tough on the south or at least on the former slaveholders of the south perhaps tougher than lincoln would have been and consistent with johnsons pledge to keep slaveholders out in the cold but soon many wondered how many individual presidential pardons would be granted as they realized that johnson was granting many more than they had expected.
blacks though now free seemed destined to be excluded from most of the rights of citizenship in the johnson plan.
if former slaveholders were to be given back their land what land would there be for former slaves.
illinois congressman elihu b washburne said i have grounds to fear president johnson may hold almost unconquerable prejudices against the african race while the radical republicans in congress were terribly disappointed many southern whites were delighted at the opportunity to create a white mans government if they accepted the end of slavery.
under johnsons plan former confederate states were readmitted as soon as they ratified the thirteenth amendment and the new state governments that were quickly organized in the south were recognized by johnson as the legitimate government of these states.
since most republicans continued to insist that the rebellious states had never left the union there was no official way or time for them to be readmitted.
once recognized these state governments dominated by many of the same people who had been in power before the civil war began passing laws strictly limiting black rights most of all the right to vote.
in addition hunting fishing free grazing of livestock which whites all assumed were their rights and which some slaves had enjoyed were now declared illegal for blacks in a series of what were known as black codes passed by states across the south beginning with mississippis code passed in november 1865.
one part of the mississippi code said all freedmen free negroes and mulattoes in the state over the age of eighteen found on the second monday in january 1866 or thereafter with no lawful employment or business or found unlawful assembling themselves together either in the day or nit time and all white persons assembling with freedmen free negroes or mulattoes or unusually associating on terms of equality shall be deemed vagrants.
422 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 in many states black codes either made it illegal for an african american to own a gun or taxed guns at high rates.
in cities new urban police forces like the one in mississippi in 1865 were designed to keep good order and discipline amongst the negro population.
police patrols not only enforced the law but also often terrorized blacks especially those who refused to sign long term labor contracts with former slave masters.
any former slave who ran away from a labor contract could be either arrested and returned to the plantation holding that contract or sentenced to a chain gang to pay off the fine for running away.
african americans in louisiana noted how similar the contracts were to slavery and how similar the new police were to the old slave patrols.
they also asked why men who but a few months since were in armed rebellion against the government should now have arms put in their hands.
johnson s amnesty especially his expectation that these states would reassume all the rights of any other state made these oppressive developments almost inevitable.
15 1 j j congressional radical reconstruction 1867 1869 the new congress that was elected with lincoln in november 1864 did not assemble until december 1865 8 months after his death.
this congress had an overwhelming republican majority including many who had become disillusioned with johnson by the time they met especially as they saw what was happening in the states that had so recently been at war with the union.
the new president they thought was clearly siding with the former slaveholders rather than the former slaves.
those in congress most unhappy with johnson the radical republicans were led by charles sumner in the senate and thaddeus stevens in the house.
stevens told the house the whole fabric of southern society must be changed and never can it be done if this opportunity is lost for stevens the core values of the republican party remained as the partys campaign slogan said free labor by free men who earned their livelihoods by the sweat of their own brows.
but with johnson moving quickly to recognize the new state governments in the old confederacy and those governments passing rigid black codes the moment seemed to be quickly slipping away.
johnson focused on the constitutional clause giving each state the right to set up its own government and arrangements for voting.
stevens and the radicals focused on a different part of the constitution the clause guaranteeing each state a republican form of government.
most of the republicans in congress were not as radical as stevens or sumner.
in 1865 a majority probably still had reservations about black voting rights.
even so nearly all were disappointed at johnsons easy amnesty of so many former confederate leaders and the way southern states were coming back into the union with their old leaders in power.
they discredited johnson s version of reconstruction because the results resembled the antebellum south in far too many ways.
in particular the fact that 58 members of the confederate congress six confederate cabinet officers andthe vice president of the confederacy were all elected to congress in 1865 and 1866 symbolized the failure of johnsons policy to bring about meaningful change.
however the constitution also gave congress its own specific ways of asserting its authority.
pennsylvania congressman thaddeus stevens wanted reconstruction to mean a thorough reordering of southern society in which former slaves would receive land and guaranteed voting rights from the federal government.
chapter 15 reconstruction 423 soon after convening in december 1865 congress created a joint committee on reconstruction.
moderate senator william pitt fessenden of maine was appointed chair and most of the radicals including stevens were excluded.
nevertheless congress undermined presidential reconstruction by refusing to seat the congressional delegates from the former confederate states even though johnson considered those states to be fully restored to the union.
johnsons use of restoration rather than reconstruction irked many in congress who wanted to see at least some change rather than restoring states to the place they had held in 1860.
despite johnsons insistence that the states had a right to be represented in congress the reality was that the constitution made each house of congress sole judge of the qualifications of its members and neither house was ready to seat former confederate leaders.
senator ben wade demanded that no southern state be given a vote in congress until african americans had the right to vote in that state.
others called for the creation of territorial governments in the former confederate states which would be under the control of congress so that both voting rights and land redistribution could be assured.
but congress itself was divided and action beyond rejecting the delegates from the south was hard to come by.
even legislation to give blacks in the district of columbia the right to vote something congress clearly had authority to do could not make it through both houses especially after a december 1865 referendum of white voters in the district rejected black voting rights 6 951 to 35.
early in 1866 illinois senator lyman trumbull proposed two new pieces of legislation.
unlike the more radical republicans trumbull still maintained a good working relationship with johnson and worried about the federal government exceeding its authority.
but given developments in the south trumbull felt congress had the authority even the duty to protect the rights of newly freed african americans under the thirteenth amendment which included language giving congress the power to pass laws to enforce the amendment.
first trumbull proposed extending the life of the freedmens bureau.
when lincoln signed the legislation creating the bureau it was envisioned as a 1 year transitional body.
however through late 1865 and early 1866 the freedmens bureau was the key federal agency distributing food to former slaves supporting the establishment of schools and in some cases even helping former slaves gain their own land.
after consulting with the head of the bureau general o o.
howard trumbull became convinced that its work would take many years and proposed extending it to 1870.
he also proposed giving it new authority to ensure that blacks had all civil rights belonging to white persons and giving bureau agents the authority to press charges against state officials who denied those rights.
trumbull then proposed the far reaching civil rights bill of 1866 that defined all persons born in the united states except indians as citizens permanently ending the dred scott distinctions between whites and blacks.
although the bill was silent on the issue of voting given that many of the citizens it referred to women and children for example could not vote it explicitly guaranteed rights to make contracts bring lawsuits and have the equal benefit of the laws without regard to race.
the law declared that such provisions were fundamental rights belonging to every man as a free man it also authorized federal authorities to prosecute violations in federal courts a significant provision since southern state courts were quickly reverting to their white dominated ways.
424 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 both of trumbull s bills would have appeared radical a year or two earlier but in 1866 they were seen as moderate proposals from a moderate senator and everyone expected smooth sailing for them.
then after they passed congress easily president johnson vetoed both bills.
he called the freedmens bureau an immense patronage system that exceeded the constitutional authority of the federal government and he characterized the civil rights bill an as unwarranted concentration of all legislative powers in the national government in his veto of the civil rights bill johnson also went out of his way to say that giving blacks citizenship rights was wrong and that the distinction of race and color is by the bill made to operate in favor of the colored and against the white race the vetoes ended congressional efforts to work with the president on reconstruction.
trumbull attacked the president.
senator william pitt fessenden up to then considered a moderate predicted that johnson would veto every other bill we pass johnson was prepared to do just that.
he wanted to court northern democrats and southern whites in his bid for a second term.
congress passed both pieces of legislation over johnsons vetoes and began to use a veto proof two thirds majority to pass similar legislation in spite of presidential opposition.
the era of presidential led reconstruction was fast coming to an end.
after passing trumbulls two major bills over the presidents veto in the spring of 1866 congress proposed another amendment to the u s constitution.
amendments to the constitution proposed in congress are not subject to a presidential veto although three fourths of the state legislatures need to agree to them.
so in 1866 congress set out to put the civil rights law into the constitution itself.
agreement to do so came quickly however agreement on the other provisions of the amendment came much more slowly.
congress was not yet ready to give all black males the same voting rights that all white males had but sumner and some other radicals would never support an amendment that did not guarantee such rights.
when their opposition was combined with the democratic minority who did not want any new rights inscribed in the constitution crafting the amendment became a major hurdle.
many members of congress wanted to punish any state that withheld the vote from black males but they did not want to punish those states currently all of them that withheld the vote from women or those states including several in the north that made it hard for recent immigrants to vote.
all of these issues led to months of wrangling but the compromise that emerged as the fourteenth amendment guaranteeing rights of citizenship to former slaves and others born or naturalized in the united states was nevertheless significant.
the key provision of the fourteenth amendment said all persons born or naturalized in the united states and subject to the jurisdiction thereof are citizens of the united states and of the state wherein they reside.
no state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the united states nor shall any state deprive any person of life liberty or property without due process of law nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.
other clauses of the fourteenth amendment stated changes drastically different from the three fifths clause and other previously accepted parts of the constitution.
they included language saying that any state that limited the voting rights of male chapter 15 reconstruction 15 1 union leagues in the south a republican party organization led by african americans which became an important organizing device after 1865 inhabitants of a state would have its representation in congress reduced that any person who had held federal office and then participated in rebellion against the government could not again hold office and that confederate debts were null and void as far as the federal government was concerned.
both houses of congress finally passed the amendment in june 1866 and sent it to the states for ratification.
just as johnson had refused to recognize a state as having returned to the union until it ratified the thirteenth amendment congress now refused to seat the members of the house or senate elected by a state until the state had ratified the fourteenth amendment.
the amendment was popular in the north and many in the south were anxious to return to congress so approval from the required three quarters of the states came quickly and the amendment was ratified in july 1868.
when congress reconvened in december 1866 the majority of republicans had no interest in working with johnson.
while the president called for immediate restoration of the now unrepresented states to congress congress decided that in fact the states of the former confederacy needed to be governed directly from washington until some indefinite future time some said that congress was raising the bar after earlier requiring only assent to the fourteenth amendment but the majority in congress were no longer in any mood to compromise.
in january 1867 congress quickly passed a law over presidential veto giving black males in the district of columbia the right to vote.
since the district was directly controlled by congress they could pass such a law even though the fifteenth amendment giving all black males the same voting rights as white males was not yet contemplated.
congressional leaders then turned to more far reaching legislation.
they passed the reconstruction act of 1867 which declared all southern state governments already recognized by johnson to be inoperative and divided the former confederate states into five military districts ordering the military to oversee the writing of new constitutions that would guarantee universal male suffrage see map 15 1.
only after these new constitutions were in place and after a state had ratified the fourteenth amendment would congress admit its representatives to congress.
the president protested that the reconstruction act was the death knell of civil liberty african americans in the south however embraced the opportunity to participate in the political process.
in addition to registering to vote and participating in constitution writing blacks struck for higher pay in charleston savannah mobile richmond and new orleans.
blacks in richmond demanded integrated horse drawn streetcars.
across the south they created union leagues that became a base for political action and mutual support.
the leagues offered opportunities to gain experience in the political process or as one former slave said we just went there and we talked a little made speeches on one question and another former slaves became political leaders.
by 1867 james h jones the former body servant to jefferson davis was a featured speaker at republican meetings across the south.
the final break johnson s impeachment by 1867 president johnson had become virtually irrelevant to federal reconstruction policy.
congress passed laws the president vetoed them and congress passed them over the presidents veto.
but the freedmans bureau was under the control of the president even if he vetoed the bill that kept it going.
the creation of military districts in the south also gave the president significant powers as commander in chief even though he had opposed creating them.
part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 z 15 1 md z free 1864 free 1 wv mc free 1865 1870 i ky free 1865 ak 1868 ga 1870 1872 tx 1870 1873 reconstruction of the south 1865 1877 date refers to readmission to union i e 1868 date refers to re establishment of conservative government i e 1874 es reconstruction government set up under lincoln us reconstruction government set up under johnson cz five military districts by reconstruction act 1867 abolition of slavery in the south mb seceded states by emancipation proclamation 1863 except territories held by union in 1863 free by state action l i delaware and kentucky by thirteenth amendment 1865 maryland missouri and west virginia by state action v map 15 1 southern military districts.
having lost all faith in president johnson s leadership the congress in 1867 created five military districts to govern the states of the former confederacy until new state constitutions that guaranteed the rights including voting rights of african americans were put in place.
some in congress began to consider removing johnson in early 1867 but they ere in a minority.
instead congress passed a number of laws that most hoped ould keep reconstruction moving in spite of the president.
one law required all residential orders to the military to pass through the army chief general grant fore going to commanders in the field.
grant was known to side with congress ad this strategy seemed like an important safeguard and a significant limitation f johnsons power.
congress also passed the tenure of office act which said that ay person whose appointment required the senates consent namely members of cabinet and ambassadors could be replaced only when the senate approved a iccessor.
the goal of the act was to ensure that secretary of war stanton who had sen appointed by lincoln and who took a tough stance on reconstruction stayed i office.
these congressional actions might have worked had johnson been willing to lay a passive role but johnson could be stubborn proud and self focused.
his loyal scretary of the navy gideon welles said he has no confidantes and seeks none as result unlike lincoln johnson was often out of touch with congressional thinking.
chapter 15 rea iction 427 these traits set the stage for an even more serious collision between the president and the congress.
while congress took charge of reconstruction johnson became convinced that he had public opinion on his side and began to encourage opponents of reconstruction in the north and south.
he also removed several of the tougher military commanders in the south and replaced them with officers who were willing to let events take their own course which meant letting former confederates take control of local governments and use their power to undermine black rights.
then in february 1868 after the senate refused johnsons request to remove stanton the president in violation of the tenure of office act fired him.
it was a clear challenge to congressional authority.
under the u s constitution a president can be removed only for high crimes and misdemeanors terms the constitution does not define.
but the procedure for impeachment is clear.
the house of representatives is required to act as a sort of grand jury deciding whether or not to bring charges called impeachment against the president.
then the senate with the chief justice of the supreme court presiding acts as a jury to hear and vote on the charges.
only with a senate vote to convict can a president be removed from office.
led by thaddeus stevens the house with every republican voting positively agreed on a long list of charges most having to do with johnsons violation of the tenure of office act but also a charge saying that the president had tried to bring congress into disgrace however the trial in the senate did not go as well for the radicals.
removing a president was very serious business and it was unclear that johnsons obstructionism met the level of a high crime it was also not clear that the tenure of office act was constitutional.
johnson claimed that he meant the firing of stanton to be tested in the supreme court.
if johnson were removed then senator ben wade president pro tern of the senate would become president since there was no vice president and many who disliked johnson also disliked wade.
when the senate finally voted in mid may of 1868 johnson survived by one vote.
johnson could serve out his term in relative peace although his chances for the democratic nomination and reelection were slim.
the right to vote grant s election and the fifteenth amendment after johnsons impeachment was resolved both parties turned to selecting nominees for the presidential election in the fall of 1868.
for the republicans the choice was easy.
ulysses s grant as commander of the army had supported the republicans in congress on the issues of reconstruction his own attitudes on race had been significantly reshaped by the courage shown by black troops during the civil war and he was the nations war hero.
ihe republicans easily nominated him along with the speaker of the house schuyler colfax of indiana as his running mate.
grant ran on a cautious platform that nevertheless embraced extending voting rights to former slaves.
his slogan was let us have peace democrats were divided on issues of personality on their opposition to congressional reconstruction and on fiscal policies whether to continue to authorize the printing of money or greenbacks based on the federal promise to pay.
after 21 ballots in which a number of candidates including andrew johnson failed to win the nomination they chose former new york governor horatio seymour who had flirted with supporting the confederacy during the war and who had called protesters in the new york draft riot my friends for vice president 428 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 they nominated a former union general from missouri francis blair who called for an end to reconstruction which he called the rule of aa semi barbarous race ofblacks while neither party articulated a fully developed economic policy the lines between the parties were drawn on the issues of race.
august belmont one of the nation s leading bankers said that in the 1868 election financial matters paled in comparison with black voting rights.
in november grant carried most of the north and the parts of the south under federal control including north and south carolina and alabama.
seymours home state of new york along with new jersey georgia and louisiana favored seymour.
the state governments in florida mississippi and texas had not yet been recognized and those states did not vote.
grant won 53 percent of the popular vote but an overwhelming 73 percent of the electoral vote for an easy victory.
with grant about to become president republicans in congress moved quickly on the issue of voting rights.
in february 1869 congress passed the fifteenth amendment which stated the right of citizens of the united states to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of race color or previous condition of servitude.
harper s weekly carried many illustrations of the changes happening in the south to northern audience.
this issue of july 1868 showed the enthusiasm with which african americans many of whom had been slaves only a few years before were taking to electoral politics.
chapter 15 reconstruction 429 15 1 in a little less than a year by february 1870 the required three fourths of the states ratified the amendment and the right of former slaves and other citizens including the children of chinese immigrants who were citizens but had also been denied the right to vote had been inscribed in the constitution.
as powerful as the language of the fifteenth amendment is it lacked some wording that many had wanted to include.
the radicals had wanted the amendment to state that neither the right to vote nor the right to hold office could be abridged.
but others feared that several northern states including california with its large chinese population might reject the amendment if the right of nonwhite people to hold office were included.
many also had wanted wording to prohibit the many tricks that some southern governments were already using to limit the black vote including literacy tests that could be manipulated to exclude whoever the test giver wanted excluded or tests related to property or education.
supporters of the amendment however worried that they would lose too much northern support if they included such clauses.
massachusetts and connecticut used literacy tests to limit voting by foreign born citizens while pennsylvania and rhode island had property or tax qualifications for voting and no one wanted to risk losing the support of those states.
as a result important safeguards were not included.
many women especially the most prominent leaders of the womens rights movement were deeply disappointed and angered by the fifteenth amendment.
women like susan b anthony elizabeth cady stanton and sojourner truth had labored long and hard in support of abolition and the union cause and now they saw womens right to vote ignored.
frederick douglass was an advocate of womens rights in addition to african american rights but in 1869 he precipitated along and painful though temporary break with anthony and stanton over the fifteenth amendment.
douglass argued for one step at a time guaranteeing black men the same rights as white men and then guaranteeing women of all races the right to vote.
douglass said i hold that women as well as men have the right to vote and my heart and my voice go with the movement to extend suffrage to women these were not just words.
in the decade before and after battles around the fifteenth amendment douglass actively campaigned for womens right to vote.
but between 1865 and 1870 douglass was willing to compromise to achieve his immediate goal.
the compromise that douglass proposed brought a sharp rebuke from the former slave and abolitionist sojourner truth.
in 1867 at the height of the debate truth gave her own passionate response to douglass.
she said that she too had been born a slave and rejoiced that they have got their liberty so much good luck to have slavery partly destroyed not entirely.
i want it root and branch destroyed for truth root and branch meant the vote for all.
partial justice would not do and if colored men get their rights and not colored women theirs you see the colored men will be masters over the women and it will be just as bad as it was before in spite of compromises and disappointments many hailed the fifteenth amendment as completing the work of abolition.
as late as 1868 free blacks could vote in only eight northern states.
in 1870 by law black men could vote everywhere in the united states.
william lloyd garrison celebrated this wonderful quite sudden transformation from the auction block to the ballot box while there was already clear evidence of the many steps by law and by violence that would be taken to deny most blacks the right to vote for most of the next century in 1870 there was also grounds for very real optimism.
15 1 quick review compare presidential reconstruction and congressional reconstruction.
what are the most significant differences between the two plans.
given these differences was the tension between them inevitable.
430 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 the impact of reconstruction 15 2 explain the impact of reconstruction on african american life in the south.
in the early years of reconstruction many of the souths former leaders returned to power.
only one southern official was tried for treason and executed henry wirz commander of the infamous andersonville prison where so many union soldiers died.
jefferson davis was imprisoned for 2 years but then was freed and retired to write his memoirs.
many other confederate leaders quickly declared their loyalty to the union after the wars end received a pardon from johnson and resumed leadership in their states.
within a year of announcing his plan to exclude the wealthy and the political leaders of the confederacy from the original amnesty conditions johnson had granted 7 000 individual pardons.
the prewar status quo seemed to be returning in the southern states.
then congress took over reconstruction and everything changed.
in state legislatures local sheriffs offices and school boards former slaves northern abolitionists and southern unionists took power under the banner of the republican party or local union leagues.
a radical remaking of the south began in the late 1860s and continued into the 1870s.
voting in the south in january 1870 the mississippi state legislature elected hiram r revels to the united states senate.
revels was the first african american ever elected to the senate.
the legislature that elected revels included 40 blacks and 100 whites hardly a black dominated body.
he was elected ironically to fill jefferson daviss former seat left vacant since davis departed in 1861.
sszfe african american senator left sits with six of the first blacks elected to the house of representatives representing alabama florida south carolina three representatives and georgia.
chapter 15 reconstruction 431 revels was born free in fayetteville north carolina in 1827.
like many of the african american political leaders during reconstruction he was a minister in the african methodist episcopal church serving as a pastor in baltimore maryland when the civil war began.
revels organized two all black regiments and served as their chaplain.
at the wars end revels went with his unit to vicksburg mississippi and then moved to natchez.
he was not initially a candidate for the senate but his lack of ambition for the post made him a perfect compromise candidate.
senator garrett davis of kentucky challenged the right of an african american to be seated in the senate.
but revelss key defender james nye of nevada told his colleagues in 1861 from this hall departed two senators who were representing here the state of mississippi one of them who went defiantly was jefferson davis for nye and eventually for a majority in the senate nothing was a more fitting symbol of the outcome of the civil war than the seating of an african american in the place of the former president of the confederacy.
mississippi later sent blanche k bruce to the senate in 1874.
bruce was born a slave but he attended oberlin college and established himself as a planter in mississippi in 1868.
unlike revels he worked his way up the political ladder serving as the sergeant at arms of the mississippi state senate assessor and sheriff of bolivar county and a member of the board of levee commissioners of the mississippi river.
navigation on the mississippi was a major concern of his during his u s senate tenure as was opposition to chinese exclusion.
bruce was the last african american to serve in the senate until edward brooke was elected from massachusetts in 1966.
more african americans were elected to the house.
twenty two blacks served in congress during reconstruction including 13 who had been born slaves.
between 1871 and 1873 south carolina had three african americans in the house joseph h rainey robert b elliott and robert g delarge.
in the same sessions benjamin s turner represented alabama josiah t walls florida and joseph long georgia.
rainey served three terms in the house during which time he played an important role in arguing for the first major federal aid to education bill that was considered although defeated in congress.
reconstruction state governments with black and white leadership expanded the right to vote abolishing restrictions that had existed for black and poor white voters.
in addition newly formulated state constitutions created public school systems and internal improvements designed to bring the south into the modern world.
it was a heady time yet not an easy one.
schools for freedom northern whites who came to the south with the union army were amazed by the thirst for literacy demonstrated by former slaves.
a member of an education society in north carolina said he thought a school house would be the first proof of their independence.
booker t washington a well known african american educator remembered the immediate aftermath of emancipation few people who were not right in the midst of the scenes can form any exact idea of the intense desire which the people of my race showed for education.
it was a whole race trying to go to school realizing that blacks saw the schoolhouse as proof of their independence surprised white observers.
it did not surprise former slaves who had grown up in a world where literacy for them was a crime.
as a slave child of seven or eight 32 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 frederick douglass had been taught the alphabet by a white woman but the lessons did not last long.
he remembered mr auld found out what was going on and at once forbade mrs auld to instruct me further telling her among other things that it was unlawful as well as unsafe to teach a slave to read it would forever unfit him to be a slave nothing appealed more to young douglass than being made unfit for slavery.
douglass found secret ways to continue his studies and by the time he made his escape to massachusetts douglass had the literacy skills that would make him one of the great orators and writers of his day.
slave masters and slave state legislatures who made it illegal to teach a slave to read or write unwittingly also made literacy a powerful symbol of freedom.
while the majority of teachers who went south to teach were white women an african american charlotte forten began teaching in port royal south carolina where she said the children are well behaved and eager to learn.
it will be a happiness american voices john roy lynch the work of reconstruction 1869 ohn roy lynch was born a slave and elected as a republican to v the mississippi legislature in 1869.
in this essay he described what reconstruction meant to those who like him were trying to create a new political system indeed a new culture in the states that had been part of the confederacy only a few years before.
the new administration had an important and difficult task before it.
a state government had to be organized from top to bottom.
a new judiciary had to be inaugurated consisting of three justices of the state supreme court fifteen judges of the circuit court and twenty chancery court judges all of whom had to be appointed by the governor by and with the advice and consent of the state senate.
in addition to this a new public school system had to be organized and established.
there was not a public school building anywhere in the state except in a few of the larger towns and they with possibly a few exceptions were greatly in need of repair.
to erect the necessary school houses and to reconstruct and repair those already in existence so as to afford educational facilities for both races was by no means an easy task.
it necessitated a very large outlay of cash in the beginning which resulted in a material increase in the rate of taxation for the time being but the constitution called for the establishment of the system and of course the work had to be done.
it was not only done but it was done creditably and as economically as circumstances and conditions at that time made possible.
that system though slightly changed still stands as a creditable monument to the work of the first republican state administration that was organized in the state of mississippi under the reconstruction acts of the congress.
it was also necessary to reorganize reconstruct and in many instances rebuild some of the penal charitable and other public institutions of the state.
a new code of laws also had to be adopted to take the place of the old one and thus wipe out the black laws that had been passed by what was known as the johnson legislature.
also it was necessary to change the statutes of the state to harmonize with the new order of things.
this was no easy task especially in view of the fact that a heavy increase in the rate of taxation was thus made necessary.
source john hope franklin editor reminiscences of an active life the autobiography of john roy lynch chicago the university of chicago press 1970 thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis according to lynch what were the most important priorities of the new republican governments.
historical interpretation what light does the document shed on the challenges faced by republican governments during reconstruction.
chapter 15 reconstruction a school operated by the freedman s bureau in richmond virginia was shown in this september 1866 issue of frank leslie s illustrated newspaper.
to teach here by 1870 several thousand teachers whites and blacks northern immigrants and veterans of the confederate army were teaching in schools for former slaves.
although a majority stayed for only a year or two some found their lifes work in these schools.
many newly free african americans welcomed northern white teachers for the long term but they also wanted teachers from their own communities.
the freedmens bureau and northern missionary groups helped in founding black colleges in the south including atlanta fisk hampton and tugaloo which were specifically designed to train black teachers often in a short course that lasted 1 or 2 years.
ihe results of the new efforts at teacher preparation were impressive and as early as 1869 the bureau reported that of the 3 000 teachers for the freedmen the majority were now african american.
the reconstruction act of 1867 also fostered the growth of southern schooling.
the 1867 act required states of the former confederacy to call state conventions to rewrite their state constitutions and the new constitutions were expected to include support for public education.
later even as state after state returned to white rule the public school system remained.
in black reconstruction in america w e b.
du bois a renowned african american activist wrote public education for all at public expense was in the south a negro idea the reality of sharecropping for many newly freed slaves another issue was as important as the vote or education land.
in virginia a freedman told a union army officer that if the army had a right to take away the master s slaves then they had the right to take masters land too.
434 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 in alabama a state convention delegate insisted the property which they hold was nearly all earned by the sweat of our brows those closest to the land who had worked it for no pay valued land and the promise of land ownership.
land provided independent economic opportunity on which freedom rested.
when shermans army arrived in savannah georgia in december 1864 the army of 60 000 troops was accompanied by some 20 000 former slaves.
sherman met with local blacks in savannah.
garrison frazier a leader of that group made it clear what they wanted freedom and land which meant placing us where we could reap the fruit of our own labor four days later shermans special field order no.
15 provided for 40 acre parcels of land for black families which was to be taken from the plantations of owners in active rebellion on the sea islands and coastal areas in georgia and later in south carolina once his army got there.
sherman also offered army mules that were no longer needed.
thus 40 acres and a mule became the symbol of freedom to many and by june 1865 40 000 newly freed people were settled on sherman land in the former confederacy.
shermans order did not make it clear whether the land grant was temporary or permanent but the link of freedom and land was permanent in the minds of many.
president johnson wasted no time ending the redistribution of land after taking office.
he ordered an end to the 40 acres and a mule policy.
as head of the freedmans bureau general o o howard had expanded shermans original south carolina plan instructing his agents to set aside 40 acre tracts for individual.
15 3 thinking historically john w alvord s first report to the freedmen s bureau 1866 john w alvord was an unusually perceptive observer who was in charge of setting up schools for the freedmen s bureau.
in his first report to the bureau in washington dc in 1866 alvord noted somewhat to his surprise that there were often black initiated schools already in operation when he arrived to open schools.
thus he wrote in his first report throughout the entire south an effort is being made by the colored people to educate themselves in the absence of other teaching they are determined to be self taught and everywhere some elementary text book or the fragment of one may be seen in the hands of negroes native schools are making their appearance through the interior of the entire country.
a more detailed reading of the report makes it clear that alvord was surprised first by the commitment of the newly freed people to education second by their sense of initiative in launching their own schools even before any federal or missionary teachers arrived and third by the sense of self respect and self determination that those running the schools were maintaining.
source john w alvord inspector s report of schools and finances.
u s bureau of refugees freedmen and abandoned lands.
washington d c u s government printing office 1866 pp.
9 10 cited in james anderson the education of blacks in the south i860 1935 chapel hill university of north carolina press 1988 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what does alvord s surprise at finding native schools say about the way african americans were perceived.
historical interpretation how do you account for the determination to be self taught and to develop their own schools by people who only a year before had been enslaved by others and who many portrayed as passive.
chapter 15 reconstruction 435 15 2 sharecropping labor system that evolved during and after reconstruction whereby landowners furnished laborers with a house farm animals tools and advanced credit in exchange for a share of the laborers crop.
blacks across the south quickly began farming their own plots.
johnson overrode howards order issued pardons to former plantation owners and ordered howard to restore the land to them which meant taking it away from those who were currently using it.
once land had been returned to its former owners there was very little chance that former slaves would regain their parcels.
in october 1865 general howard made a painful journey to edisto island in south carolina to announce the presidents order.
a committee of freedmen drafted their response general we want homesteads if the government having concluded to befriend its late enemies and to neglect to observe the principles of common faith between its self and us its allies in the war you said was over now takes away from them all right to the soil they stand upon save such as they can get by again working for your late and their all time enemies you will see this is not the condition of really freemen.
redistribution of land it seemed was not going to be part of reconstruction.
in a few places however former slaves were able to purchase or win government land.
having spent their lives in unpaid labor few slaves had any resources to buy land even when it was being sold very cheaply in the aftermath of the war.
in south carolina which had an exceptionally strong reconstruction government the legislature established a state land commission that provided grants of land to some 14 000 black families perhaps one seventh of the states black population in various parts of the state.
they also created the town of promised land which continues as a black led community to the present.
the primary economic opportunity open to slaves was to return to the plantations where they had worked in the past but do so as paid employees.
neither former slaves nor former slave owners found the prospect encouraging.
one georgia planter complained that once we had reliable labor controlled at will.
now it is both uncertain and unreliable when railroads or new enterprises offered jobs blacks left the plantations to take other work.
during the johnson dominated reconstruction southern landowners not only reclaimed their lands but also ensured the passage of vagrancy laws made it a crime to be without a job which meant former slaves had to take whatever was offered or be jailed.
some landowners agreed to hire only their own former slaves making it extremely difficult for newly free people to bargain for wages or move to better opportunities.
many in washington were pleased to see blacks become wage earners paid for raising the cotton sugar rice and tobacco they had previously raised without pay as slaves.
but former slaves did not like working for wages especially the low wages that were offered for work in the same places where they had once labored as slaves.
wageearning blacks resented their status as what some called wage slaves they wanted land of their own and if they could not get land and in most parts of the south they could not they wanted a share in the profits of their work.
given the dissatisfaction that both white landowners and black workers felt a new economic arrangement was born sharecropping.
sharecropping meant just what the name implied.
instead of working for wages former slaves worked as independent entrepreneurs who were guaranteed a share of the crop in return for their labor.
at the same time landowners who provided the land the seeds and the loans to get through the year also received a share of the crop.
as this agricultural economy developed after the civil war the owner of a large tract of land almost always a former plantation owner who had the land returned 436 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 edisto island off the coast of south carolina was one of the first places where the government provided land and mules and mule carts.
former slaves quickly used the opportunity to become independent farmers.
by the johnson administration agreed to provide crude housing a short term loan for living expenses known as the furnish and usually provided at the beginning of the growing season in march seed fertilizer tools and the right to grow cotton on a specified piece of land 15 to 40 acres in area.
landless tenants almost always former slaves agreed to work the land plant weed or chop the cotton through the growing season and bring in a crop.
landowner and sharecropper would then split the profits after the harvest.
once the harvest was done just before christmas at the settle the landowner would provide the sharecropper with a statement of accounts showing the value of the cotton harvest the cost of the furnish and any other loans or purchases at the commissary on the plantation usually the only place the sharecropper could buy goods and often a place where prices were very high and the difference or profit due to the sharecropper.
everyone knew that many planters cheated their often illiterate tenants.
asking for a detailed accounting meant risking ones home and perhaps ones life.
few took the risk though many sharecroppers were privately furious when the end of year payments were finally made and somehow the results for those who had worked all year were so modest.
sharecropping began on the sugar plantations of louisiana and quickly spread to the rest of the agricultural south.
with sharecropping black workers had a significant new incentive to work since they retained a portion of the profits they created.
women and children who had resisted work in the field for wages now returned to the fields as families sought to make a living.
at first landowners were far from enthusiastic about sharecropping.
while it meant that they no longer needed to supervise employees they did not like the sense chapter 15 reconstruction 437 homes for sharecroppers were not much different from the cabins that had been built in the old slave quarters.
of independence that sharecropping brought to former slaves.
they also disliked the shift from having farm work done by gangs of laborers as had been the case in slavery and wageearning times to having the work done by family units on smaller plots.
one south carolina planter complained about the black led union leagues that fostered sharecropping saying their leaders counsel them not to work for wages at all but to insist upon setting up for themselves nevertheless by the early 1870s sharecropping had become the primary means of agricultural organization in much of the south especially the regions great cottongrowing heartland see map 15 2.
1860 map 15 2 sharecropping reshapes a plantation.
these two maps show the changes in the living and work arrangements on the barrow plantation in oglethorpe county georgia between the last days of slavery in 1860 and the establishment of sharecropping in 1881.
by the latter date the old slave quarter had disappeared replaced by dispersed cottages of the sharecropping families each of whom worked a portion of the land.
438 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 before long plantation owners found ways to manipulate it for their own ends.
owners developed a credit system whereby a plantation store sold everything from food to clothing on credit to the sharecroppers to be repaid when the crop was harvested.
many plantation owners made as much money with their stores as with their crops.
with crops mortgaged before they were even planted workers fell further and further into debt to the landowners.
if sharecropping initially gave black families freedom that work for wages did not it also tied them to the land in poverty for generations.
quick review consider the early impacts of reconstruction up to 1877.
would you consider it a success or a failure.
give at least three reasons to support your position.
terror apathy and the creation of the segregated south 153 analyze the reasons reconstruction ended and the impact of redemption.
during the first decade after the civil war americans witnessed extraordinary changes.
slavery ended and the constitution was amended to give former slaves citizenship rights and the same right to vote as whites.
black males voted held office and served on juries and black men women and children rode on integrated transit and attended school.
some even managed to own their own land.
however few of the advances of the first decade of reconstruction lasted.
the rise and decline of black rights was an uneven process.
blacks were organizing and gaining new rights while the civil war was still being fought.
many whites resisted black political and economic progress throughout congressional reconstruction.
although the withdrawal of federal troops in 1877 greatly hastened the process of undoing the gains of reconstruction what some white southerners called redemption that too was uneven.
in some areas white only government had been reestablished well before 1877 while in other areas blacks maintained political rights well into the 1880s and 1890s.
nevertheless eventually the high hopes of reconstruction ended everywhere.
opposition to black rights and the roots of redemption opponents of black rights were never completely excluded from power during reconstruction.
in september 1868 the white majority in the georgia legislature voted to expel all 27 african american representatives.
henry mcneal turner one of the 27 responded you may expel us gentlemen by your votes today but while you do it remember that there is a just god in heaven two years later in response to actions like the expulsion of the black legislators president grant reinstated military rule in georgia.
black legislators returned to their seats along with white allies and opponents and a majority in the legislature ratified the fifteenth amendment.
with grant in the white house and republican leaders in congress who were willing to use federal troops if necessary to support the rights of former slaves and their allies the republican party in the south was the party of black rights and racial equality.
blacks often organized in union leagues were at the heart of the party but there were also large numbers of white republicans in the south including both southern born and immigrants from the north.
southern whites who supported republican and multiracial efforts were called scalawags and they were a diverse lot.
some had scalawags a disparaging term for southern whites who supported the southern republican party during reconstruction.
chapter 15 reconstruction 439 15 j 15 j carpetbaggers term used by white southerners for northern transplants who came to the south to help with reconstruction.
153 opposed secession from 1861.
others like confederate general james longstreet or army veteran albert r parsons embraced the republican party only after the war.
some like parsons strongly supported equal rights for blacks.
for others support for black rights was secondary but they saw the party as a place of personal opportunity.
northern whites who came south were called carpetbaggers because southerners said they could carry everything they owned in a single suitcase covered with carpet like material.
resentful southerners claimed that carpetbaggers had come south to get rich.
carpetbaggers were on the whole younger and less prosperous than the scalawags.
some carpetbaggers were no doubt opportunists coming to make their fortune while others were abolitionists coming south to implement policies they had long advocated.
many were veterans of the union army and some like governor adelbert ames the republican governor of mississippi had first been ordered south by the army and had stayed on.
in the 1860s and 1870s there were virtually no black democrats in the south.
the post civil war democratic party was the party of white only government.
southern democrats organized at every political level from small towns to state legislatures and governors offices.
their twofold goal was to assure that even if blacks were now free they would have few rights and that whites committed to excluding blacks from power would dominate every aspect of society politically economically and culturally.
for these segregationist democrats african americans of the union leagues scalawags and carpetbaggers were all their enemies.
lucius quintus cincinnatus lamar of mississippi an example of the southern democratic party leaders of his day was from an old elite southern family.
he represented mississippi in the u s congress before the war and became a staunch secessionist.
during the war he was a general in the confederate army.
in the postwar period he decided to enter politics again.
lamar wrote to a friend it does seem to me that if there ever was a time when the white people of this state should rise with one unanimous voice protest against the domination about to be piled upon them the present is that time he proceeded to do everything he could to ensure white rule in mississippi.
in november 1872 having long since secured a presidential pardon lamar won a seat in the u s congress.
he also helped to organize the democratic party in mississippi.
in campaign speeches lamar attacked black voting rights.
in congress he tried to ensure that the federal government did not enforce black rights.
he helped defeat the enforcement act of 1875 which would have given president grant more authority to implement the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments in mississippi.
while he was engaged in partisan politics lamar also helped to develop another political organization outside of the democratic party hidden from view but essential to his political victory the ku klux kian.
ku klux kian one of several vigilante groups that terrorized black people in the south during reconstruction era founded by confederate veterans in 1866.
the rise of violence and the ku klux kian the ku klux kian was founded as a social club among confederate veterans in tennessee in 1866.
it quickly turned into the largest of several secret and violent organizations bent on ensuring a reign of terror against not only republican political leaders of either race but also teachers in black schools and blacks in general.
the kian was committed to ending reconstruction and returning the south to white rule.
the kian assassinated arkansass congressman james m hinds members of the south carolina legislature and other members of state constitutional conventions.
it had only just begun its work.
440 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 similar organizations grew across the south.
in louisiana the knights of the white camellia played a similar role as did the white line organizations in mississippi.
although leaders like lamar maintained a public distance they secretly kept close ties to these violent extralegal organizations.
by political organizing and sheer violence and intimidation they were confident that they could return the south to its prewar ways.
even before the emergence of the kkk african americans and their white republican allies faced violence.
just after the wars end in may 1866 a bloody riot in memphis tennessee which began when two carriages one driven by a black and one by a white collided.
the riot resulted in the burning of black schools churches and over 90 black homes as well as the killing of at least 48 people all but two of whom were black.
a memphis teacher was murdered and others were told they would be killed if they did not leave the city immediately.
the following fall only 13 of the 40 teachers in the black schools of memphis returned.
a few weeks later a similar riot in new orleans louisiana resulted in at least 100 injuries as well as the killing of 34 blacks and three of their white supporters.
by the spring of 1873 what could only be described as a civil war was going on in louisiana.
tension mounted after the november 1872 elections in which one group of voters elected a republican governor and another group a democratic one.
when a federal judge ruled in favor of the republican slate president grant sent troops to new orleans to oust the democratic governor and install the republican administration.
but in the small town of colfax louisiana two sheriffs had also been elected and federal troops were a long way off.
on easter sunday april 13 1873 tensions reached a boiling point.
several dozen black families along with william ward who was the republican sheriff as well as a former slave and union army veteran barricaded themselves inside the town and sent urgent telegrams to the governor in new orleans asking for the army to rescue them.
help was too late in coming.
two to three hundred whites marched on the town led by the democratic sheriff confederate veteran christopher columbus nash.
nash and his army attacked the town and killed everyone they could find.
at least 60 blacks perhaps many more were killed.
the next day witnesses saw only piles of bodies everywhere.
colfax was far from an isolated incident.
some of the greatest violence was in mississippi.
on july 4 1874 as the republican party held a meeting in vicksburg mississippi armed whites arrived and shot and killed many of those white and black in attendance.
peter crosby the sheriff in vicksburg demanded federal intervention but did not get help.
on september 1 1875 at a republican meeting in yazoo city henry dixon began shooting at the mixed race gathering.
one person was killed instantly.
before long those who were at the meeting scattered and a company of organized mississippi white liners the mississippi version of the kian took over the town and forced its elected government to flee.
on election day the democrats won statewide in mississippi.
in port gibson black voters arriving at the polls were met by some 80 whites armed with remington rifles who started firing at them.
one old man john morris was killed six others wounded and none voted.
at peytona not a single republican vote was cast.
kian members quickly adopted hoods and masks both to hide their identity and to frighten those who opposed them.
chapter 15 reconstruction 441 the memphis riot was but one of many in which whites enraged by new black rights attacked homes schools and churches belonging to newly free blacks and any whites who supported them.
democratic sentries on the tombigbee river ensured that black voters could not cross the river to get to polling places.
governor ames fled for his life before his term ended while democratic party teams warned politically active republicans black and white to leave the state before they were killed.
reconstruction ended in mississippi with the 1875 elections.
efforts to defend reconstruction the antiblack anti republican violence with which the south was slowly redeemed from reconstruction met resistance at every step sometimes very significant resistance.
in march of 1870 just as the fifteenth amendment was ratified congress also passed the first enforcement act making the denial of the right to vote because of race through force fraud bribery or intimidation a federal crime.
up to that time protecting voting rights had been completely a state issue but in 1870 congress had significant reasons not to trust that all the states would protect voting rights especially for newly enfranchised african americans.
two further enforcement acts gave the federal government the right to intervene when elections were unfair.
in addition the ku klux kian act of april 1871 made conspiracies to deprive citizens of the right to vote a punishable federal offense.
in june 1870 congress also created the u s department of justice with a specific mandate to enforce reconstruction.
up until then the u s attorney general had been a kind of in house lawyer and legal advisor to the president and cabinet but with no agency to lead.
all of these acts ct v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 represented a major expansion of federal power.
because of the new legislation crimes against individuals could for the first time be prosecuted by the federal government especially if state governments did not step in and do their duty president grant used this legislation forcefully.
in october 1871 the president proclaimed nine counties of south carolina to be in a condition of lawlessness and sent federal troops to restore order and arrest several hundred kian leaders some of whom ended up serving terms in federal prison.
in addition perhaps 2 000 kian members left the state.
seven hundred leaders of the kian were also arrested in mississippi and several hundred more in north carolina.
by the end of 1872 the kian as an organization had been destroyed.
ihe kian would rise again but not for many decades later.
nevertheless despite its absence violence against blacks and their white republican allies continued in the 1870s.
in the north people were growing more and more willing to let the south settle its own affairs.
when the democrats nominated newspaper editor horace greeley for president in 1872 they adopted a platform attacking republican corruption and calling for civil service reform while also promising a general amnesty for former confederates and an end to federal intervention in the south.
grant was easily renominated by the republicans and won the election handily but democrats gained power in congress.
as it turned out greeley died before the electoral votes were counted which caused some confusion but no one doubted that grant had won the election.
in his inaugural address at the beginning of his second term in march 1873 grant told the nation the effects of the late civil strife have been to free the slave and make him a citizen.
yet he is not possessed of the civil rights which citizenship should carry with it.
this is wrong and should be corrected.
to this correction i stand committed so far as executive influence can avail grant did his best but it was not enough.
in 1875 grant sent fellow civil war general philip sheridan to louisiana to investigate the political violence.
sheridan documented the killing of 2 141 blacks and the wounding of 2 115 more since the war had ended.
all of these crimes remained unpunished.
another civil war veteran former slave henry adams organized a committee of 500 blacks to look into affairs and see the true condition of our race in northern louisiana around the red river area alone the committee documented 683 murders including the following notations sam maybury whipped to death december 1865 henry west badly whipped november 1874 george a colored man killed by white men 1873 nancy brooks badly whipped by a white man 1873 in most cases the list included the name of the victim and the unpunished killer.
the reality that sheridan and adams documented would not change for a very long time.
a changing national mood and the end of reconstruction a number of factors led to the growing national weariness with federal intervention in the south.
southern reconstruction governments were regularly accused of corruption and some office holders black and white certainly enriched themselves.
pinchback of louisiana the only black governor in the reconstruction era admitted that he made considerable profit for himself in his political career.
south carolinas white republican governor robert k scott speculated in state bonds and north carolinas governor william holden was aware of damnable rascality in truth the reconstruction governments were probably no more corrupt than those that came before or after but the charges tarnished reconstruction.
the grant administration also faced one corruption scandal after another.
during grants first year in office jay gould and james fisk the nations leading bankers tried to corner the nations gold supply and thus control the economy with possible support from administration insiders including julia grant the presidents wife.
one after another cabinet officers resigned and were replaced after they were charged with taking bribes or other forms of corruption.
in 1870 former ohio governor jacob cox resigned as secretary of the interior to protest the administrations failure to implement civil service reform.
in perhaps the biggest scandal a congressional investigation uncovered the workings of the so called whiskey ring a group including elected officials government employees and whiskey makers who defrauded the u s treasury of excise taxes on whiskey.
over 200 distillers and revenue agents were indicted and grants personal secretary orville e babcock resigned.
grant directed the investigations to continue saying let no guilty man escape if it can be avoided and he ordered the attorney general not to grant immunity to any suspects but he was seriously tarnished by the widespread corruption.
the sheer size of the federal interventions in the south also undermined public support.
in late 1874 white league militants ousted the republican governor william p kellogg in louisiana and took over the legislative hall.
since louisiana was still under military supervision grant ordered general sheridan to restore order.
with 5 000 u s army troops sheridan restored kellogg to the governors office and forcibly removed democrats from the legislative hall.
the spectacle of u s army soldiers marching into a legislative chamber and removing people who claimed to have been elected created a huge backlash.
newspapers that had supported the union cause now compared the white league to the founding fathers defending their freedom from the tyranny of the british.
debates in congress reflected the change in northern public opinion and the increasing swagger of southern leaders.
joseph r hawley a connecticut republican who called himself a radical abolitionist nevertheless argued that the social and educational and moral reconstruction of the south could never come from any legislative halls the democrats in congress praised local self government while insisting that black and white republicans in the south should stop depending upon external aid in that context it was difficult for the federal administration or the u s army officers in the south to get support.
the u s supreme court was not sympathetic to reconstruction.
in the slaughterhouse cases of 1873 the court severely restricted the reach of the fourteenth amendment.
a group of butchers in new orleans had challenged the right of the louisiana legislature to grant a monopoly to one meatpacking company because they said it violated their fourteenth amendment rights to due process of law and citizenship rights.
but the court ruled that the fourteenth amendment did not include such rights making it much harder to bring other suits about state infringement of citizens rights.
in march 1876 the courts decision in united states v cruikshank struck a further blow to reconstruction.
bill cruikshank was a white participant in the part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 attack on colfax louisiana in 1873.
he was indicted on federal charges for violating the civil rights of blacks who were killed in the attack.
but 3 years later the supreme court ruled that the charges were unconstitutional.
chief justice morrison r waite wrote that protecting the rights of individual citizens was a state not a federal duty.
cruikshank took away one of the federal governments most important enforcement powers the right to bring federal charges against those who attacked the basic rights of african americans.
finally in 1883 the court ruled that the civil rights act of 1875 was unconstitutional because the fourteenth amendment gave congress only the right to outlaw state government actions not discrimination by individuals which the court left to the states to deal with.
the legal foundation of reconstruction seemed to be crumbling or perhaps the court was simply following public opinion.
associate justice samuel miller a grant appointee wrote to a friend describing what many americans were also feeling i am losing interest in these matters as the country prepared for the 1876 presidential elections the loss of interest in reconstruction was evident.
the republicans nominated ohio governor rutherford b hayes who was on good terms with all factions in the party and especially popular with some because of his crackdown on nascent labor unions in ohio.
the platform said surprisingly little about reconstruction.
the democrats nominated new york governor samuel tilden who had made a fortune as legal counsel for some of the countrys richest bankers and railroads and gained fame for fighting corruption in government.
promising to continue the fight against corruption and foster prosperity and never mentioning reconstruction tilden was the strongest candidate the democrats had nominated in some time.
the campaign was intense especially in the south where violence and confusion reigned.
in november tilden outpolled hayes winning the popular vote 4 286 808 to 4 034 142 but it was the electoral votes that counted.
in three states florida louisiana and south carolina republican election boards discarded enough votes to declare hayes the winner which meant that he would also win the electoral count.
not surprisingly the democrats challenged these decisions.
the months between the election and the inauguration were as tense as any since the jefferson adams contest of 1800.
some democrats vowed tilden or war congress created an electoral commission of 10 congressional representatives five from each party plus five supreme court justices to determine the outcome since the constitution gave no guidance beyond saying that the votes shall be counted in the senate.
after intense negotiations the electoral commission ruled 8 to 7 for hayes.
but the constitution specified that a president could not be declared elected until the senate actually counted the votes cast by the presidential electors from the various states.
democrats refused to convene the senate to count that vote thus making it impossible to resolve the crisis.
finally on february 26 a group of southern democrats met with ohio republicans and negotiated a compromise.
hayes who promised to treat the south with kind consideration agreed that if he were made president he would use his power to end reconstruction most of all by withdrawing the federal troops that were in the south protecting republican governments.
the southern democrats liked the offer and agreed to let the senate meet and count the votes including following the electoral commissions recommendation the votes of the republican electors from florida.
on inauguration day march 4 1877 hayes became president and moved quickly to fulfill his promises.
152 152 15 3 jim crow segregation segregation laws that became widespread in the south during the 1890s named for a minstrel show character portrayed satirically by white actors in blackface.
southern republicans who had supported hayes were outraged.
a former slave from south carolina commented angrily to think that hayes could go back on us when we had to wade through blood to help place him where he is now little could now be done however.
hayes did not immediately remove federal troops from the south but he made it clear that the troops who remained would not intervene in the souths internal matters as grant had ordered.
the changes in federal policy had been coming for some time but after march 1877 there was little reason to expect any federal support for reconstruction anywhere.
after 1877 the direction was clear.
john c calhoun an arkansas planter and grandson of the south carolina senator of the same name told congress that left to ourselves the white south could settle all questions about the regions political arrangements.
and they did.
blacks carpetbaggers and scalawags were slowly excluded from offices though some stayed on into the 1890s.
many were forced to leave the south altogether if they wanted long lives.
in addition blacks were excluded from voting altogether education budgets were slashed and the regulation of share cropping shifted further in favor of plantation owners.
after 1877 white rule in the south was assured.
the birth of the segregated south disenfranchisement and segregation did not happen overnight.
african americans were still being elected to office in the 1880s and 1890s.
george h white of north carolina who was described as the last of the negro congressmen bade a final farewell to the house of representatives in 1901 saying this mr chairman this is perhaps the negroes temporary farewell to the american congress.
but let me say phoenix like he will rise up someday and come again the absence of blacks from congress lasted for 28 years until oscar de priest was elected from chicago.
only after another civil rights movement many decades later did african americans reach the number of representatives in congress that they had in the 1870s.
various forms of what came to be called jim crow segregation developed at a rapid pace.
jim crow was a derogatory character in a minstrel show designed to denigrate blacks but his name has been applied to the whole era of rigid racial segregation that was the rule in many parts of the united states from the 1870s to the 1960s.
schools public facilities transportation and most every other aspect of life were segregated.
in addition to losing the vote blacks were marginalized economically so that sharecropping became virtually the only option for most.
a vicious campaign of lynching controlled blacks through fear and intimidation.
perhaps the capstone of this segregation was the u s supreme courts 1896 plessy v ferguson decision that separate by equal facilities were quite acceptable under the united states constitution.
by the time that decision was issued the high hopes of reconstruction were a dim memory and most americans white and black were living in a very different world.
153 quick review considering the events and trends of the later years of reconstruction or redemption as it was called who were the winners and who were the losers.
who was most responsible for what happened.
partv expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 conclusion during the 12 years after the civil war americans grappled with what the future held for newly freed slaves and how best to return to the union those states that had been in rebellion during the civil war.
the so called radical republicans in congress sought ways to protect the educational political and economic rights of the freedmen as former slaves male and female were called.
andrew johnson who became president upon lincolns death in april 1865 seemed indifferent to african american rights and soon alienated congressional radicals by restoring power to former rebels intent on limiting the freedoms of former slaves.
congressional republicans had their own plans for consolidating the union victory however and eventually the house of representatives impeached johnson for obstructing its plans to reconstruct the south.
although he was acquitted of high crimes and misdemeanors by the senate which allowed him to stay in office johnsons political career was over.
but congress passed a number of laws including the 1866 civil rights act and the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments to the constitution designed to protect black rights as citizens and voters.
across the south african americans and whites committed to reconstruction were elected to local and national office in larger numbers and began to reshape their states.
in 1868 ulysses s grant the republican nominee was elected president.
grant was committed to the reconstruction of the south in ways that would protect black rights especially black voting rights.
after the war african americans pursued full citizenship rights education and economic independence.
terrorized by white supremacists and lacking money and credit most african americans never achieved either true equality or independence.
at the same time white veterans of the confederate army were organizing to deny those rights not only legally through the democratic party but also illegally through the ku klux kian and other similar organizations.
as time passed and as public support for federal intervention in the affairs of the south eroded the promise of reconstructions early days evaporated.
by 1877 a new president rutherford b hayes began to bring reconstruction to an end assuring white rule in the south and the disenfranchisement and jim crow segregation of african americans for generations to come.
chapter review why might the historian eric foner call reconstruction america s unfinished revolution.
chapter 15 reconstruction 447 chapter 15 chapter review federal reconstruction policy explain the political development of federal reconstruction policy.
review questions 1.
historical interpretation what do johnsons policies before his impeachment tell us about his vision of the post reconstruction south.
constructing arguments how would you explain the increasingly radical nature of congressional reconstruction.
what factors pushed congress toward more aggressive intervention in southern society and politics.
comparison compare and contrast presidential reconstruction and congressional reconstruction.
what were some of the ways that congress forced the states of the former confederacy to accept reconstruction that johnson opposed.
the impact of reconstruction explain the impact of reconstruction on african american life in the south.
review questions 4.
historical interpretation what aspects of the history of the 1860s and 1870s would a historian report to emphasize the success of congressional reconstruction.
what aspects of those years would a historian report to emphasize congressional reconstruction as a failure.
contextualization why did newly freed slaves place such a high priority on education.
constructing arguments defend or refute the following statement.
by the end of the 1870s from an economic perspective most southern blacks were almost as closely tied to the land and dependent on white landowners as they had been under slavery what evidence can you produce to support your position.
terror apathy and the creation of the segregated south analyze the reasons reconstruction ended and the impact of redemption.
review questions 7.
contextualization what groups made up the republican coalition during reconstruction.
what did each group hope to gain from its support of the party.
historical interpretation is it fair to describe the democratic party during reconstruction as the party of white supremacy.
why or why not.
constructing arguments defend or refute the following statement.
the ku klux kian of the reconstruction era was at its essence a terrorist organization 15 3 v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 becoming an industrial worl power costs benefits and response 1865 1914 part outline.
chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 385 ll significant dates.
1861 confederate states of america organized abraham lincoln inaugurated fort sumter surrenders slaves who come to union army declared contraband of war confederates win first battle of bull run 1862 monitor vs merrimack sea battle union army wins battle of shiloh tennessee union navy captures new orleans second battle of bull run confederate victory protects richmond union victory at antietam 1863 emancipation proclamation takes effect richmond bread riots fall ofvicksburg battle of gettysburg union victory protects washington dc new york city draft riots 1864 battle of the wilderness atlanta falls to sherman s army beginning of sherman s march to the sea farragut wins mobile alabama lincoln reelected 1865 congress passes 13th amendment outlawing slavery lee surrenders at appomattox court house lincoln assassinated this chapter traces life in the united states through the 4 years of the civil war.
the battles that were fought over those 4 long years determined the war s outcome.
but the fighting also helped shape public opinion.
no one north or south was prepared for the terrible death toll of the war and the fear of being killed or losing loved ones haunted almost everyone in the united states during the civil war.
ideas were also changing throughout the nation as the war continued.
many in the north who started fighting a war to save the union went through periods of wondering whether it might be better to just let the south go and then ended up fighting to end slavery.
many in the south slaveholders and nonslaveholders alike who started out fighting to preserve their independence from northern influence slowly became resigned to a different fate even if they never stopped resenting the reality that the war created.
and many who began the war as enslaved people officially owned by other human beings ended the war as free citizens many of them veterans of the union army that had won their freedom.
the civil war changed all of subsequent u s history and its impact is important to understand.
fort sumter to antietam 1861 1862 explain how the early battles of the war shaped future events.
14 1 after fort sumter surrendered in mid april no further serious battles occurred for the next 2 months as each side sought to understand the others goals and strategy.
both governments raised and positioned their armies.
the confederates had only to fight a defensive war to protect their territory.
they did not need to win victories in the north only protect their lands to win what they wanted.
the north however needed to defeat the confederate army to reunite the nation.
as the war began the commander of the union armies was the aging hero of the war with mexico general winfield scott.
he proposed what came to be known as the anaconda plan to blockade the south by sea take control of the mississippi river and slowly squeeze the confederacy into submission as an anaconda snake squeezed its victim without a full scale invasion of the region that he thought would be too bloody and lead to generations of hatred no matter what the outcome.
but many northerners believed that the north needed to defeat the confederates on confederate turf.
union generals wanted a lot of time to prepare supplies and train recruits.
in lincolns opinion his generals always wanted more time until grant took command much later in the war.
when general irvin mcdowell commander of the union forces in 1861 complained that he had only green recruits the president responded y ou are green it is true but they are green also you are all green alike.
for lincoln a quick attack on the confederacy especially if richmond could be taken would mean victory.
no one was yet thinking of a long war.
rebel yell a frightening yell that confederate soldiers gave when entering battle.
many northern troops commented on how unnerving it could be.
early inconclusive battles the first serious battle of the war took place on july 21 1861 see map 14 1.
at lincolns prodding mcdowell with 18 000 troops finally advanced fro washington across the potomac river into virginia.
the army was accompanied by northern reporters members of congress and others who thought it would be the one time they would see a battle.
confederate commander pierre beauregard was alerted to the union army s movement by confederate spies in washington.
the armies met at the small town of manassas virginia on bull run creek.
northerners called it the first battle of bull run southerners the battle of manassas.
union troops tired from the long march from washington started to surround the confederate forces but the confederates held their ground.
in an afternoon charge confederates let out the scream that came to be known as the rebel yell.
one northerner said there is nothing 386 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 soldiers on both sides like these union soldiers in camp spent most of the first months of the war either in training or sitting in camp and waiting.
note the one african american off to the side.
this early in the war african americans were not yet in uniform but that would soon change.
like it on this side of the infernal region the union troops began to flee merging with panic stricken civilians who ran back to the relative safety of washington dc.
the battle of manassas or first bull run was a clear confederate victory.
it gave the confederates great perhaps even dangerously high levels of confidence.
confederate newspapers asked why their generals had not gone on to capture washington though in fact mcdowell had done a good job of developing the defense of the capital.
northerners were despairing.
horace greeley who had done much to stir up support for the war now wrote to lincoln if it is best for the country and for mankind that we make peace with the rebels and on their own terms do not shrink even from that lincoln had no intention of taking that action but the president now realized that it would take more than a few easy battles to win the war.
perhaps mary boykin chesnut the plantation wife who was deeply devoted to the southern cause but never blind to reality best understood the impact of the first battle when she wrote that she feared this early victory lulls us into a foots paradise of conceit.
lincoln responded to the loss at bull run by calling for 1 million new volunteers.
he fired several union generals including the unlucky mcdowell reorganized the army on the maryland virginia line as the army of the potomac which would remain the prime union army throughout the war and appointed george b mcclellan to command it.
he tightened federal control in washington and maryland.
in addition he reorganized federal troops in the west as a separate army with orders to proceed down the mississippi river and try to divide the confederacy.
the country was in for a long war.
although some in the south were clamoring for confederate troops to march north and defeat the damn yankees jefferson davis believed that the key to confederate victory was doing what george washington had done in the revolution simply survive.
in time he hoped northern opinion would tire of war and foreign governments would recognize the south.
many in the south were confident that britain would support them because of british need for southern cotton.
but they underestimated abolitionist opinion in britain which had abolished slavery in its own colonies in the 1830s and the army of the potomac the main union army led by a series of generals until ulysses s grant took command in 1863 and led it to the final victory in 1865.
chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 387 map 14 1 major civil war battles 1861 1862.
as this map shows during the first 2 years of the war the major battles took place in northern virginia where the confederacy tried to defend its capital of richmond and union forces defended washington dc and in the mississippi river valley.
part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 caution of the british government which wanted to keep quite clear of the conflict some owners and workers in the cotton mills in manchester and liverpool wanted a confederate victory but overall british opinion was opposed to slavery.
in the end britain stayed neutral.
general mcclellan was a first rate organizer and he trained the union army well.
ihe army of the potomac became a strong fighting force.
nevertheless mcclellan was never quite ready to fight.
in one meeting with lincoln the general made but one request just dont let them hurry me is all i ask by october 1861 mcclellan was in command of 120 000 soldiers.
the confederate army in virginia was about 45 000 strong but mcclellan was sure it included at least 150 000 soldiers.
considering the possibilities for terrible loss of life mcclellans caution is understandable.
for lincoln however that kind of caution would result only in the end of the union.
by december 1861 there had been no major land battle since bull run.
the cost of maintaining and supplying an army was still high however much higher than the expenditures of any previous peacetime government had been.
secretary of the treasury salmon chase reported difficulty balancing the federal budget.
the london times reported the independence of the south virtually established then mcclellan got sick.
in january 1862 a discouraged lincoln said the people are impatient chase has no money the general of the army has typhoid fever.
the bottom is out of the tub.
what shall i do the u s navy takes control of southern rivers and ports the union cause was not as bleak as lincoln feared.
although the north and south began the war with more or less equal size armies the north had a much stronger navy.
as early as august 1861 the u s navy attacked confederate fortifications on the atlantic and gulf coasts.
by november the union controlled the sea islands off south carolina and not incidentally some 10 000 slaves who had been left behind by fleeing plantation owners.
with the u s navy attacking southern coastal fortifications and beginning a blockade of southern ports early in the war the south was losing access to the atlantic.
by april 1862 only the ports of charleston south carolina wilmington north carolina and savannah georgia were still open.
from these ports the south sent fast blockaderunning ships to maintain contact with the rest of the world getting supplies from the bahamas bermuda and cuba as well as from britain and france but at high cost.
the closing of its ports by the u s navy also led the confederacy to build a new kind of ship.
at the tredegar iron works in virginia armor plates were placed on a salvaged ship that had been the u s s.
merrimack but was renamed the c s s.
the virginia also had 10 well protected guns and an iron ram that could sink wooden ships.
while the north celebrated the early naval victories word of a new southern ironclad led the u s navy to plan for a similar ship.
an eccentric designer john ericsson proposed a strange but potentially powerful design for an ironclad that looked like a floating raft that had a revolving gun turret with two 11 inch guns.
his ship was named the monitor.
when the c s s.
virginia sank two union ships off the mouth of the james river the navy ordered the monitor to proceed south from the brooklyn navy yard without even time for a test run.
on march 9 1862 the crew of the virginia saw something they thought was a raft taking one of the navy ships boilers to shore for repairs but then the boiler started firing at them.
after hours of firing and maneuvering the virginia returned to port and each side declared victory.
the two ships never fought again the crew of the virginia blew up their ship rather than let it fall into northern hands when the union army invaded virginia in may 1862 and the monitor sank in a gale.
but naval warfare had changed forever as the two ships showed that ironclads could easily defeat a wooden hulled navy.
for the remainder of the civil war however fast wooden ships continued as best they could to keep the confederacy supplied with war material by outrunning the u s navy and the u s navy blockaded most southern commerce.
14 1 chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 389 14 1 the seagoing ironclad ships the virginia formerly the merrimack and the monitor fought one battle in march 1862 but the union navy s smaller ironclad riverboats like the one shown here did more to turn the tide of the war as they attacked confederate fortifications all along the mississippi river and its tributaries.
in early 1862 the u s navy also won important battles on the mississippi river.
cairo illinois where the ohio river flows into the mississippi was the southernmost city under union control.
south of cairo the confederacy controlled the mississippi as well as the cumberland and tennessee rivers that flowed into it.
the navy commander at cairo was andrew h foote a sober abolitionist while the army commander was the hard drinking ulysses s grant who had given little thought to abolition before the war.
together they attacked the souths rivers.
on february 6 1862 union forces overwhelmed confederate fort henry and union gunboats turned the tennessee river into a union thoroughfare.
grant became a hero.
the union controlled most of kentucky and tennessee.
southern optimism disappeared.
in april 1862 a fleet commanded by david g farragut got past a string of confederate forts and took new orleans the largest city in the south which remained in union hands for the duration of the war.
farraguts ships moved up the mississippi capturing baton rouge and natchez by the end of june.
only vicksburg on high bluffs over the mississippi river prevented complete union control of the river which would have cut the confederacy in half.
the beginning of a long war while the union navy won battles general grant led 40 000 troops in an attack on corinth mississippi.
corinth was where the souths major north south and east west rail lines crossed and grant meant to disrupt the network.
before grants forces got to corinth however southern forces attacked the union army near shiloh church in tennessee on april 6.
in 2 days of terrible fighting grant won but at a high cost of killed or wounded troops 13 047 for the union and 10 699 for the confederates.
shiloh undermined morale in both armies.
a confederate private wrote i never realized the pomp and circumstance of the thing called glorious war until i saw this men.
lying in every conceivable position the dead with their eyes wide open the wounded begging piteously for help union general william t sherman said the scenes on this field would have cured anybody of war the cost of the union victory at shiloh convinced many that it would be a long and terrible war.
mary boykin chesnut wrote in her diary i have nothing to chronicle but disasters nevertheless by may 1862 union forces had won control of several southern rivers and cities disrupted the southern rail system and taken many prisoners.
grant however would spend the next year stalled at vicksburg.
part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 390 with union victories in the west lincoln urged mcclellan to attack the confederate forces in the east.
the confederate army of northern virginia was the souths elite force assigned to protect the capital of richmond virginia and the essential supply sources nearby.
mcclellan landed troops on the virginia coast to march up the peninsula hence the name the peninsular campaign of 1862 to capture richmond.
with 135 000 troops he seemed poised for victory.
but mcclellan moved slowly with great caution driving lincoln to distraction.
in may and june 1862 confederate general stonewall jackson defeated northern forces in the shenandoah valley and kept knoxville and much of east tennessee in confederate hands.
it was an area filled with northern sympathizers.
but jackson kept winning.
northern troops had had to be diverted from the attack on richmond to deal with jackson whose troops had captured badly needed food and medical supplies.
at the end of may union and confederate forces fought a series of inconclusive engagements at the chickahominy river only a few miles from richmond.
jefferson davis made robert e lee commander of the army of northern virginia a move that almost turned the tide of war.
lee forced mcclellan to pull back from richmond to the james river.
the costs of the war were getting higher.
general d h hill whose unit lee had ordered to attack union forces at malvern hill on july 1 said of the result it was not war it was murder some 20 000 confederates had been killed or wounded twice as many as in the union army but lee kept up the pace.
at the end of august 1862 union and confederate armies met again at manassas on bull run creek where the south had won its first victory a year before.
the confederates led by lee and jackson again defeated the union army which pulled back into northern virginia.
at the beginning of the summer union soldiers could hear the church bells of richmond.
by the end of august richmond was safe and the confederate army was within 20 miles of washington dc.
it was a major reversal of fortunes.
army of northern virginia the main confederate army led for most of the war by robert e lee it fought in virginia maryland and pennsylvania before surrendering at appomattox court house in april 1865.
142 143 144 by the fall of 1862 lee and jefferson davis wanted a decisive win as badly as lincoln had.
the confederate army planned to encircle washington dc.
at antietam creek near sharpsburg maryland mcclellan attacked lees army on september 17 1862.
the result was the single bloodiest day of the war with approximately 23 000 soldiers killed or wounded four times the number of u s soldiers killed or wounded on d day in world war ii.
neither side could claim victory at antietam but neither side was defeated.
the next day lee withdrew his army to the relative safety of the shenandoah valley in virginia but mcclellan did not pursue lees retreating forces which was the last straw for lincoln.
when a month later mcclellan still had not moved and reported that he needed to rest his horses before any attack lincoln telegraphed will you pardon me for asking what the horses of your army have done since the battle of antietam that fatigue anything it was the end of the presidents patience and he relieved mcclellan of command.
14 1 quick review why were early union army generals so reluctant to fight as hard as lincoln wanted.
why was the navy so important to the north s ultimate victory.
14 2 the road to emancipation analyze how the war influenced attitudes toward slavery in white and black communities leading to the emancipation proclamation and to black soldiers in the union army.
lincoln had long insisted that although he personally thought slavery evil it was not the role of the national government to interfere with the settled institutions of states.
soon after his election he wrote to former congressman alexander stephens of georgia who was trying to convince his state not to secede do the people of the south really entertain fears that a republican administration would directly or indirectly interfere with their slaves or with them about their slaves.
if they do i wish to assure you as once a friend and still i hope not an enemy that there is no cause for such fears.
after he had assumed office and even after the fighting began lincoln kept restating the same position.
once the southern states began to secede his top priority was to hold the union together with or without slavery.
as late as august 1862 lincoln wrote to horace greeley knowing that his words would be published in the new york tribune insisting my paramount object in this struggle is to save the union and is not either to save or destroy slavery he closed the letter noting that this was his official position but that he also intended no modification of my oft expressed personal wish that all men everywhere could be free but his official position was evolving and some historians would argue so were his personal views.
contraband of war while lincolns views were evolving slaves and former slaves were clear on what they wanted from the war.
only a month into the civil war on may 23 1861 three slaves found their way to the union held fortress monroe in virginia and asked the forts commander general benjamin f butler for his protection.
butler needing workers put them to work.
he also coined a term for escaped slaves who came behind union lines contraband of war since american law then defined slaves as private property and since international law allowed belligerent nations to seize goods and property meant to help the other side wage war there was logic to butlers new term.
if slaves were property that the confederacy planned to use against the union then the union had a right to seize that property.
throughout much of the war slaves who fled to the union army were 392 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 14 known as contrabands.
there were contraband camps and contraband schools word of butler s decision spread rapidly.
more slaves started coming to fortress monroe which some now called freedom fort.
lincoln was not yet ready to set firm policy but butler s policy was approved and fortress monroe continued to be a haven for escaping slaves.
nevertheless federal authorities including new officials appointed by lincoln continued to enforce the fugitive slave act in the district of columbia and some generals returned slaves to their rightful owners.
with no national policy to guide him general john c fremont the head of the u s army in missouri announced that his troops would emancipate any slave belonging to a confederate supporter.
this announcement infuriated lincoln because he believed that he and not one of his generals should decide an issue as weighty as emancipation.
lincoln pressed for compensated emancipation in which the government would pay to free slaves in the areas loyal to the union.
slaveholders in kentucky however had no interest in giving up their slaves with or without payment and the idea went nowhere.
lincoln also pursued the possibility of colonization in which freed slaves could leave the united states for central america or even africa.
no nation showed much interest in the project and freed slaves showed even less interest.
lincoln continued to be more interested in keeping kentucky loyal to the union than in the fate of any slaves.
a northern reporter noted in all attempts to soothe southern wrath the negro is thrown in as the offering well into 1862 there was little cause for optimism for those who wanted the war to end slavery.
former slave and abolitionist leader frederick douglass wrote of his disappointment in dealing with the causes of our present troubles we find in quarter high and low the most painful evidences of dishonesty for douglass the problem was obvious we have attempted to maintain our union in utter defiance of the moral chemistry of the universe we have sought to bind the chains of slavery on the limbs of the black man without thinking that at last we should find the other end of that hateful chain about our own necks.
regardless in 1862 most of northern white public opinion was not ready to agree with douglass.
contrabands also known as contraband of war the name union generals gave to former slaves who escaped to the union lines and worked in support of union troops.
colonization a plan popular in the 1830s and briefly considered by president lincoln to create colonies in africa to which former slaves might return.
it was never popular with slaves or former slaves themselves.
mrmpr slaves now officially contraband of war waited for their next r of 1862 a group of wqu d be fight ng as full fledged soldiers in the union army.
nthesu assignment.
before long many such former s chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 393 i as the union army marched deeper into the confederacy however commanders realized that slaves could be of great value to them.
slaves knew the country they knew hidden roadways and they knew what white southerners were thinking.
george e stephens one of the few black newspaper reporters accompanying union troops wrote that when the union soldier meets the negro in the enemys country he knows him as a friend for many union soldiers meeting slaves firsthand began to change their minds.
future president james a garfield commanding an ohio unit in tennessee said that he found the rank and file of the army steadily and surely becoming imbued with sympathy for the slaves and hatred for slavery with or without authorization some blacks began to fight in the union army.
in indian territory oklahoma blacks who lived with creeks and seminoles joined them in attacking other tribal members who had signed a treaty with the confederates.
union officers in kansas and on the coast of south carolina began to recruit black troops.
secretary of war edward m stanton approved the move though he asked his officers to keep it quiet because it was so much in advance of public opinion but the government needed more soldiers and many blacks wanted to fight if the fighting was for their freedom.
issuing the emancipation proclamation president lincoln also began to change his mind.
lincoln was far too wise a politician to reveal all of his thinking.
he had long said that although he thought slavery a terrible evil the constitution protected slavery where it already existed and his only goal was stopping its spread into new territories.
in 1861 and early 1862 his priority was securing the loyalty of kentucky and other border states which meant protecting slavery there.
he understood that many northerners feared free blacks almost as much as they disliked slavery.
public opinion would support a fight to save the union but not necessarily a fight to end slavery.
but by 1862 northern opinion was changing.
generally the northern thinking was that the slaveholding south was waging war against the united states because it wanted to defend the institution of slavery and it was using slaves to support the war effort while its young white men went off to war.
abolitionists were getting an audience where they had previously been shunned.
blacks were willing to fight in the union army when many whites were not.
and many slaves were fleeing to the union lines.
in july 1862 the republican dominated congress declared that anyone convicted of assisting the rebellion against the u s government was liable to seizure and sale of all property and that all rebel owned slaves who escaped to the union army were forever free of their servitude lincoln then began discussing emancipation with his cabinet in july.
secretary of state seward among others urged caution until a northern victory would make talk of emancipation look less like a desperate measure.
on september 22 1862 lincoln told his cabinet that he had promised god that if lees army was forced out of maryland where they were then trying to encircle washington dc then he would act.
the battle of antietam enabled him to do so.
senator sumner had told him more than a year before that the souths rebellion gave the president war powers including the right to seize property even the kind of private property known as slaves.
the proclamation that lincoln was planning to issue was he said a matter of military strategy.
it was also directed at building northern support for the war especially black and abolitionist support.
his proposed emancipation would apply only to those areas of the country that were in a state of rebellion as of january 1 1863.
lincoln hoped that as a result at least some areas would vote to shift sides and support the union and in an ironic twist voters in tennessee and southern louisiana around new orleans both areas where the union army was in control did just that thus exempting themselves from the impact of the proclamation.
the emancipation proclamation did not free a single slave when it was first issued.
it did not apply in areas loyal to the union including slave states and though it technically freed all of the slaves in the confederate areas the government had no 94 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 emancipation proclamation decree announced by president abraham lincoln formally issued on january 1 1863 freeing slaves in all confederate states still in rebellion.
power as of yet in areas that were not under union control.
however the proclamation did resolve the issue of contraband slaves made abolishing slavery a military goal and fundamentally changed the civil war.
northern democrats immediately attacked the proclamation.
while the democratic minority in congress supported the war effort to save the union they opposed any widening of the war s goals.
by 1862 some in congress known as peace democrats advocated letting the confederacy go rather than endure further bloodshed.
in the november 1862 congressional elections peace democrats attacked republicans because they said the emancipation proclamation was widening the purpose of war and therefore making it longer and more bloody.
the new york democratic platform called the emancipation proclamation a proposal for the butchery of women and children for scenes of lust and rapine and arson and murder for governor new yorks democrats nominated horatio seymour who said that the people of the south should be allowed to withdraw themselves from the government seymour won as did a democrat in new jersey joel parker who although a war democrat because he supported the war effort was highly critical of the emancipation proclamation.
democrats gained control of the state legislatures in illinois and indiana.
northern democrats opposed to emancipation also won 34 more seats in the house of representatives.
since few southerners remained in congress this number was not enough to win a majority but it expanded the influence of those who wanted to challenge the presidents new war goals.
the november 1862 democratic gains seem to have hardened the views of lincoln and his cabinet.
just after the election attorney general edward bates usually one of the cabinets more cautious members ruled that free blacks had all the rights of citizens and that the dred scott decision held no authority except in the specific circumstances of the case.
batess ruling did not include voting rights free blacks were considered like women and children who were citizens but could not vote.
nevertheless they were now citizens.
on january 1 1863 lincoln signed the emancipation proclamation declaring that all slaves in areas then in rebellion about 3 million of the nations 4 million slaves are and henceforth shall be free and that the military should recognize and maintain their freedom.
the proclamation also said that black soldiers and sailors could be organized in the armed service of the united states.
there was no stirring rhetoric about human rights only a claim of military necessity but the civil war was now a war to end slavery.
while northerners debated and voted slaves in the south voted with their feet.
slaves came to understand that their freedom was one of the issues the war would settle.
early in the war many virginia plantations lost all their slaves and by august 1862 as confederate troops had to be diverted from fighting to ensure that slaves did not escape a north carolina resident wrote that our negroes are beginning to show that they understand the state of affairs and insolence and insubordination are quite common peace democrats also known as copperheads a large faction within the democratic party that advocated immediate peace with the confederacy on terms that would allow it to leave the union.
black soldiers in the union army in january 1863 just after lincoln signed the emancipation proclamation the weekly anglo african said a century may elapse before another opportunity shall be afforded of reclaiming and holding our withheld rights blacks both slave and free joined the military in great numbers.
more than 180 000 black soldiers one fifth of the nations adult black male population under age 45 and about 10 percent of the total union force eventually fought for the union.
former slaves quickly signed up for service especially in the west where grant encouraged full inclusion of blacks in the army.
in massachusetts governor john andrew with lincolns support authorized the organization of what became the fifty fourth and fifty fifth massachusetts regiments.
civil war regiments were typically organized by states but the fifty fourth and fifty fifth although they were massachusetts regiments recruited free blacks from across the north though with chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 395 american voices susie king taylor reminiscences of my life in camp 1862 susie king taylor 1848 1912 published her autobiography long after the civil war but her memories of the war and the rumors of freedom that arrived in advance of the reality remained vivid.
taylor was born in rural georgia but lived in savannah as a child where she attended a secret and illegal school for slaves and learned to read and write.
soon after her trip to st simon s island and freedom with the union army she opened a school for other newly freed slaves and later taught black troops to read and write while also serving as a nurse.
i was born under the slave law in georgia in 1848 and was brought up by my grandmother in savannah.
there were three of us with her my younger sister and brother.
my brother and i being the two eldest we were sent to a friend of my grandmother mrs woodhouse a widow to learn to read and write.
she was a free woman and lived on bay lane between habersham and price streets about half a mile from my house.
we went every day about nine o clock with our books wrapped in paper to prevent the police or white persons from seeing them.
we went in one at a time through the gate into the yard to the l kitchen which was the schoolroom.
she had twenty five or thirty children whom she taught assisted by her daughter mary jane about this time i had been reading so much about the yankees i was very anxious to see them.
the whites would tell their colored people not to go to the yankees for they would harness them to carts and make them pull the carts around in place of horses.
i asked grandmother one day if this was true.
she replied certainly not.
that the white people did not want slaves to go over to the yankees and told them these things to frighten them.
don t you see those signs pasted about the streets.
one reading i am a rattlesnake if you touch me i will strike.
another reads i am a wild cat.
beware etc.
these are warnings to the north so don t mind what the white people say.
i wanted to see these wonderful yankees so much as i heard my parents say the yankee was going to set all the slaves free on april 1 1862 about the time the union soldiers were firing on fort pulaski i was sent out into the country to my mother.
i remember what a roar and din the guns made.
they jarred the earth for miles.
the fort was at last taken by them.
two days after the taking of fort pulaski my uncle took his family of seven and myself to st catherine island.
we landed under the protection of the union fleet and remained there two weeks when about thirty of us were taken aboard the gunboat p to be transferred to st simon s island and at last to my unbounded joy i saw the yankee.
source susie king taylor reminiscences of my life in camp with the 33d united states colored troops late 1 st s c.
volunteers boston published by the author 1902 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what steps did taylor s family take to prepare her for freedom.
historical interpretation what does this document tell you about the priorities of enslaved african americans as freedom approached.
what might explain the importance they attached to education.
ini white officers.
in rural franklin country pennsylvania not far from the mason dixon line 45 free black men signed up for the fifty fourth regiment and more joined the fifty fifth.
most free blacks who volunteered for service were from the lowest rungs of the economy including thomas burgess a carpenter joseph christy a woodcutter and hezekiah watson and thomas cuff quarrymen.
the bounties paid to all soldiers for joining and the subsequent pay mattered to poor families black or white.
the opportunity to fight for freedom mattered even more to black soldiers.
in spring 1863 black soldiers in louisiana fought hard and rescued white troops who faced defeat turning what could have been defeat into a victory.
at fort wagner south carolina the fifty fourth massachusetts regiment lost half its number including its white commander robert gould shaw after requesting the right to be first in the assault.
after those encounters many shared secretary of war stantons view that these troops were among the bravest of the brave in fighting for the union their bravery convinced some including lincoln that they were as deserving as any whites not only of their freedom but also of the right to vote and participate equally in the political process.
black soldiers also demanded and eventually got equal treatment within the army.
officers were told that any soldier whatever his rank who mistreated freedmen would be dismissed.
the militia act of 1862 set the pay of black soldiers at the level of military laborers on the assumption that their work would be behind the lines.
as their role changed black soldiers demanded equal pay.
soldiers in the massachusetts fifty fourth and fifty fifth regiments refused to accept any pay until it was raised to that of part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 j 1 even before and especially after the emancipation proclamation formalized their place in the union army thousands of african americans joined the army to fight for the union cause and for freedom.
white soldiers.
in june 1864 congress provided equal pay and enlistment bounties for blacks and whites.
in the army blacks also had equal rights in military courts and rights to testify in trials something they could not do as civilians in most of the country.
finally during the last months of the war blacks were promoted to the officer ranks.
the presence of black troops in the union army enraged many in the confederacy.
in may 1863 the south refused to include black troops in prisoner of war exchanges since they had declared all such troops to be runaway slaves who should be returned to slavery.
in response and despite pressure lincoln suspended the exchange of prisoners until early 1865 when the confederacy agreed to resume exchanges.
black prisoners of war were treated more harshly than white prisoners.
in april 1864 when the union garrison at fort pillow tennessee surrendered to confederate general nathan b.
forest he ordered the massacre of black soldiers.
blacks who fought knew what danger they faced and they fought anyway.
quick review how did the battles fought at the beginning of the civil war change people s attitudes about the war in the north and the south.
the home front shortages opposition riots and battles 14 3 explain how the war s death toll and civilian shortages affected life north and south during the war.
after the initial euphoria wore off and as the reports of casualties began to circulate support for the war dropped in both the north and the south.
even those supporting the war had second thoughts.
it was not only the terrible toll from the battlefields though nearly every family was touched by those losses but also the wars effects on the home front which had not been expected when it began.
inflation and bread riots in the south the wars heaviest toll was in the south.
ihe confederate government never succeeded in placing its financial house in order.
southern politicians had long objected to federal tariffs and other taxes.
it was hard now that independence was claimed to turn to chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 397 these taxes.
although there were modest tax increases the confederate government was always short of money.
to finance the war the confederates issued war bonds.
it was fair many argued for future generations to pay the cost of the war.
but buying war bonds that paid 8 percent per year in interest when inflation was running at 12 percent per month was not a good investment.
and even rich southerners often did not have much cash to invest.
southern wealth was invested in land and slaves and neither could be easily converted to cash especially in wartime.
so the confederate government sought to solve its financial problems by simply printing more money 20 million in may 1861 100 million in august.
creating more currency however caused terrible inflation that undermined the sale of war bonds and drove the price of goods out of sight.
in 1862 southern workers saw their wages increase by about 55 percent while the cost of living increased by 300 percent.
the price of salt essential to preserving meat rose from 2 a bag before the war to 60 by the fall of 1862.
in addition the disruption of southern transportation especially after the loss of the rail terminals in memphis in june 1862 meant that though one area might have ample supplies of food other areas were literally starving.
managing the home front in the south fell primarily to women.
during the war three out of four white men of military age ultimately defined by the confederate government as ages 17 to 50 served in the army and one out of five of this age range were killed in the war.
margaret junkin preston of lexington virginia described a world in which there were no men left in new bern north carolina women wrote to the governor to say that of 250 whites remaining in their town only 20 were male and of these 11 were old and three about to join the army.
and in carrollton alabama a woman wrote to her governor in 1862 to say that the latest call for soldiers almost literally depopulates the country of men for white women this situation meant taking on new roles including managing slaves.
in 1863 lizzie neblettof texas wrote to her husband that she was doing my best as a manager and overseer but by 1863 she realized that the news of the emancipation proclamation spreading in the slave quarter had changed everything i dont think we have one who will stay with us letters to distant husbands reflected how terribly their wives missed them and how these long separations were changing womens role in a society that had prided itself on male dominance and female fragility.
as the montgomery daily advertiser wrote in july 1864 the surface of society like a great ocean is upheaved and all the relations of life are disturbed and out of joint in spring 1863 food shortages led to bread riots across the south from richmond virginia to mobile alabama.
women often wives whose husbands were off fighting and who were trying desperately to sustain themselves and their children attacked shops and warehouses.
by march 1863 the army of northern virginia was subsisting on half rations but the women of richmond had far less.
in april a mob of over 1 000 women shouting bread bread and our children are starving began looting shops in richmond first for bread and then for clothing.
when president davis threatened to shoot rioters they dispersed but the anger did not subside.
the government tried to distribute food and to stop hoarding in warehouses.
nevertheless as the war continued it created streams of refugees inflation and starvation across the south.
as many as 50 000 civilians died in the south during the war in addition to the 260 000 confederate war dead.
taxes mourning and resistance in the north life was easier in the north.
most of the fighting took place on southern soil and the northern economy was more stable.
the north also had an established treasury department and tax system when the war began though revenue that had been sufficient for the 1850s was not even close to meeting the needs of a war economy.
the financier jay cooke one of the richest and most reviled bankers of his day advised the treasury department and created new federal bonds in amounts that allowed not only banks but also individuals to buy war bonds.
cooke made a significant profit on these transactions but the bonds kept the government solvent.
congress also created the internal revenue service and began a federal income tax in august 1861.
most people were exempt from the tax since income under 800 per year was not taxed and only a minority made more than that.
finally the federal government began issuing federal notes that were secured not by gold or silver but simply by the governments promise to redeem them.
congress not only authorized such bank notes which came to be known as greenbacks for their green ink but also declared that they were legal tender which meant that no one could refuse them as payment for goods or debts.
the result was the creation of a solid monetary system that lasted long after the war.
although there was little fighting in the north families saw sons march off to war and often received the terrible news that they were never coming home.
death on the scale of the civil war had never been known before and has not been known since in the united states.
after major battles newspapers and telegraph offices posted casualty lists.
close comrades or hospital nurses caring for those who died wrote letters to their families and the awful news changed life for those waiting at home.
in many parts of the north as in the south communities were virtually depopulated of military aged men during the war and women took on roles that they had never before considered.
although the prewar north had less rigidly defined gender roles than the south changes were significant for many.
many northerners never supported the war effort and their numbers increased after the emancipation proclamation.
by 1863 as the death toll rose and the prospects of defeating the confederacy dimmed the peace faction within the northern democratic party grew rapidly though the party always included not only peace democrats but also war democrats who supported the war to save the union if not the emancipation proclamation.
peace democrats came to be known as copperheads after republicans had coined the term comparing antiwar democrats to venomous snakes.
but by 1863 peace democrats proudly took up the term and continued to call for peace while hoping to make more gains in the state elections of 1863.
by 1863 ohio congressman clement l vallandigham had emerged as the leader of the peace democrats.
for vallandigham the result of the war was defeat debt taxation sepulchers vallandigham strongly disapproved of the emancipation proclamation declaring that the government should look only to the welfare peace and safety of the white race his words touched a nerve in northern public opinion but did not win over a majority.
in a may 1863 speech he said that king lincoln had widened the war from one to save the union to one to free the slaves and must be stopped.
general ambrose burnside the union military commander in ohio had issued an order that declaring sympathy for the enemy was against the law.
vallandigham was arrested and convicted.
after briefly being jailed he was exiled to the confederacy.
he met with confederate officials in richmond then made his way to canada where from exile he ran as a peace democrat for governor of ohio in november 1863.
although he lost the election vallandigham did win 40 percent of the votes.
new york city was a center of opposition to the war.
its large irish catholic population had little interest in fighting for the rights of african americans.
more free blacks they thought meant more competitors on the streets and docks of new york and they did not like it.
after lincoln issued the emancipation proclamation new yorks catholic archbishop john hughes wrote that we catholics have not 14 1 i j 1c2 internal revenue service i an agency created by congress during the civil war to collect federal taxes in support of the war effort.
143 greenbacks i papercurrency printed on order of congress based on the federal government s promise 1.
to pay rather than backed by actual gold or silver as security.
the slightest idea of carrying on a war that costs so much blood and treasure just to gratify a clique of abolitionists while northern support for the abolition of slavery was growing as the war progressed especially among troops in the army northern opinion was divided.
r 7 chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 399 new york draft riot a mostly irish immigrant protest against conscription in new york city that escalated into class and racial warfare.
irish catholics were far from the only people in the north to dislike free blacks and have little interest in freeing slaves.
as word of the emancipation proclamation spread in 1862 antiblack riots broke out in several cities including cincinnati where a strike by irish dockworkers was defeated with the use of black strikebreakers.
in brooklyn a mob attacked a tobacco factory where blacks were working.
as opposition grew in the north to the war itself especially expanding the war goals to include emancipation voluntary enlistment in the army declined.
in july 1863 the government began to enforce a military draft and the antiblack anti abolitionist antiwar fervor broke into violence.
in new york city on july 13 mobs attacked the draft offices and then turned on black neighborhoods republican newspapers and government offices.
blacks were beaten lynched and shot.
before it was over 105 people most of them black were killed.
ihe new york draft riot was the worst riot in american history up to that time.
only the arrival of federal troops on july 15 fresh from the battle of gettysburg ended the violence.
warfare in the north and west although the civil war was fought primarily in the south battles took place in distant areas of the nation.
a victory at glorieta pass near santa fe kept new mexico in union hands.
in missouri bands loyal to each side fought battles throughout the war that spilled over into neighboring states and often were fueled by earlier disputes.
william clarke quantrill who had been among the missouri border ruffians in the 1850s led attacks on union troops and sympathizers in missouri and in 1863 quantrill led a band of 450 southern sympathizers in a raid on lawrence kansas.
in retaliation for events in bleeding kansas quantrill ordered kill every male and burn every house the band followed orders killing 183 men and boys and burning 185 buildings in lawrence eluding capture by union troops.
quantrill was eventually killed by union soldiers but many of his followers including jesse and frank james became famous outlaws and continued to terrorize parts of the west long after the war was over.
confederate agents also tried to arrange attacks on the union from canada and planned an uprising in chicago during the democratic convention of 1864 but nothing came of that effort.
those involved in the new york draft riot of july 1863 attacked union draft officials republican newspapers and supporters and most of all african americans.
400 partv expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 confederate and union leaders both sought allies among the tribes in indian territory.
cherokee creeks and seminoles were all divided between some who thought the confederacy would offer better terms than the united states had done and others who sided with the united states.
even without confederate influence some northern tribes were angry at the u s government over the loss of supplies that had been diverted to the war effort and over lincolns withdrawal of troops that were protecting the tribes from expanding white settlements as promised in various treaties.
in minnesota in august 1862 santee sioux under little crow killed hundreds of white settlers and u s troops but were soon defeated.
little crow along with 37 other santee leaders were executed in the largest public hanging in u s history.
many from the tribe moved to canada.
in early 1863 the shoshoni under chief bear hunter angry at the growing presence of white settlers and migrants in the tribes region attacked white settlements in the utah and idaho territories.
union troops retaliated massacring most of the shoshoni warriors along with women and children in an attack on january 29 1863.
as indian white relationships degenerated during the war union troops were diverted from the war with the confederacy to fight indians.
indians suffered no matter which side they took and most whites looked the other way.
quick review how did political opposition popular opposition especially where violent and economic upheaval threaten the war effort in the north and south.
from gettysburg to appomattox and beyond 14 4 analyze the strategies and costs of fighting a long and terrible war.
as both its proponents and opponents understood the emancipation proclamation widened the purpose of the civil war.
military tactics also changed in 1863.
early in the war generals hoped for a short and limited war.
mcclellan was far from the only general north or south who tried to avoid large losses of fighting troops.
by the time the war entered its third year however military and civilian leaders on both sides had concluded that only a much more sustained offensive would end the war.
lincoln relieved several cautious generals mcclellan hooker and meade before he promoted grant to overall command.
davis on the other hand promoted lee to be the top military commander early in the war.
in grant and lee each president had selected a general who was willing to fight a large scale offensive war and absorb large troop losses to win.
gettysburg and the war in pennsylvania and virginia in spring of 1863 hooker while he was still in command marched union troops into virginia and the two armies fought for 7 days at chancellorsville.
when stonewall jackson led his troops around the end of the union lines hooker lost his nerve and ordered a retreat.
chancellorsville was a major confederate victory though it came at the high cost of 10 000 confederate dead and wounded and 14 000 union losses.
in the battle jackson was accidentally shot by his own troops and died a week later.
lincoln relieved hooker of command and appointed general george meade to replace hooker.
meanwhile lee convinced davis that the time had come to invade the north cut washington dc off from the rest of the country and end the war.
june 1863 was the high point of confederate confidence and confederate advances.
as lee led the souths largest army through rural pennsylvania many in the north not just the unfortunate inhabitants of the towns through which the army marched grew fearful.
if the confederate army could control the pennsylvania countryside chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 14 1 14 2 14 3 14 4 they could attack philadelphia or washington as a well fed well organized army of conquest.
the north could not continue the war if its capital and major cities were under rebel control.
long before any battles took place pennsylvania residents knew one was coming.
while people living in many parts of the south had already experienced 2 years of war such fears were new north of the mason dixon line.
philip schaff a theologian and historian teaching at mercersburg seminary in pennsylvania remembered that trying times did not bring out the best in frightened and confused people.
they turned on their neighbors because of pro or antiwar politics or over squabbles about what to hide and where to hide it.
when the rebel army did arrive mercersburg was luckier than some towns at least for its white citizens.
general lee ordered that no private property shall be injured or destroyed schaff described the first confederate officer he met as intelligent and courteous but full of hatred for the yankees not all the confederates who followed were as polite.
mercersburg had a large free black population and they suffered far worse than whites.
schaff said that some of the troops went on a regular slave hunt which presented the worst spectacle i ever saw in this war when white households hid black friends the invading troops proclaimed first that they would burn down every house which harbored a fugitive slave and they considered all blacks to be fugitive slaves.
schaff was terrified that his servant eliza and her son would be found.
they escaped but other blacks in the town were caught and sold into slavery.
for blacks and whites southern pennsylvania in 1863 was every bit as much a war zone as virginia or the mississippi river valley had been in 1862.
lincoln and meade ordered the army of the potomac to stop lees advance at all cost.
the northern and southern armies found each other near the town of gettysburg pennsylvania.
on july 1 confederate forces drove union troops out of the town and onto cemetery hill.
the next morning lee ordered a major attack but the union army held its ground.
after another major charge directly at the heart of the union lines on july 3 known as pickett s charge for the officer commanding the lead unit it became clear to lee that despite terrible losses the union forces now reinforced could not be dislodged.
of the 14 000 soldiers that pickett led in the assault only half returned.
confederate general longstreet spoke of the battle of gettysburg as hopeless slaughter one of the saddest days of my life in the 3 days at gettysburg in the days after the battle of gettysburg bodies littered the battlefield.
photographs brought the high cost of war home to people north and south.
402 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 1 51 000 soldiers were killed or wounded 23 000 from the north and 28 000 from the south.
on july 4 lee began a painful retreat back to virginia.
the confederate army would never again be a major presence in the north.
lincoln however was furious that meade like mcclellan did not pursue the retreating confederates.
while news was arriving in washington that the confederate forces had been turned back word also came of a second northern victory.
unable to defeat the confederate garrison at vicksburg in 1862 grant surrounded the city and starved it.
after holding on for a year on july 4 1863 the confederate forces at vicksburg surrendered.
watching the union army march into vicksburg a local resident wrote what a contrast these stalwart well fed men were to the worn men in gray who were being blindly dashed against this embodiment of modern power the entire mississippi river was now under union control.
the confederacy had been cut in half.
lincoln made grant general in chief of all union armies.
but it would be another hard year before there was another northern victory like gettysburg or vicksburg and 2 years before the war ended.
the terrible cost of war in early 1864 grant took direct command in the east and marched into virginia to attack lee.
he quickly stalled.
in early may 1864 at the battle of the wilderness southern forces mounted a furious attack with high casualties.
neither side won the battle of the wilderness but unlike his predecessors grant pursued the confederate forces 14j p i j 14 2.
143 14 4 american voices cornelia hancock letters of cornelia hancock july 7 1863 s a young woman from a quaker family in new jersey cornelia hancock was originally rejected for service by the union army s superintendent of female nurses dorothea dix.
hancock responded by making her way on her own to the field hospital set up in the days immediately after the battle of gettysburg and once there was quickly put to work.
her letter home was written just 3 days after the battle ended.
gettysburg pa july 7th 1863 wall street half past two o clock october 13 1857 by james h cafferty and charles g rosenberg dear cousin i am very tired tonight have been on the field all day went to the 3rd division 2nd army corps.
i suppose there are about five hundred wounded belonging to it there are no words in the english language to express the sufferings i witnessed today.
the men lie on the ground their clothes have been cut off them to dress their wounds they are half naked have nothing but hardtack to eat only as sanitary commissions christian associations and so forth give them.
i was the first woman who reached the 2nd corps after the three days fight at gettysburg.
i was in the corps all day not another woman within a half mile to give you some idea of the extent and numbers of the sounds four surgeons none of whom were idle fifteen minutes of time were busy all day amputating legs and arms.
i gave to every man that had a leg or arm off a gill of wine to every wounded in the third division one glass of lemonade some bread and preserves and tobacco.
i feel very thankful that this was a successful battle the spirit of the men is so high that many of the poor fellows said today what is an arm or leg to whipping lee out of penn.
i would get on first rate if they would not ask me to write to their wives that i cannot do without crying which is not pleasant to either party.
i do not mind the sight of blood have seen limbs taken off and was not sick at all.
it is a very beautiful rolling country here under favorable circumstances i should think healthy but now for five miles around there is an awful smell of putrefaction.
women are needed here very badly anyone who is willing to go to field hospitals.
cornelia source henrietta stratton jaquette editor south after gettysburg letters of cornelia hancock 1863 1868 new york crowell 1956 pp.
16 19 reprinted in p.
robert d marcus david burner anthony marcus america firsthand readings from settlement to reconstruction sixth edition volume one boston bedford st.
martin s 2004 p 288.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what language does hancock use to make the hospital come alive for those who are reading her letter.
historical interpretation what assumptions about women of the civil war era is hancock challenging.
what assumptions might she be reinforcing.
chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 403 id 14j.
j 14 4 after the battle.
at the end of may union forces took control of the crossroads town of cold harbor virginia but confederate forces attacked and grant ordered a counterattack.
the armies fought along a line from cold harbor to the chickahominy river.
in this case even grant thought the cost too high.
wounded soldiers could not escape fires that roared through the thick undergrowth and the suffering was terrible.
he wrote in his memoirs that this attack was the only one he wished he had never ordered.
the union lost 13 000 troops to the confederate 2 500.
in spite of the terrible losses grant still did not retreat.
in june 1864 grant attacked petersburg then the second largest city in virginia and settled down for a siege.
grant telegraphed lincoln i propose to fight it out on this line if it takes all summer it was what lincoln wanted from a general.
but while grant was not retreating he was not making much progress either.
some newspapers began to call grant a butcher others just wondered if the war would ever end.
at least three factors now caused the civil wars high death toll.
lee and grant had shifted tactics from a limited war to a war of attrition.
each army meant to destroy the other killing and wounding as many soldiers as possible.
after 1863 there were no more limited engagements.
weapons were also deadlier than anything used in previous wars.
finally medicine was still in its infancy.
the wounded often died from infections that only a few years later a new generation knew how to treat.
given all three factors grieving became part of life for troops and for families at home.
before the civil war armies fought with muskets which took time to load and were not that accurate.
most military authorities in prior wars agreed that the best way to attack was in a close order formation in which a well trained army marched forward shooting reloading and shooting again.
if both sides had muskets the inaccuracy and short range of the weapons reduced the danger to any one soldier.
that strategy was what had been taught at west point where most senior officers of both the north and the south had been trained.
but the close order formation was a virtual death sentence to troops facing an army with rifles.
the new rifles developed in france and by the american james h burton at the federal armory at harpers ferry in the 1850s increased the distance that a soldier could shoot four fold and the spin a rifle gave to a bullet meant that it did a lot more damage to the human body.
by 1863 union factories developed repeating rifles that made the firepower of these weapons much faster and more deadly.
the accuracy of rifles also meant that opponents could identify officers and shoot them a reason why so many generals were killed in the war and why generals like grant began wearing privates uniforms.
the south never matched the north in weapons production and many of its new weapons were either captured or came from blockade runners.
the souths slow production of rifles was one reason it suffered more casualties than the north.
artillery also became a key defensive weapon in the civil war.
new cannons that fired grapeshot and canister rather than old fashioned cannon balls were like giant shotguns.
defending armies in the civil war could shoot down row after row of attackers.
a union cavalry officer described the results of these new weapons in combat.
in july 1862 the morning after confederate army units attacked union placements at malvern hill virginia he said our eyes saw an appalling spectacle upon the slopes down to the woodlands half a mile away.
over five thousand dead and wounded men were on the ground enough were alive and moving to give the field a singular crawling effect that result is what the new weapons of war did to people.
medicine nursing and a new role for women many of those wounded in the civil war died because of a lack of effective medical treatment.
indeed more soldiers died of diseases during the war than died in combat.
it was just after the war that european researchers louis pasteur and joseph lister developed modern bacteriology.
no civil war doctor north or south knew that 404 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 microbes in contaminated water or on hands or unsterilized instruments caused infection or that mosquitoes could be as dangerous to troops as enemy bullets.
antiseptics did not exist.
medical education was primitive.
military camps where large numbers of men lived in close and often unsanitary quarters were breeding grounds for disease.
many soldiers thought that it was better to avoid a physician than get close to one.
soldiers north and south agreed with the alabama soldier who wrote that i believe the doctors kill more than they cour cure and with the massachusetts officer who said that the regimental surgeon was a jackass to fill gaps in medical care women began to nurse the wounded and the sick.
before the war nursing had been almost exclusively mens work.
but now the men were fighting and the women were determined to aid the cause for which sons husbands and lovers were risking their lives.
in the north the united states sanitary commission became a powerful voluntary womens organization that was able to brush aside the army medical bureau and take on everything from raising money for medical supplies to providing nurses in field hospitals.
elizabeth blackwell the first american woman m d began organizing the sanitary commission in 1861 and with widespread support most of all from the troops whom its nurses aided it flourished despite hostility from male army physicians.
ihe reformer and social worker dorothea dix was named superintendent of female nurses by the end of the war dix had organized 3 000 northern women volunteers to serve as army nurses in addition to others who were paid directly by the sanitary commission.
still other women most notably clara barton who later helped create the american red cross became free agent nurses helping wherever they could.
mary ann bickerdyke began serving as a nurse at cairo illinois and followed grants and shermans armies across the south.
mother bickerdyke as the troops called her was the only woman sherman authorized to serve in his advanced base hospitals.
women in the south took up similar duties often despite greater hostility.
southern culture even more than northern treated middle class white women as in need of constant protection.
moving into a hospital as a nurse was hardly protected work and it brought women into close contact with male bodies something sanitary commission created in 1861 to improve the medical services and treatment for sick and wounded union soldiers during the course of the war.
a nil 11 q nitarv commission treats wounded union soldiers.
ann bell a young nurse with the u s sanitary lomun iu chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 405 14 4 previously thought improper.
but the sick were there and the women were determined to help.
the confederate baptist offered religious sanction for this new role for women saying that they are most valuable auxiliaries.
in spite of concerns about delicacy modesty and refinement women went to work as nurses in the south.
sara agnes pryor who had lived in omfort before the war volunteered to help in virginia hospitals.
when she saw a nurse kneeling to hold the stump of an amputated arm she fainted and thought she was wholly unfit for the work but pryor overcame her fine lady faintness and became a serious professional.
mary rutledge fogg was from one of the souths grand families in nashville and she used her status to pressure jefferson davis to allow her to start military hospitals in nashville memphis and knoxville after seeing 50 brave soldiers die for the want of proper nurses phoebe yates levy pember a 40 year old widow was named matron of the confederate hospital in richmond where she and her sisters provided for the hundreds of wounded soldiers who streamed into the confederate capital.
women nurses north and south looked to their hero florence nightingale the english woman who had virtually invented modern nursing while serving british troops in the 1853 1856 crimean war.
and like nightingale the nurses of the civil war sought to bring healing to wounded soldiers as well as comfort to the dying and those who were recovering.
presidential politics and sherman s march to the sea then north while women like pryor and barton tried to comfort the wounded soldiers fought and grant held his line in virginia it was not clear whether lincoln could hold his office.
continuing losses lack of progress at petersburg and hostility to emancipation all combined to strengthen the chances of the copperhead antiwar democrats in the 1864 presidential election.
none were more aware of this situation than the leaders of the confederacy.
lee knew he could not hold petersburg forever but he was confident that all he needed to do was hold the city until the november elections.
if grant made no progress and casualties remained high lee and davis thought that the copperhead democrats would win the election and make peace.
while the democrats grew stronger many republicans were losing heart by 1864.
congressman martin f conway a republican from kansas who had once criticized lincoln for pursuing the war too slowly now asked the president for gods sake try and arrange peace with the south.
the war spirit is gone when in august 1864 the democrats nominated general mcclellan whom lincoln had fired for being too cautious lincoln expected to be a one term president.
his only hope he wrote was to save the union between the election and the inauguration that would take place in march 1865.
then the picture on the battlefield changed dramatically see map 14 2.
when grant had come east to fight in virginia he left his closest subordinate william t sherman in charge in the west.
sherman began a march across the heart of the confederacy.
just as the mississippi river campaign had cut the confederacy in half from north to south sherman aimed to cut it in half from west to east.
slowly avoiding major confrontations and keeping a careful eye on his supply trains sherman led his army moving from tennessee across mississippi alabama and into georgia.
sherman saw little value or glory in winning battles.
he said that glory in war is all moonshine even success the most brilliant is over dead and mangled bodies with the anguish and lamentation of distant families sherman just kept maneuvering and kept marching fighting when necessary.
confederate general john bell hood tried to stop sherman before he reached atlanta an important railroad center.
in august 1864 sherman changed course and the confederate general thought sherman was retreating but sherman won the next battle on august 30.
the confederates then evacuated atlanta and burned most of 406 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 v map 14 2 major civil war battles 1863 1865.
while armies fought in pennsylvania maryland and virginia all through 1863 1864 and 1865 a union force led by william t sherman marched through the confederate states from tennessee to georgia and the carolinas.
on september 1 sherman led his troops into atlanta.
mary boykin chesnut wrote in her diary since atlanta i have felt as if all were dead within me forever.
we are going to be wiped off the earth as sherman was taking atlanta admiral farragut led a daring raid on mobile bay alabama.
confederate forts guarded the harbor and well placed mines known then as torpedoes blocked the entrance.
when the lead ship in farraguts fleet was sunk by an exploding mine the fleet stopped.
farragut in one of the wars immortal chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 407 142 142 142 14 4 phrases ordered damn the torpedoes.
full speed ahead farragut s fleet won control of mobiles harbor.
while mobile which was more inland remained in confederate hands the port which had been an essential base for confederate blockade runners was under union control by the end of august 1864 adding one more link in the union chain encircling the confederacy.
shermans taking of atlanta and farraguts victory at mobile bay were important military victories but they were also political victories for lincoln and psychological victories for the north.
lincoln grew optimistic.
secretary of state seward said sherman and farragut have knocked the bottom out of the democrats.
frederick douglass who had wanted a stronger abolitionist at the head of the 1864 republican ticket now said that all hesitation ought to cease regarding support for the president.
lincoln insisted that if he were reelected the government must be based on liberty and equality an open field and a fair chance in the race of life even the democrat nominee mcclellan shifted his tone insisting that negotiations with the south be on the basis of the union angering copperhead peace democrats who wanted peace on any terms.
in november lincoln defeated mcclellan by 2 220 846 popular votes to 1 809 445 ensuring lincoln 212 electoral votes to mcclellans 21.
after the capture of atlanta no one was sure what sherman would do next.
his supply lines were stretched to the limit.
in response sherman proposed to cut his army loose from supply lines entirely live off the land and march his 62 000 toughened troops straight through the heart of the confederacy.
lincoln and grant agreed.
there would be little armed resistance sherman argued since the confederate army was fighting in the north not protecting the confederate heartland which they presumed was safe.
sherman believed that w ar is cruelty and you cannot refine it on november 15 he started his march to the sea destroying every farm factory and railroad in his path.
troops destroyed all that the army could not eat or use.
in milledgeville georgia then the state capital shermans troops met union prisoners who had escaped from the notorious southern prison camp at andersonville.
some union prisoners at andersonville had spent years with only the barest rations and their uniforms had turned to shreds.
many died there.
the sight of these emaciated soldiers wearing rags sickened and infuriated the northern soldiers.
along the way escaping slaves and southern white unionists joined the march.
sherman captured savannah georgia on the atlantic coast in late december.
his telegram to president lincoln said i beg to present you as a christmas gift the city of savannah with 150 heavy guns and about 25 000 bales of cotton in january 1865 sherman started north through georgia and the carolinas.
his goal was to attack lees army from the south while grant attacked from the north.
sherman continued to destroy any of the souths resources for waging war including food.
when the army reached south carolina one union soldier said here is where treason began and by god here is where it shall end sherman seemed to agree and another soldier said that by the time the army was through south carolina will never want to secede again every house they encountered was burned and every village stripped of supplies.
sherman left the coast of south carolina to others and it was probably the good fortune of charleston to be occupied by troops from the unions department of the south including many black units who saved the city.
shermans army then marched inland to the states capitol of columbia which was burned to the ground.
when the army reached the north carolina border the burning stopped.
but in south carolina the march left a trail of anger and resentment that lasted for generations as it demoralized a population that was already losing faith in the war.
the road to appomattox and peace before sherman could finish his march through north carolina and into virginia other events began turning in grants favor.
as news of lincolns november reelection the capture of savannah and the destruction in south carolina began to sink in many 408 party expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 142 table 14 1 major battles of the civil war battle significance 1 fort sumter charleston south carolina april 12 13 1861 the firing on the federal garrison by confederate forces was the opening of the war.
bull run or first manassas fairfax and prince william counties virginia july 21 1861 union forces marching south from washington dc were met by confederates at bull run creek.
many northerners expected a short skirmish and then a march to richmond but the confederates turned the tide and union soldiers retreated back to washington dc.
new orleans louisiana april 23 28 1862 u s navy ships under david g farragut took new orleans the largest city in the south which remained in union hands for the duration of the war.
second battle of bull run or second manassas august 28 30 1862 the battle was a major confederate victory and ended northern hopes for an easy attack on the confederate capital.
antietam or sharpsburg washington county maryland september 16 18 1862 lee marched into maryland but was stopped in a fierce battle at antietam.
lincoln was furious that mcclellan did not pursue lee on his retreat into virginia.
fredericksburg virginia december 13 1862 union general ambrose burnside led an attack on the town as a first step toward attacking the confederate capital of richmond but was defeated by a well defended force commanded by robert e lee.
the u s army lost 13 000 troops mostly in ill conceived direct attacks while the confederates lost 5 000.
northern morale sank.
chancellorsville spotsylvania county virginia april 30 may 6 1863 a union army led by general joseph hooker was defeated by a confederate force leading to a major incursion north of the mason dixon line that threatened washington dc.
gettysburg pennsylvania july 1 3 1863 the bloodiest battle of the war led to lee s withdrawal back to virginia ending the threat to washington dc.
vicksburg mississippi may 18 july 4 1863 union troops commanded by ulysses s grant finally took control of the mississippi river from st louis to new orleans and thus cut the confederacy in half while securing easy access into the interior of the confederacy.
wilderness spotsylvania county virginia may 5 7 1864 lincoln placed grant in charge of all u s forces and grant led a bloody drive into virginia.
the first battle took place in deep woods hence the wilderness and grant unlike previous union generals simply kept going.
cold harbor virginia may 31 june 12 1864 grant attacked the confederate army and took horrible casualties.
in his memoirs grant wrote that this was the one attack he wished he had never ordered.
atlanta georgia september 2 1864 william t sherman led 62 000 troops into georgia defeating confederate forces and taking atlanta.
sherman s army then began its march to the sea taking savannah on december 21 before running north and attacking confederate forces in south and north carolina.
mobile bay alabama august 2 23 1864 u s admiral david g farragut effectively ended blockade running out of mobile depriving the south of badly needed supplies.
appomattox court house virginia april 9 1865 lee surrendered to grant.
in the south began to lose hope.
in early 1865 lee even began recruiting black soldiers with the promise of freedom for them though not the end of slavery for others.
by march 1865 lee knew his army could not stay at petersburg.
the retreat of the remaining army of northern virginia out of petersburg left richmond open to attack.
on april 2 while jefferson davis sat in sunday morning services in richmond a messenger gave him a telegram.
many in the congregation chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 409 142 142 14 4 14 1 14 j 143 14 4 thought they knew what it meant when davis slipped out.
all sunday afternoon the leaders of the confederate government moved out of richmond taking what records gold and materials they could and burning the rest.
by evening mobs had replaced the government.
the next morning the union army marched into richmond not to burn the city but to put out the fires that the retreating confederates had started.
the day after that president lincoln with only a small guard of sailors came to richmond sat at daviss old desk and greeted former slaves who were shouting glory to god and bless the lord when one former slave knelt at lincolns feet the president said dont kneel to me.
that is not right davis fled south from richmond to danville where he announced that nothing is now needed to render our triumph certain but our own unquenchable resolve but resolve was melting.
lees troops were weak from lack of food.
he tried one last attack on april 9 and when that failed sent word to grant that he was ready to surrender.
the two generals grant and lee met in wilmer mcleans living room in appomattox virginia that afternoon.
grant remembered the encounter.
we soon fell into a conversation about old army times our conversation grew so pleasant that i almost forgot the object of our meeting but when lee turned back to the matter at hand grant wrote out the terms of surrender.
he allowed the confederate soldiers to keep their horses and mules with them to help in planting crops for the year ahead and lee noted that this would have a happy effect the first union troops to arrive in richmond on april 4 1865 looked on a city in ruins.
410 partv expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 explore the civil war on myhistorylab what brought the united states to the civil war.
by 1860 the united states was divided between north and south a divergence centered on the issue of slavery.
other elements however also separated the two sides.
the south was mostly agricultural and rural compared to the far more urbanized and industrialized north.
by 1861 the two sides were in the civil war as 11 southern states had seceded as the confederacy.
a bloody conflict ensued that lasted until 1865 and cost more american lives than any other u s war before or since.
the union eventually won bolstered by its economic advantages but only after the deaths of 752 000 men.
union soldiers pose with a captured confederate cannon.
resources of the union and the confederacy 1861 industrial workers factories railroad tracks miles union 1 300 000 110 000 22 000 confederacy 110 000 1 800 9 000 union ml confederacy source multiple sources inter university consortium for political and social research icpsr studies 2896.
archive icpsr q historicaf economic data united states railroads and the making of modern america digital history project university of nebraska lincoln.
inter university consortium for political and social research q historical economic data united states key questions use myhistorylab explorer to answer these questions comparison how did the south s population density contrast to that of the north.
map area data based on census information.
response where were the major civil war battles fought.
consider different regional strategies that affected military campaigns.
analysis how did the north win the battle of gettysburg.
examine the course of this decisive battle.
chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 411 14 4 grant arranged for lees starving army to receive military rations.
at 4 30 p m grant telegraphed secretary of war stanton that general lee surrendered the army of northern virginia this afternoon the long and terrible war essentially over.
grant wrote of a sense of sadness at the downfall of a foe who had fought so long and valiantly and had suffered so much for a cause though that cause was i believe one of the worst for which a people ever fought lees surrender did not quite end the war.
jefferson davis fled south hoping to regroup his government perhaps in texas until he was captured in georgia on may 10.
he was held in custody for 2 years at fortress monroe before being released on bail.
davis was indicted for treason but the charges were never pressed although he was barred from ever holding a federal office again.
during the next 2 decades he tried various business ventures and wrote his defense of the cause he had led.
isolated confederate units carried on the fight in remote areas especially texas until may.
but after the april 9 surrender at appomattox almost everyone knew that the war was over.
washington dc was draped with flags people fired salutes embraced and sang.
soldiers on both sides found their weary way home.
those in the north were welcomed with grand parades most of those in the south simply made it home.
lincoln s legacy on january 31 1865 even before lees surrender the house of representatives voted 119 to 56 to add a thirteenth amendment to the constitution neither slavery nor involuntary servitude except as a punishment for a crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted shall exist within the united states or any place subject to their jurisdiction.
the floor of the house and visitors watching in the gallery erupted into cheers and applause.
many of those in the gallery were african americans people who had not been even admitted to the house gallery until 1864.
the senate and the states quickly followed and the amendment became part of the constitution on december 18 1865.
the war that began over slavery ended with its abolition in every part of the united states.
after visiting richmond virginia on april 4 and 5 and receiving the news of lees surrender on april 9 president lincoln gave what came to be known as his last speech at the white house on april 11 1865.
of course he did not know it was to be his last.
reviewing the presidents speech the new york world said mr.
lincoln gropes like a traveler in an unknown country without a map in fact the administration the congress and the country were all groping to find their way through several extraordinarily difficult issues as the civil war ended.
among the most contentious were those related to defining the rights of newly freed slaves did they have the right to vote.
did they have other political rights.
did they have a right to some of the land they had worked for so long.
there were equally contentious arguments about the rights of the former confederate states had they actually left the union in which case did they needed to be readmitted perhaps after a time as territories.
or had they never left the union in which case could they could simply renew their place in the country and make their own laws.
no one really knew the answers or how to get answers.
as lincoln said on april 11 unlike a case of a war between independent nations there is no authorized organ for us to treat with.
no one man has authority to give up the rebellion for any other man.
we simply must begin with and mold from disorganized and discordant elements lincoln also called the question of whether the confederate states had left the union a pernicious abstraction he did not want to debate whether the 12 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 v thinking historically abraham lincoln second inaugural address 1865 as lincoln took the oath of office for the second time everyone knew that the civil war was about to end.
no one of course knew that the president had only weeks to live.
but it was the occasion of one of the most memorable speeches in american history.
lincoln said on the occasion corresponding to this four years ago all thoughts were anxiously directed to an impending civil war.
all dreaded it all sought to avert it both parties deprecated war but one of them would make war rather than let the nation survive and the other would accept war rather than let it perish.
and the war came.
one eighth of the whole population were colored slaves not distributed generally over the union but localized in the southern part of it.
these slaves constituted a peculiar and powerful interest.
all knew that this interest was somehow the cause of the war.
to strengthen perpetuate and extend this interest was the object for which the insurgents would rend the union even by war while the government claimed no right to do more than to restrict the territorial enlargement of it.
neither party expected for the war the magnitude or the duration which it has already attained.
neither anticipated that the cause of the conflict might cease with or even before the conflict itself should cease.
each looked for an easier triumph and a result less fundamental and astounding.
both read the same bible and pray to the same god and each invokes his aid against the other.
it may seem strange that any men should dare to ask a just god s assistance in wringing their bread from the sweat of other men s faces but let us judge not that we be not judged.
the prayers of both could not be answered that of neither has been answered fully fondly do we hope fervently do we pray that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away.
yet if god wills that it continue until all the wealth piled by the bond man s two hundred and fifty years of unrequited toil shall be sunk and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash shall be paid by another drawn with the sword as was said three thousand years ago so still it must be said the judgments of the lord are true and righteous altogether.
with malice toward none with charity for all with firmness in the right as god gives us to see the right let us strive on to finish the work we are in to bind up the nation s wounds to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his widow and his orphan to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations.
source congressional globe march 4 1865 senate 39th congress 4th session pp.
thinking critically 1.
historical interpretation what does this speech tell you about lincoln s views on the root causes of the war.
was his interpretation universally accepted.
historical interpretation what sort of postwar reconstruction do you think lincoln had in mind with his with malice toward none with charity for all with firmness in the right statement.
does it offer any hint of the possible nature of reconstruction under lincoln.
in states had really left the union and therefore needed to be readmitted or whether they had simply been in rebellion and therefore with the end of the rebellion were back in their old places.
the issue for him he said was much simpler we all agree that the seceded states so called are out of their proper practical relation with the union and that the sole object of the government civil and military in regard to those states is to again get them into that proper practical relation in fact the issue was not so simple.
if the states had actually left the union then congress could impose conditions on their readmission such as granting blacks the right to vote.
if they had never left then it was more difficult to impose such conditions.
in april 1865 lincoln began to give more attention to the postwar era.
some thought he had decided that guaranteeing former slaves the right to vote should be a key element in the integration of the confederate states back into the union but he did not announce his policy.
on the morning of april 14 he met with the cabinet to discuss what he was now calling reconstruction he directed secretary chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 413 of war stanton to develop military districts and temporary military governments across the south to avoid anarchy and supervise a return to civilian rule.
those at the meeting remembered that lincoln said the agenda had shifted from the war to a new set of peacetime issues on which we must soon begin to act but lincoln would not be the one doing the acting.
that same evening the president and his wife attended a play at fords theater.
he was shot by john wilkes booth who had become convinced that lincoln was indeed going to give former slaves the right to vote.
early the next morning lincoln died.
as april 1865 ended the country was in mourning and it was at peace and no one knew what the future held.
14 4 quick review how was the violence of the civil war different from other wars in which the united states was involved.
conclusion when the civil war began in 1861 people north and south hoped for and expected a short and limited war but it was not to be.
four years of terrible violence would follow.
when the first calls for troops were issued enthusiastic young men signed up for service in the union and confederate armies anxious not to miss out on the adventure and glory that they were sure would come in a short and easy war.
but attitudes changed quickly.
in the first significant battle of the war at bull run creek near manassas virginia in july 1861 tourists from washington dc accompanied union forces to watch what they were sure would be an easy victory.
but in spite of early predictions confederate forces turned the tide and the union army and their visitors were quickly driven back to the relative safety of the nations capital.
in spite of early successes by the u s navy in blockading many southern ports and in opening up portions of the mississippi river to union forces president lincoln soon became convinced that the nation was in for a long and bloody war and began looking for a general who had the tenacity to lead troops to a convincing victory.
but through 1861 1862 and 1863 in spite of bloody battles a second one at bull run in august 1862 followed by the bloodiest day of the war at antietam maryland that september further battles at fredericksburg virginia in december then chancellorsville virginia in april 1863 and gettysburg pennsylvania that july the war seemed to have no conclusive end in sight.
battles took place as far away as missouri new mexico and minnesota some with western indian tribes angry at expanding white settlement and some between northern and southern sympathizers.
many north and south began to lose hope.
in the north peace democrats soon calling themselves copperheads began to campaign for an end to the war and for letting the south go its own way.
the new york draft riots of july 1863 illustrated the way many white immigrants in that city had little interest in fighting a war and indeed blamed local blacks whom they attacked across the city for causing their troubles.
at the same time in the south starvation spread and southern cities including the confederate capital of richmond virginia were wracked with bread riots.
while others debated however black and white abolitionists knew exactly what they wanted from the war an end to slavery everywhere in the united states.
from the earliest days of the war abolitionists had urged lincoln to use his war powers to free all slaves and some like the former slave frederick douglass insisted that the 414 partv expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 only terms on which the war could be won and the nation united was the complete abolition of the institution of slavery that had led to war in the first place.
finally in the fall of 1862 after more than a year of caution president lincoln decided to act and on january 1 1863 signed the emancipation proclamation freeing all slaves in the rebellious states and calling on former slaves to enlist in the union army.
former slaves who had been flocking to union posts now joined the army and quickly attained equality with white soldiers as well as a reputation for valor that impressed many.
still the war itself continued.
women north and south became nurses a previously all male profession to help the wounded and suffering soldiers.
in 1863 after the union armys victory at vicksburg on the mississippi river lincoln selected ulysses s grant after searching for a general who had the determination to do what had to be done to win the war.
grant began a series of attacks on confederate forces in virginia in an effort to both defeat the main body of the confederate army and take the confederate capital of richmond.
at the same time grants former deputy william t sherman began a march across the south from the mississippi river to atlanta georgia and then a march to the sea that captured the port city of savannah georgia in december 1864.
as 1865 began shermans army turned north marching through the carolinas to attack virginia from the south while grants army had new victories in virginia.
finally on april 9 1865 the main confederate army commanded by robert e lee surrendered to grant.
ihe civil war was over.
days later president lincoln who was just beginning to turn his attention to what might come next was assassinated.
the rebuilding of the country would be in other hands.
did that style of waging war chapter the civil war became a war of attrition.
how contribute to the union victory.
chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 415 chapter 14 chapter review fort sumter to antietam 1861 1862 14 1 explain how the early battles of the war shaped future events.
review questions 1.
contextualization what lessons did each side take away from the first battle of bull run.
comparison compare and contrast the strategies of the north and the south in the first 2 years of the war.
how did each sides strategy reflect its strengths and weaknesses.
historical interpretation how important was union naval supremacy to the norths eventual victory.
143 the home front shortages opposition riots and battles explain how the war s death toll and civilian shortages affected life north and south during the war.
review questions 7.
cause and effect how did financial problems undermine the southern war effort.
historical interpretation how did southern women contribute to the war effort.
how did the war change the role of women in southern society.
comparison compare and contrast the northern and southern home fronts.
how would explain the changes you note.
14 2 the road to emancipation analyze how the war influenced attitudes toward slavery in white and black communities leading to the emancipation proclamation and to black soldiers in the union army.
review questions 4.
contextualization how would you explain lincolns initial reluctance to link the war to the abolition of slavery.
historical interpretation what light does the union response to escaped slaves shed on the diversity of opinion about slavery in the north.
chronological reasoning how did lincolns views on emancipation evolve over the course of the war.
how would you explain the changes you note.
14 4 from gettysburg to appomattox and beyond analyze the strategies and costs of fighting a long and terrible war.
review questions 10.
constructing arguments defend or refute the following statement after the union victories at gettysburg and vicksburg in july 1863 the eventual defeat of the confederacy was all but certain what evidence can you produce to support your position.
comparison how did union strategy change after grant was given overall command.
recognizing cause and effect what factors contributed to the extraordinarily high death toll during the civil war.
historical interpretation reread lincolns second inaugural address.
to what forces does lincoln attribute the war.
contextualization what did freedom mean to frederick douglass.
what rights and responsibilities did it entail.
416 partv expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 v this popular picture drawn by a h ward for harper s weekly in november 1867 illustrated the prime meaning of reconstruction for many african americans whether former slaves or former soldiers in the union army.
the end of slavery brought for the moment the right to vote.
for those who had been enslaved it was a day of freedom.
they celebrated as others had done.
houston h holloway a slave sold three times before his 20th birthday recalled the day emancipation came to georgia i felt like a bird out of a cage the week passed off in a blaze of glory six weeks later holloway and his wife celebrated the birth of a new baby and received my free born son into the world.
for some former slaves nothing mattered more than getting away from their old plantations.
they moved short distances to be with friends and family or great distances to louisiana indian territory or the north.
for others the news that they could now be wage earning employees on the same plantations where they had previously worked without pay was the best option available.
whatever their situation and regardless of their previous status emancipation changed every aspect of life for all people of the united states.
chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the development and decline of reconstruction.
federal reconstruction policy explain the political development of federal reconstruction policy.
the impact of reconstruction explain the impact of reconstruction on african american life in the south.
terror apathy and the creation of the segregated south analyze the reasons reconstruction ended and the impact of redemption.
chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 537 social darwinism the application of charles darwin s theory of biological evolution to society holding that the fittest and the wealthiest should thrive and lead the weak and the poor deserve their fate and government action is unable to alter this natural process.
the professors john dewey is best remembered for his educational ideas but his goal was a wider philosophical response to industrialism.
dewey was born in 1859 in a small town in vermont studied philosophy at johns hopkins university and taught at the university of michigan.
in 1894 dewey was invited to the new university of chicago.
dewey accepted the offer with enthusiasm.
chicago in the 1890s was the center of social reform in which dewey and his wife alice chapman dewey were deeply interested.
when it came time to make the move however dewey had a hard time getting to chicago.
when dewey set out for chicago in july 1894 most of the nations rail lines were shut down because of the pullman strike.
he found transit on a michigan central train that did not use pullman cars.
traveling in the midst of a nationwide strike was informative to the young philosophy professor.
he spoke with one of the american railway union organizers and wrote to his wife that my nerves were more thrilled than they had been for years he wondered if i had better resign my job teaching follow him round till i got into life dewey was considerably less impressed by another passenger who was voluble on the outrage of the strike because it was preventing him from getting home for dinner.
for dewey the focus was on higher considerations.
young intellectuals like dewey were then challenging the dominant economic theory of the time social darwinism the foremost american exponent of social darwinism the economist william graham sumner opposed what he called the absurd effort to make the world over for sumner charles darwins description of biological evolution showed that the fittest of each species survive and thus shape the future.
so sumner argued in the social order the fittest were rightfully the owners and the dominant class of society.
those less fit are condemned by their natural un fitness to be laborers and employees.
any interference with the system sumner argued would destabilize the economy and weaken the nation.
herbert spencer a british writer proposed similar ideas coining the phrase survival of the fittest he too had a large following in the united states especially among the wealthy.
dewey saw the ideas of spencer and sumner as easy but unethical justifications for privilege.
instead dewey believed that wise people could and should intervene in the economy to make it more just.
his thinking was shared by a generation of philosophers including william james charles s peirce and future supreme court justice oliver wendell holmes who in the 1880s and 1890s doubted all ideological certainties and certainly did not want to see social darwinism become the dominant mindset in society.
another young scholar richard ely at johns hopkins university also attacked the social darwinists.
ely had visited the town of pullman before the strike and noticed that workers would not talk to him fearing that he was a spy.
he called the towns culture benevolent well wishing feudalism as a counter to social darwinism ely was developing a very different economic theory that allowed for indeed called for government to intervene directly in the economic affairs of the country.
while dewey focused on philosophy and ely on economics albion small was helping to build the new academic discipline of sociology.
for small sociologists did not simply study society they meant to reform it.
in 1896 small sought to help define his field when he wrote in the new american journal of sociology that action not speculation is the supreme teacher dewey ely and small were all part of a generation of academics who shared the goal of changing society.
the muckraking journalists although newspapers had been important in the united states since well before the american revolution newspapers changed significantly in the late 1800s.
when joseph pulitzer bought the new york evening world in 1887 he made it the largest circulation paper in the country with several innovations banner headlines comic strips and investigative journalism.
the world did an expose of the speculative adventures of the managers of the equitable life assurance society which the paper said were 538 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 gambling with the peoples money.
public anger over this news of the insurance industrys excesses led to the election of a reforming republican charles evans hughes as governor of new york in 1906 and to new regulations on the insurance industry.
in addition the huge response to the expose made the world a very successful paper.
almost a decade later william randolph hearst who had used the pulitzer formula for his san francisco examiner exposes of the southern pacific railroad purchased the new york morning journal to compete directly with pulitzer.
hearst hired some of the countrys best reporters edward markham ambrose bierce and winifred black and published his own exposes of new york city corruption.
many other newspapers began to imitate pulitzer and hearst.
the trend toward investigative reporting to expose misconduct of important people or organizations was emerging even before pulitzer and hearst took advantage of it.
henry demarest lloyd who wrote for chicago newspapers became one of the first of the so called muckraking journalists.
the term muckraking referred to the job of raking through filth.
muckraking journalists saw it as their duty to expose the filth of corruption.
not everyone liked the new investigative journalism and those who objected included more than just those being investigated.
president theodore roosevelt thought the journalists described problems but failed to offer solutions.
it was roosevelt who coined the term muckrakers.
he said the journalists were simply raking up the muck from the bottom of societys pond and the name muckraker stuck.
for many however it became a term of respect.
early in his career lloyd covered the 1877 railroad strike.
he wrote that if something did not happen to improve the lot of the countrys workers the country will drift into a convulsion as much greater than the convulsion that wrecked the roman empire lloyds 1881 expose of standard oil company and his 1894 book wealth against commonwealth denounced the monopolies as a threat to the welfare of everyday people.
hearst also launched cosmopolitan magazine as a vehicle for investigative journalism.
in 1893 s s mcclure launched mcclure s magazine which until 1926 was the muckraking journalists journalism exposing economic social and political evils so named by theodore roosevelt for its raking the muck from the bottom of american society.
the jungle by muckraking journalist upton sinclair exposed the inhumane and unhealthy conditions of meat processing in chicago.
one result was typical of progressive legislation designed to improve peop es lives the pure food and drug act which regulated the meatpacking industry.
chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 539 leader in the investigative field.
investigative journalists writing with the conviction that if people knew more of what was wrong in society they would act to change it played a key role in the progressive movement.
ihe january 1903 issue of mcclure s included articles by ida m tarbell as part of her continuing analysis of john d rockefeller and the standard oil company later published as the history of the standard oil company in 1904 ray stannard baker s report of visiting striking coal miners and their families and the report by lincoln steffens on ihe shame of minneapolis about the trial of the infamous four term mayor of minneapolis who got rich from payments from opium joints unlicensed saloons known as blind pigs and disorderly houses of prostitution.
issue after issue of mcclure s cosmopolitan and daily newspapers were forcing cities to clean up corruption compelling sometimes reluctant legislators to enact new restrictions on monopolies and helping political reformers gain office.
in 1906 a young reporter named upton sinclair took a job in chicagos slaughterhouses to report from the inside on the meatpacking industry.
he found a world where workers suffered terrible injury animals suffered inhumane treatment and unsanitary conditions poisoned the meat consumed by americans.
when sinclairs expose the jungle was published in 1906 the public response was immediate.
consumption of meat fell precipitously and within months congress passed the federal meat inspection act and the pure food and drug act regulating the meat industry as well as the food and drug industries.
while sinclairs main goal had been to draw attention to inhumane working conditions the primary result of his efforts was sanitary regulation of meatpacking plants.
as sinclair reflected years later i aimed at the publics heart and by accident i hit it in the stomach nevertheless the passage of reform legislation within months of a sinclairs book showed the power of such reporting and at the same time raised journalism to new heights as a respectable profession.
quick review which was more important to launching the progressive movement the theory behind it or the identification of specific problems.
the transformation of the cities analyze the changes in urban life that inspired progressive reforms and the impact of those reforms on cities.
the united states grew from a little under 40 million people in 1870 to just over 75 million people in 1900 for comparison the 2010 census showed the united states at over 300 million people.
perhaps one third of the growth between 1870 and 1910 was due to immigration and two thirds to a high birth rate.
while the population almost doubled it also became concentrated in cities.
many of the nations cities were much larger and more densely populated in 1900 than they had been in 1870 when the majority of people still lived on farms and in rural communities.
in 1870 the united states had only seven cities with over 250 000 people and none yet held a million people.
thirty years later three cities had passed the 1 million mark new york with 3 4 million chicago with 1 7 million and philadelphia with 1 3 million.
ihere were also dozens of large cities scattered among most of the states and territories of the union.
americans were adjusting to urban life and the adjustment was not always easy.
the rise of machine politics and the progressive response as cities grew a new kind of urban politics took root in the united states shaped by the fact that cities were the major points of entry for new immigrants to the nation.
many immigrants desperately needed services especially help with a job.
some took quickly to city political life finding in politics a way to gain social respectability.
part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 nowhere was the mix of urban growth immigration and the need for new services greater than in new york city.
within that mix in new york a new kind of political organization the political machine was created.
in political machines constituents supported a candidate in return for anticipated favors which would be repaid when that candidate was elected.
new yorks democratic political machine was known as tammany hall named for the building where it first met.
tammany effectively ruled new york for most of the years from the 1850s to the 1930s.
many other urban political machines were often associated with irish political leaders but tammany predated the irish influence.
in fact gaining access to tammany was part of the irish rise to power in new york city.
the most famous or infamous of early tammany bosses was william m boss tweed who led tammany in the 1860s and 1870s.
tweed was a protestant of english background.
after holding the office of alderman city council member and then being elected to congress tweed turned to where he saw the real power in tammany.
in 1863 at the age of 40 tweed became the chief of tammany.
he made sure one of his close allies abraham oakley was elected mayor while he stayed in the background and kept control of the political process.
tweed became immensely wealthy as he and his tammany associates benefited from some said stole from development projects like the tweed courthouse in lower manhattan now the home of the citys school department and riverside park built over the new york central railroad tracks beautiful municipal improvements that provided jobs but cost many times what they should have with large kickbacks going to the chosen developers and to tweed himself.
tweed and the new york political bosses who came after him robbed the city shamelessly by one estimate taking 45 million dollars 1 billion in current dollars.
at the same time the political machine made sure that the citys poor or more specifically those among the citys poor who supported them on election day got jobs when they needed them.
when necessary tammany created more jobs than the city needed tammany hall new york city s democratic party organization dating from well before the civil war that evolved into a powerful political machine after 1860 using patronage and bribes to maintain control of the city administration.
political cartoons like this one showing a corrupt political boss handing out special privileges and demanding votes in return did much to turn public opinion against machine rule in politics.
chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 5 to be sure that every loyal voter got one even if that meant that the city had 20 inspectors for its four water pumps and central and riverside parks were kept immaculate by an impressively large number of park workers.
tammany and other political machines could also be counted on for more direct aid when it was needed a handout to tide a family over a rough spot a basket of food for the holidays someone to show up at court and indicate to the judge or district attorney when charges should be dropped.
tweeds corruption was attacked by the cartoonist thomas nast and eventually provoked a public backlash.
tweed was arrested convicted of theft and died in jail in 1878.
some of his collaborators fled the country.
but tammany survived and the new leader john honest john kelly was the first of a long line of irish politicians to direct tammany.
kelly avoided the kind of theft that led to tweed s downfall.
but he did ensure that a tightly organized political machine maintained close links to immigrant communities and catholic parishes as well as local and district bosses.
kelly controlled the citys 40 000 jobs and made sure that loyal tammany supporters those who remembered to vote the tammany ticket on election day got those jobs.
one of tammanys district leaders george washington plunkitt was also a state senator.
in 1905 plunkitt described how new york politics worked.
he said that reformers failed to draw the distinction between honest graft and dishonest graft.
theres all the difference in the world between the two plunkitt would have nothing to do with dishonest graft blackmailin gamblers saloon keepers disorderly people etc but there was another way he said theres honest graft and im an example of how it works.
i might sum up the whole thing by sayin t seen my opportunities and i took em he explained well im tipped off say that theyre going to lay out a new park at a certain place 1 go to that place and i buy up all the land i can in the neighborhood aint it perfectly honest to charge a good price and make a profit on my investment and foresight it was an arrangement that plunkitt saw no reason to hide.
reformers might not have liked it but that was how cities worked in plunkitts day.
new york was far from alone in the rise of machine politics that was often irish dominated.
most large cities had something similar.
politics in boston was played at the neighborhood level where a number of legendary figures patrick j kennedy in east boston john f honey fitz fitzgerald in the north end p j.
maguire and later james michael curley in roxbury and most powerful of all martin lomasney in the west end each ruled their neighborhood.
in 1905 fitzgerald won election as mayor.
he served two terms and was succeeded by his arch rival james m curley who dominated boston politics for the next half century.
fitzgeralds favorite daughter rose married patrick kennedys son joseph and their son john fitzgerald kennedy became the first irish catholic elected president.
while the political machines met real needs for their poor and working class constituents and along the way made a few of their leaders very wealthy the closed door deals the graft honest or dishonest and the political favoritism dismayed many.
the political machines greatly increased the cost of municipal government.
they also shut many out of office especially the children and grandchildren of the native born elite who thought it was their duty and destiny to rule.
a new generation of political reformers began challenging the political machines making municipal reform an important element in the progressive agenda.
the progressive challenge to city and state government progressive reformers believed that the countrys political and economic systems could be fixed if honest people of good will put their minds to it.
they had little interest in radical reforms like socialism and little sympathy for the old line politicians like bostons martin lomasney.
they were what they said they were reformers trying to reform current structures of government.
in their campaigns for efficient urban management progressive reformers sometimes came across as cold and heartless to residents who preferred the part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 542 american voices lincoln steffens boston 1915 1908 lincoln steffens one of the leading muckraking journalists was invited to support a reform effort in boston called boston 1915 by local businessmen in 1908.
boston taught steffens some important lessons about not only the role of political machines but also the place of reformers like himself in the life of the urban poor.
my sponsor e a filene called together a group of earnest representative men some of them reformers not all i asked them who was the worst the most impossible man in boston.
martin lomasney they said all in quick agreement.
a politician he was and the next morning early i took my little dog mickey sweeney and went over in the bad wards where martin lomasney was the boss who do you want.
he demanded.
martin lomasney.
that s me he said.
who are you.
i told him.
sure he said.
i ve read your stuff.
what do you want.
the reformers sent me to you i asked them who was the worst man in town and they named you.
so i ve come to get the low down on things and will you give it to me.
you must want something martin grumbled at me yes i said.
police graft.
what do you do about the petty crooks.
he was cross or he pretended to be.
what do you mean by petty crooks.
oh you know the dips the burglars and thieves the regular professional crooks that we honest grafters call criminals.
and what do you mean by what i do about them.
well you go to the front for them don t you.
see the dis trict attorney or a judge or the cops you get them off don t you.
yes i do he said dropping his feet and facing me with three fingers thrust under my nose.
three times.
ah now don t you sometimes do it four times.
he was defying me.
seven times.
martin don t you even get em off seventy times seven times.
yes i do he burst.
i never quit some of em not the way you do.
of course i said.
you stick but tell me how do you justify it to yourself saving these hopeless crooks over and over and over again when you know they ll come back and do it over and over and over again.
i did not expect him to answer this question.
it was more of an exclamation on my part but he did answer it inarticulate people can sometimes express themselves.
i think said martin lomasney that there s got to be in every ward somebody that any bloke can come to no matter what he s done and get help.
help you understand none of your law and your justice but help.
that hit me hard and we got no further that day.
they provided help and counsel and a hiding place in emergencies for friendless men women and children who were in dire need who were in guilty need with the mob of justice after them.
and as i sat there and thought i saw that if we were to build up in boston an organization to replace the political machine and so win the town the loyalty that now went to the boss and his party we must provide for that service.
source lincoln steffens the autobiography of lincoln steffens new york the literary guild 1931 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what did lincoln steffens and the men who invited him to boston think about the way that martin lomasney ran his ward in boston.
what did lomasney think of the reformers.
historical interpretation how did lomasney justify his politics.
what do his justifications suggest about the challenges faced by the reformers who hoped to supplant him.
face to face dealings of old style political bosses.
moreover in their desire to cut costs some reformers attacked services that others thought essential.
progressive reform was also seen sometimes accurately as an effort by an older protestant and native born elite to reclaim power from more recent immigrant groups especially the irish who had built up their own political organizations.
nevertheless candidates committed to cleaning up urban corruption and providing more efficient urban services came to power in a number of cities.
progressive reform cut across the political parties.
republicans and democrats alike included both reformers and those who resisted reform.
chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics initiative procedure by which citizens can introduce a subject for legislation usually through a petition signed by a specific number of voters.
referendum submission of a law proposed or already in effect to a direct popular vote for approval or rejection.
recall the process of removing an official from office by popular vote usually after using petitions to call for such a vote.
grover cleveland was elected mayor of buffalo new york as a democrat in 1881 with a promise to clean up the municipal corruption.
cleveland established a reputation for honesty especially after he rejected a street cleaning contract approved by the city council as a bare faced impudent and shameless scheme clevelands honesty led to his election as a reform governor of new york and only 2 years later to the presidency and the white house.
hazen s pingree was elected mayor of detroit michigan as a republican reformer.
born in maine in 1840 pingree served in the union army then moved to detroit where he went to work in a shoe factory and by the 1880s owned one of the largest shoe manufacturers in the midwest.
in 1889 republican business leaders determined to oust detroits democratic machine sought out pingree who quickly took to politics was a tough campaigner and became a popular mayor.
pingree challenged the awarding of city contracts for the schools ferries toll roads and street and sewer services.
when the private city railway company wanted a long term contract pingree forced them to cut fares from 5 cents to 3 cents a significant benefit to detroits citizens.
when the depression of 1893 put 25 000 of detroits 250 000 people out of work pingree who did not want to increase municipal spending convinced owners of vacant lots to allow the city to use them provided seeds and farm implements to the unemployed and urged people all over the city to start their own potato patches and vegetable plots.
in time he became known as potato patch pingree for his efforts.
samuel m jones known as golden rule jones served as mayor of toledo ohio from 1897 until 1904.
jones started work as a day laborer but eventually started his own oil company.
when jones sold the company to standard oil he emerged a rich man.
reform minded business leaders nominated jones for mayor in toledo in an effort to dislodge a corrupt machine.
jones spent municipal funds freely opening kindergartens building parks and instituting an 8 hour day for city workers.
he also called on voters to renounce political parties believing that a nonpartisan approach to politics would work best.
the republican party unhappy with joness free spending ways refused to renominate him but he was elected as an independent and continued to serve as a popular mayor until his death.
his successor in office brand whitlock continued his policies through four terms until president woodrow wilson appointed whitlock as u s ambassador to belgium on the eve of world war i.
between them jones and whitlock gave toledo a national reputation for good government and effective public services when many cities were still mired in corruption and inefficiency.
other cities were also known for their progressive mayors including san franciscos james d phelan 1897 1902 and clevelands tom lofton johnson 1899 1909.
grover cleveland and hazen s pingree both moved from the mayors office to become governor of their states.
the move was not merely upward political mobility.
many progressive reformers became convinced that legislation at the state level was essential to limit the power of corporations or corrupt urban machines.
other state reforms became core progressive issues especially proposals for initiative referendum and recall measures aimed at limiting the power of political elites by giving voters the chance to change government policy.
south dakota in the 1890s oregon in 1902 and then other states especially in the west began adopting these measures.
initiative laws allowed voters to put new laws on the ballot through a petition process while a referendum allowed a similar process to review legislation already in force in a state.
finally recall petitions and votes allowed voters to remove public officials legislators mayors governors from office before their terms ended.
never as popular east of the mississippi as in the west initiative referendum and recall were typical progressive measures based on the same assumption that drove muckraking journalists an educated and informed public would do the right thing once the right information was in hand.
governors and legislatures also adopted other reforms in the progressive era.
workers who were injured on the job had been left on their own or blamed for accidents but progressives passed workers compensation laws.
some passed limits on 544 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 this young pittsburgh miner lost his leg in a mine accident.
referring to people like this worker helped progressives pass worker s compensation laws.
the length of the work day especially for women and tried to regulate the safety of working conditions.
reform came to new york city by a different route.
seth low the president of columbia university was elected mayor of new york as an anti tammany candidate in 1901.
he fought graft and instituted civil service reform but low was not popular especially in communities that depended on tammany and he was defeated for reelection 2 years later.
at that point new york was back in tammany hands and tammanys boss charles murphy was also the most powerful politician in the state although he held no office.
after state elections in 1910 however murphy launched his own reform efforts.
he selected two tammany loyalists who were among the youngest and newest in the legislature 33 year old robert f wagner in the senate and 38 year old alfred e smith in the house to be the party leaders.
wagner and smith were known as the tammany twins in their long political careers they were also among the most important reformers in american history.
after the triangle factory fire in 1911 see chapter 18 murphy knew they had to do something or lose the support of families who had lost so many daughters and sons in the fire.
murphy directed wagner and smith to sponsor the creation of the new york factory investigating commission which the legislature approved within 3 months.
where tammany controlled police officers had harassed striking garment workers only months before the tammany created factory investigating commission hired some of the same strikers to investigate conditions in the citys garment industries where they found unsafe and unworkable fire escapes and locked exits.
a social worker frances perkins who had witnessed the triangle fire was one of many to volunteer her services to the factory investigating commission.
perkins also wrote much of the legislation that came from the commissions work.
in the 2 years wagner and smith working closely with perkins pushed 36 measures through the new york legislature including those requiring sprinklers in high rise buildings fire drills in large shops unlocked exits and a reorganization of the state department of labor to enforce the new regulations.
later these new yorkers would bring progressive legislation to a national stage.
frances perkins served as the head of the state s department of labor and then from 1933 to 1945 as the u s secretary of labor the first woman to serve in a chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 19 1 j j 19 2 w presidential cabinet.
robert wagner went to washington as a u s.
senator where he sponsored legislation creating the social security system and legislation guaranteeing unemployment insurance and workers compensation.
in addition he sponsored the wagner act which gave labor unions the right to bargain effectively the most important piece of labor legislation enacted in the united states in the 1900s.
al smith served as a progressive governor of new york in the 1920s and as the democratic nominee for u s president in 1928 the first catholic nominated by a major party.
progressive reform had influenced one of the most powerful political machines tammany and in turn tammany had cultivated powerfully effective legislators who generated historic reforms.
progressive education in 1899 john dewey wrote the school and society describing what he thought a progressive approach to education should be one that he had tried to create with his wife alice chapman dewey and ella flagg young a chicago teacher leader who would later be superintendent of schools in chicago the first woman to lead a big city system.
together they opened the laboratory school at the university of chicago in 1896 a child centered approach.
for dewey and others the focus was not on structure at all but on the child.
these child centered progressives wanted to shift the emphasis in schools from the curriculum to the needs of the child.
progressive education meant many different things to different people and dewey represented only one aspect of it.
other educators who also called themselves progressives argued bitterly with him.
for some progressive education meant reorganizing schools to be more business like with centralized administrations and bureaucratic top down modes of decision making.
progressive teachers wanted to restructure schools to give themselves more voice and more influence while also earning better pay and teaching smaller classes.
for yet others the goal was to make education scientific and to use standardized testing to improve schools.
certainly in the field of education there were many movements that called themselves progressive and no one definition fit all of them.
jane addams and the settlement house movement jane addams 1860 1935 spent all of her adult life at hull house in chicago living among the city s poor.
she not only provided social services but also learned much from her neighbors.
in 1913 when jane addams had been living at hull house on halsted street in chicago for more than 20 years she summed up her belief about the role of the settlement house and all efforts to improve society.
we have learned to say she wrote that the good must be extended to all of society before it can be held secure by any one person or any one class but we have not yet learned to add to that statement that unless all men and all classes contribute to a good we cannot even be sure it is worth having while many progressives might have agreed that society must find a way to extend the good things of life to all citizens far fewer would have agreed with addams that all citizens needed to play a role in defining what good looked like.
nevertheless she held firm on both points.
at hull house social reformers met those they were trying to help in face to face encounters and all involved learned from each other.
addams was born to a comfortable life in 1860 her father was a friend of abraham lincolns and moved to chicago in 1889 when she and her friend ellen starr opened hull house.
chicagos hull house though not the first american settlement house became the model for most others.
addams said she was at hull house to be a part of the community not to offer help from above.
she knew that she was living there as much to learn as to help her economically poorer neighbors.
hull house and similar settlement houses in other cities organized badly needed social services in poor urban neighborhoods.
lillian wald and mary brewster founded the henry street settlement and the henry street visiting nurse services in new york citys lower east side.
others settlement houses including hull house did the same.
visiting nurses based in settlement houses visited the tenement apartments of the poor and brought medical help.
546 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 american voices jane addams twenty years at hull house 1910 jane addams was a younger contemporary of mother jones but from a very different background.
she and her good friend ellen starr opened hull house in one of chicago s poorest neighborhoods in september 1889 and addams lived there for the next 45 years serving successive generations of chicago s poor.
in the process she became a nationally and internationally known advocate for settlement houses and later for political reform and an end to war.
nevertheless for all of her national and international travel and fame her home and her roots remained on halsted street where she lived until she died in 1935.
the next january 1889 found miss starr and myself in chicago searching for a neighborhood in which we might put our plans into execution.
in our eagerness to win friends for the new undertaking we utilized every opportunity to set forth the meaning of the settlement as it had been embodied intoynbee hall although in those days we made no appeal for money meaning to start with our own slender resources.
in those early days we were often asked why we had come to live on halsted street when we could afford to live somewhere else.
i remember one man who used to shake his head and say it was the strangest thing he had met in his experience but who was finally convinced that it was not strange but natural.
in time it came to seem natural to all of us that the settlement should be there.
if it is natural to feed the hungry and care for the sick it is certainly natural to give pleasure to the young comfort to the aged and to minister to the deep seated craving for social intercourse that all men feel.
whoever does it is rewarded by something which if not gratitude is at least spontaneous and vital and lacks that irksome sense of obligation with which a substantial benefit is too often acknowledged from the first it seemed understood that we were ready to perform the humblest neighborhood services.
we were asked to wash the newborn babies and to prepare the dead for burial to nurse the sick and to mind the children.
but in spite of some untoward experiences we were constantly impressed with the uniform kindness and courtesy we received.
perhaps these first days laid the simple human foundations which are certainly essential for continuous living among the poor first genuine preference for residence in an industrial quarter to any other part of the city because it is interesting and makes the human appeal and second the conviction in the words of canon barnett that the things which make men alike are finer and better than the things that keep them apart and that these basic likenesses if they are properly accentuated easily transcend the less essential differences of race language creed and tradition.
perhaps even in those first days we made a beginning toward that object which was afterward stated in our charter to provide a center for a higher civic and social life to institute and maintain educational and philanthropic enterprises and to investigate and improve the conditions in the industrial districts of chicago.
source jane addams twenty years at hull house originally published 1910.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis why did jane addams believe that living among the poor was a central part of her mission.
contextualization how did addams see her relationship with the people she served.
what aspects of the progressive movement were reflected in her views.
under addams leadership hull house did more than provide services to the poor.
it also took the side of the poor in labor and legal disputes.
when addams realized that young women strikers were in danger of losing their company housing hull house launched a cooperative womens boarding house.
such direct support for strikers did not endear addams to some of chicagos most powerful leaders who were willing to tolerate even support social services but were hostile to her involvement in a strike.
nevertheless such efforts solidified her base within the communities that mattered the most to her.
quick review why were political reforms school reforms and assistance for the working class deemed necessary to improve life in american cities.
which were the most beneficial.
were some harmful.
chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 547 religious responses to the gilded age 19 3 id j explain the main currents of religiously based reform movements during the progressive era.
in the late 1800s reform movements seeking to improve the lives of working people bring an end to municipal corruption and build a just economic order often took on the language and style of evangelical religion.
both reform movements and religious revivals emphasized personal and social transformation.
both wanted changes in peoples hearts and were unafraid to use government to bring about changes in behavior.
many reformers were themselves protestants and reform efforts were often rooted in the ideas and individualistic ethos of protestant christianity.
temperance and the woman s christian temperance union certainly no political renewal movement was more rooted in protestant christianity than the womens campaign against alcohol that began in the 1870s see map 19 1.
early in the 1800s many protestant ministers began to oppose excessive drinking and some protestants took a strong stand against liquor.
still most americans continued to drink alcohol.
the panic of 1873 however led a group of midwestern women to start a new temperance movement.
many women seemed to reach the same conclusion at about the same time liquor was consuming their husbands wages while leading the men to arrive home drunk and ready to abuse wives and children.
the answer to this problem and the key to defending their homes and families they said was a campaign against demon rum state wide prohibition before 1900 by 1910 i i by 1919 local option map 19 1 prohibition in the states.
the power of the woman s christian temperance union is shown in the number of states that starting with kansas in 1881 prohibited the sale of alcohol outright and those many more that passed local option laws giving cities and towns the right to ban alcohol.
548 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 in hillsboro ohio women began to meet to pray and then to take their prayers into the local saloons or if banned to stand outside and pray.
through the depression winter of 1873 1874 ohio women claimed credit for closing some 3 000 saloons.
the following fall in november 1874 200 women from 17 states met in cleveland and formed the woman s christian temperance union wctu.
they were determined to make temperance abstinence from liquor the key moral and political issue of the decade.
in the process the wctu empowered a generation of women who had been taught that ladylike behavior meant quietly taking care of home and family and leaving politics to men.
when the wctu began frances e willard dean of women and professor at northwestern university in chicago was too busy with her academic duties to pay much attention.
soon thereafter however she left northwestern to become a full time organizer for the wctu.
five years later in 1879 willard became its second president and she led the wctu for the next 24 years until her death in 1898 becoming probably the most prominent woman in the united states at the time.
under willard s leadership the wctu broadened its goals while never losing sight of ending the use of alcohol.
willard was convinced that much of the evil by which the country is cursed especially the evil of drink is the fault of the men in power whose duty is to make and administer the laws she took the organization into the political arena demanding for women the right to vote so they could vote on matters affecting drink and the home.
she coined the phrase home protection to describe the wctus agenda.
if drink was destroying families she argued then women needed the right to defend their families.
if the wctu was going to pursue its mission of saving homes and reconstructing the nation then willard insisted we must show power by the time willard died the wctu had almost 200 000 members a 12 story national headquarters in chicago and a powerful national presence.
others took the temperance cause in very different directions.
carry nation from kiowa kansas was married to a man who turned out to be a hopeless drunk.
after he died nation moved and married a nondrinker.
in response to what she believed was a call from god nation went back to kiowa and smashed up the local saloon breaking bottles mirrors and pictures.
she followed up with hatchetations of other saloons and became a national symbol of one version of the temperance movement.
whether in the direct action of carry nation or the more organized approach of frances willard the temperance movement changed the united states.
it laid a solid foundation not only for the eighteenth amendment that in 1919 banned the manufacture and sale of liquor but also for the nineteenth amendment that a few months later in 1920 gave women the right to vote.
the temperance crusade also demonstrated the power of organized religion both in churches led by clergy and in extradenomina tional organizations often led by women.
the united states in the late 1800s was still an overwhelmingly protestant country and a movement that could tap the protestant religious fervor of the nations majority could go far.
the social gospel in 1897 charles m sheldon a young congregationalist pastor in topeka kansas published a novel in his steps which eventually sold 15 million copies.
in his steps told of a fictionalized minister who asks his congregation what would be the result if in this city every church member should begin to do as jesus would do.
what would jesus do in the matter of wealth in the novel the question what would jesus do transformed the town.
similarly in his steps also struck a chord in the country.
sheldons question what would jesus do led many protestants to embrace reform movements.
other religious leaders began to talk of what they called the social gospel which was based on the idea that improving society was both the right thing for religious frances willard 1839 1898 led the woman s christian temperance union from 1879 to 1898 making it a powerful force in the united states.
woman s christian temperance union national organization formed after the civil war dedicated to prohibiting the sale and distribution of alcohol.
social gospel application of religious ethics to industrial conditions and thereby alleviating poverty slums and labor exploitation.
chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 549 thinking historically how the other half lives 193 jacob a riis an immigrant from denmark working as a newspaper police reporter published how the other half lives in 1890.
in that book riis sought to describe to the city s well off residents the housing conditions of new york s poor especially through his photographs.
he described parts of lower manhattan the death of a child in a tenement was registered at the bureau of vital statistics as plainly due to suffocation in the foul air of an unventilated apartment.
another was the case of a hard working family of man and wife young people from the old country who took poison together in a crosby street tenement because they were tired.
there was no other explanation and none was needed when i stood in the room in which they had lived.
it was an attic with sloping ceiling and a single window so far out on the roof that it seemed not to belong to the place at all.
with scarcely room enough to turn around in they had been compelled to pay five dollars and a half a month in advance.
there were four such rooms in the attic and together they brought in as much as many a handsome little cottage in a pleasant part of brooklyn.
riis said the proprietors frequently urged the filthy habits of the tenants as an excuse for the condition of their property utterly losing sight of the fact that it was the tolerance of those habits which was the real evil and that for this they themselves were alone responsible.
in pinning responsibility for poverty and misery directly on those who profited from it riis created considerable hostility toward himself but also great publicity for the book.
later riis described the difficulty he had in getting the how the other half lives published for more than a year i had knocked at the doors of the various magazine editors with my pictures proposing to tell them how the other half lived but no one wanted to know i n the church one might at all events tell the truth unhindered.
so i thought but there were cautious souls there too.
eventually riis met dr schauffler the manager of the city mission society and dr josiah strong the author of our country.
they were impressed with the photos and arranged for riis to tell the stories within how the other half lives to a group at the broadway tabernacle a congregational church associated with schauffler and strong.
riis continues the account one of the editors of scribner s magazine saw my pictures and heard their story in his church and came to talk the matter over with me.
as a result of that talk i wrote an article that appeared in the christmas scribner s 1889 under the title how the other half lives and made an instant impression.
it could not have been long after i wrote how the other half lives that he theodore roosevelt then police commissioner of new york city came to the evening sun office one day looking for me.
i was out and he left his card merely writing on the back of it that he had read my book and had come to help.
there is very little ease where theodore roosevelt leads as we all found out mr roosevelt was a member of the health board and sometimes it was the tenements we went inspecting when the tenants slept.
he was after the facts and learned speedily to get them as he could.
when as governor he wanted to know just how the factory law was being executed he came down from albany and spent a whole day with me personally investigating tenements in which sweating sweatshop manufacturing done at home was carried on.
source jacob a riis the making of an american new york macmillan 1901 pp.
thinking critically 1.
contextualization what might have been some of the reasons riis had trouble getting his pictures published.
how do you think real estate owners responded to his pictures and his explanations of conditions.
comparison compare and contrast the contributions of riis roosevelt and addams to the progressive movement.
what common beliefs approaches and goals did they share.
people to do and indeed gods will.
there were many social gospel preachers but the most prominent was walter rauschenbusch whose 1917 book a theology for the social gospel broadened the definition of sin from a focus on individual flaws to include social institutions that oppressed others.
rauschenbusch was far from alone in advocating a social gospel.
george d herron was a pastor whose most famous sermon the message of jesus to men of wealth claimed simply that a rich christian is a contradiction of terms josiah strong edited a social gospel magazine the gospel of the kingdom and published a book our country pleading for missionary work within american cities and around the world.
in every city local city mission societies carried out their own social gospel mission.
part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 even more than his writing the photographs that jacob riis made like this one titled sleeping quarters areaway mulberry st showed middle class america the poverty in which the other half lived.
i 19 1 m2 wj while the social gospel was a protestant movement social issues also swept catholic america.
cardinal james gibbons the long time archbishop of baltimore and nominal leader of american catholics defended the american labor movement and the role of catholics in it to a wary vatican.
gibbons argued that the rise of monopolies with their heartless avarice demanded action.
not all religious communities shared in the social gospel movement however.
many first generation jewish immigrants put all of their religious energy into secular political reform and labor movements.
some rabbis in turn worried that the focus on secular politics would undermine the spiritual world of the immigrants.
parish priests in italian german and czech parishes in chicago tangled with the anarchists and union radicals whom they saw as taking people away from the faith.
some catholics focused on private devotional activities or large street festivals often devoted to the virgin mary seeing their faith as a refuge from the larger society rather than a way to change society.
they valued the ministry of individuals like frances xavier cabrini mother cabrini sent to the united states by an italian bishop in 1889 to serve the needs of the italian immigrants but who unlike cardinal gibbons avoided labor organizing and politics.
religious people like others had widely differing ideas about how to live well in the new urban and industrial society of the united states.
quick review how were religiously inspired progressives similar to or different from other progressive reformers.
progressive politics on the national stage analyze the three progressive presidents and their administrations.
a significant turning point in american politics came early in the morning of september 14 1901 when president william mckinley died in buffalo new york.
he had been visiting the pan american exposition when he was shot by a lone anar chist leon czolgosz on september 6.
ihe president survived the bullet but died of the infection that followed.
mckinley was the third american president to be assassinated chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 55 19 4 theodore roosevelt 552 part vi becoming an industrial world power after abraham lincoln in 1865 and james a garfield in 1881.
ihe fact that czolgosz described himself as an anarchist led to a strong backlash against the anarchist movement just regaining its political standing after the widespread hostility to anarchism engendered by the haymarket violence of 1886 see chapter 18.
vice president theodore roosevelt who had been on a camping trip with his family in new yorks adirondack mountains when mckinley was shot arrived in buffalo to take the oath of office.
sitting on the train bringing mckinleys body from buffalo to washington dc was ohio senator mark hanna who had helped mckinley select roosevelt as vice president.
hanna understood what the transition meant for many like him who constituted the old guard of the republican party.
now look hanna muttered that damned cowboy is president of the united states there was a reason that some referred to the new president as a cowboy.
theodore roosevelt had already had an extraordinary career in and out of politics when he ascended to the presidency.
born to a wealthy new york family whose roots went back to dutch new york he grew up as a sometimes awkward and sickly child.
he compensated by lifting weights and learning to box.
he attended harvard college was elected to the new york state assembly at 23 a year after his marriage to alice hathaway lee.
when his wife died roosevelt abandoned politics for a cowboy life in the dakotas.
he soon returned to new york married edith kermit carow and started on his rapid political ascent.
he was appointed u s civil service commissioner at age 31 police commissioner of new york at 37 and assistant secretary of the navy at 39.
during the spanish american war roosevelt took command of a unit in cuba known as the rough riders making himself a war hero.
he was elected governor of new york when he had just turned 40 and was already plotting his own campaign for the presidency.
roosevelts hopes for the presidency were almost derailed by his differences with the old guard in the new york republican party.
as governor roosevelt wanted to end corruption tax the street railways and provide for industrial safety as well as workmens compensation for those injured on the job.
he had advocated for the inspection of tenement housing since being shown their conditions by jacob riis.
but not everyone in new york democrats or republicans liked those new ideas.
ihe boss of the republican party in new york state senator tom platt supported roosevelt for governor in november 1898 because his war hero popularity and anticorruption image seemed the only way to win the election and maintain republican power.
but once platt discovered that roosevelt actually meant what he said the boss decided he needed to get rid of the governor before he wrecked the republican machine.
platt planned to sideline roosevelt by getting him the nomination as mckinleys running mate for 1900.
roosevelt did not want the nomination.
in 1900 no sitting vice president had been elected president since martin van buren succeeded andrew jackson more than half a century earlier.
even so the nomination was hard to reject without seeming disloyal to the party.
mckinley and roosevelt won the election and state politics in new york returned to normal.
then only months into mckinleys second term the president was dead and the reforming politician from new york was the president of the united states.
at the age of 42 he was also the youngest president ever.
teddy roosevelt progressive president taking the oath of office the new president promised to carry out absolutely unbroken the former presidents policies.
one observer responded yes the same way one carries out the trash that comment represented an accurate view of the new president.
after a brief period of mourning very brief for him personally the white house and the country started to experience roosevelts considerable reforming energy which new yorkers had known for some time.
costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 the trustbuster and the square deal roosevelt soon outlined his departure from mckinley and his determination to limit the power of industrial corporations.
tr as he came to be known to everyone told congress that there are real and grave evils that come from the power of the great corporations and the federal government needed to assume the authority to supervise and limit that power.
only a month before roosevelt spoke to congress james j hill owner of the great northern railroad and e h harriman who controlled the union pacific railroad met with representatives of j pierpont morgan who controlled the northern pacific railroad.
these three lines were competitors across the northern plains.
ihe competition among them kept prices low and helped farmers and industries who wanted to ship their products.
as had been the case with steel less than a year before such competition struck morgan as terribly inefficient and a drain on profits.
hill harriman and morgan solved their problem by creating a new entity the northern securities company limited to which they then sold all of their railroads.
in place of competition the transcontinental railroad routes would now be one happy family.
roosevelt did not mention northern securities in his december speech and some industrialists hoped that his speech was mere rhetoric.
then in february 1902 the attorney general announced that at the presidents request he was filing suit under the 1890 sherman antitrust act to break up northern securities.
to the new president the northern securities company was too big and too powerful and the lack of competition on the rails meant that the new trust could charge virtually any rates it wanted to haul freight and passengers.
roosevelts actions were not the first time that the progressive movement led the federal government to take action.
in response to the assassination of president garfield by a disappointed office seeker in 1881 congress passed the pendleton civil service reform act of 1883 which sought to replace political patronage with merit in the selection of government employees.
chester a arthur the vice president who became president when garfield died strongly supported the act and lost the backing of the bosses in his own party for doing so.
the act created the civil service commission whose job it was to give federal employees a measure of protection from losing their jobs over their political ideas while keeping federal civil servants not elected officials from actively fundraising or campaigning.
in addition in response to public pressure about the power of monopolies congress had passed the sherman antitrust act in 1890 which its sponsor senator john sherman of ohio said was to outlaw any business practices that would unfairly raise costs for the consumer.
the pendleton act however covered only about 10 of federal employees when it was passed and none at the state or local level.
the sherman act had been a virtual dead letter after a series of court cases reduced its scope soon after it was passed.
suddenly with the northern securities suit a new administration was bringing the sherman act back to life and warning of further progressive initiatives to follow.
soon after the suit was announced j p morgan visited the white house for a private meeting with the president and the attorney general.
morgan told the president if we have done anything wrong send your man to my man and they can fix it up.
roosevelt who saw things quite differently said that can t be done and attorney general philander chase knox added we dont want to fix it up we want to stop it morgan then asked if the government was now going to attack his other interests especially u s steel and roosevelt responded certainly not unless we find out that in any case they have done something that we regard as wrong.
after morgan left roosevelt told knox he found it quite revealing that morgan could deal with him only as a big rival operator with whom to make a deal.
but there would be no deal.
the northern securities case took 2 years to move through the federal courts but in march 1904 the u s supreme court affirmed roosevelts interpretation of the sherman act.
the majority opinion said that no scheme or device could more sherman antitrust act the first federal antitrust measure passed in 1890 sought to promote economic competition by prohibiting business combinations in restraint of trade or commerce.
pendleton civil service reform act a law of 1883 that reformed the spoils system by prohibiting government workers from making political contributions and by creating the civil service commission to oversee their appointment on the basis of merit rather than politics.
chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 55 effectively and certainly suppress free competition and ordered the northern security trust broken up into competing lines.
from then on roosevelt would be known as the trustbuster and he liked the title.
roosevelt kept up the pressure for change.
in a series of speeches in the summer of 1902 he told audiences the great corporations which we have grown to speak of rather loosely as trusts are the creatures of the state and the state not only has the right to control them but it is in duty bound to control them wherever need of such control is shown his natural inclination to expand the governments power to supervise corporations was supported by many in congress and by muckraking publications like mcclures which roosevelt may have disliked but which nonetheless provided him with new ammunition with every issue.
roosevelt wanted a new cabinet level department of commerce with investigative authority a ban on secret deals between railroads and specific companies of the sort that launched rockefellers oil empire and additional funds for the department of justice to expedite antitrust cases.
ironically once roosevelt had won his northern securities victory and gained the tools that congress gave him he did not pursue many other antitrust cases.
the taft and wilson administrations would use the new tools more than roosevelt himself.
the president had made his point.
as was often the case during his 7 years in office having done so he moved on to other issues.
conservation in nature as a child theodore roosevelt was a birdwatcher and developed an intense love of nature.
years later he walked into a cabinet meeting and asked gentlemen do you know what has happened this morning the members of the cabinet waited for important news.
roosevelt told them just now i saw a chestnut sided warbler and this is only february the birds did not usually appear in washington on their return from central america until much later in the spring.
while roosevelt loved nature watched birds and as president saved thousands of acres of land from development he was also an avid hunter who loved to shoot bear cougar or just about anything in the wilderness.
however on one bear hunt in 1902 roosevelt refused to shoot a bear that had been captured and tied to a tree so the president could have the honor of the shot.
he was happy to kill many other bears on real hunts but attacking a tied up bear was unsportsmanlike.
his refusal made national news and sparked a new craze fostered by the steiff and ideal toy companies a new toy known as a teddy bear in honor of the president who would not shoot one.
just before he became vice president roosevelt published the strenuous life in which he argued that americans were getting far too little time to replenish their bodies and souls in the great outdoors.
but the strenuous life in nature that he advocated was only possible if the wilderness and the wildlife were preserved for future generations to enjoy.
once he became president roosevelt combined all of this considerable enthusiasm for nature with his political skill to become perhaps the most conservation minded of any president.
although a keenly passionate advocate roosevelt was not however the first president to care about conservation.
harrison cleveland and mckinley all set aside federal lands for permanent parks and both yellowstone and the grand canyon were federal reserves before roosevelt took office.
but from roosevelts perspective too few animals were protected too little land had been put aside and too little was being done to protect the environment.
even though his attack on the trusts got most of the headlines a short line in trs december 1901 message to congress said the preservation of our forests is an imperative business necessity people like his friend gifford pinchot and members of the audubon and sierra clubs cheered.
western senators were furious at an attack on the prime source of wealth in their states.
again some hoped that it was a mere rhetorical flourish.
they soon learned differently.
when roosevelt came to the presidency in 1901 43 million acres of land were included in u s forest reserves.
when he left office in 1909 that number had increased more than fourfold to 194 million acres.
34 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 roosevelt also professionalized the protection of nature.
he wrote that the nation as a whole should earnestly desire and strive to leave to the next generation the national honor unstained and the national resources unexhausted and only new conservation efforts would preserve either honor or resources.
he appointed a former rough rider david e warford as a federal forest ranger with authority to protect the 4 15 million acres of federal land in arizona and colorado.
he nominated gifford pinchot who shared the presidents commitment to be head of the division of forestry and later head of the u s forest service in the department of the interior and gave him an absolutely free hand between 1906 and 1908 roosevelt used or misused as his critics said authority given to him by the antiquities act of 1906 to declare a 295 acre stand of giant redwood trees just north of san francisco as muir woods national monument 800 000 acres in arizona as the grand canyon national monument and 2 500 acres later expanded to 26 000 acres as the pinnacles national monument in california.
he also set aside the natural bridges national monument in utah and a dozen other similar monuments ensuring that the land would never pass into private hands see map 19 2.
the presidents continued expansion of the amount of land protected by the federal government provoked resistance in congress.
in early 1907 senator charles w fulton a republican from oregon attached an amendment to the department of agricultures appropriations bill that said that no further forest reserves or expansions of reserves could be created within six western states without an act of congress.
when the bill reached the president he had 10 days to sign it or risk having no funds to operate the department of agriculture.
roosevelt quickly approved a total of 21 new forest reserves in the six states medicine bow forest in colorado priest river forest in idaho and washington toiyabe forest in nevada blue mountain in oregon and hawaii volcano 1916 191 pacific ocean national parks with date of initial protection and date of current designation national forests atlantic ocean biscayne 1968 1980 everglades 1934 map 19 2 major national parks.
while the federal government claimed ownership of much of the land in the west no president matched theodore roosevelt in setting aside large tracts of that land as national parks and forests so it would be preserved for future generations rather than be sold or developed.
r a a drnnmrci a pnlitirc olympic and rainier forests in washington.
when the paperwork creating these new forests was done roosevelt then signed the agriculture bill with fultons amendment saying that no additional forests would be created.
roosevelt and african americans one of roosevelts first moves as president was to invite booker t washington the countrys best known african american to the white house for a meeting and then in october 1901 for dinner with the president and his family.
no african american had ever before eaten a meal as a guest at the white house.
roosevelt was making a very public statement about race relations in the united states.
he was also taking a first step toward securing a full term as elected president for himself.
booker t washington controlled a block of delegates to the republican nominating conventions since even though blacks could not vote in the segregated south of roosevelts day they could and did win election as delegates to national republican nominating conventions.
although neither roosevelt nor washington discussed the dinner in public the press made a great deal of the evening.
while some reports were positive papers like the memphis scimitar called the dinner the most damnable outrage which has ever been perpetrated by any citizen of the united states for the rest of his 7 years in the white house roosevelt had a decidedly mixed record on african american concerns.
he did not mention black disenfranchisement or lynching in his first presidential message to congress.
however in his 1906 annual message to congress he said the members of the white race should understand that every lynching represents by just so much a loosening of the bands of civilization they were important words though with too little follow up.
in symbolic ways the white house dinner and speeches on lynching roosevelt did more to support african americans than several of his predecessors or successors.
in comparison to the energy he gave to other issues he considered important however his track record was certainly lackluster.
roosevelt s continuing popularity roosevelts obvious joy at life and enjoyment of the presidency was infectious.
people loved having a young and enthusiastic chief executive.
a friend once said of roosevelt that he wanted to be the bride at every wedding and the corpse at every funeral roosevelts large family brought life and vitality to the previously staid white house.
alice daughter of his first marriage was a young adult who flirted with and charmed everyone she met including ohio congressman nicholas longworth whom she married in a white house wedding.
she would continue to charm washington society for the next three quarters of a century.
the president and ediths younger children ted kermit ethel archie and quentin played at the white house chasing rabbits on the white house grounds marching with the white house police and riding bicycles on the lawn and occasionally down the stairs.
in 1904 the republicans easily nominated roosevelt for a full term.
having lost with bryan in 1896 and 1900 democrats were looking for a fresh face and nominated alton b parker chief justice of the new york court of appeals.
it was not a close contest.
parker was a colorless candidate but it is unlikely that any democrat could have won.
republicans were the countrys major party and roosevelts energy carried the day.
he won by a landslide.
after his reelection roosevelts popularity only grew and he and everyone knew that he could easily win a third term or as his daughter alice kept saying a second elected term if he were a candidate in 1908.
nevertheless he had promised himself and the country in 1904 that he would not seek a third term saying as he claimed victory in november 1904 the wise custom which limits the president to two terms regards the substance and not the form as 1908 approached the president was tempted to break the pledge but did not.
roosevelts goal in 1908 was to find a part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 556 candidate who would carry on the policies that he had championed.
he thought he had found just the right candidate in secretary of war william howard taft.
taft wins taft loses the elections of 1908 and 1912 william howard taft who had served as a federal district court judge in ohio before becoming governor general of the philippines and then secretary of war would have loved an appointment to the supreme court one he finally won in 1921 when warren harding appointed him.
but in 1908 roosevelt had picked taft as the successor most likely to continue his programs and once roosevelt had made up his mind there was little that taft or anyone else could do to stop him.
having failed miserably with the conservative alton parker in the 1904 election the democrats returned to william jennings bryan for a third try for the white house.
the socialist party was also growing in strength and their candidate eugene v debs made a respectable showing.
but the election was never really in doubt and taft won easily on the promise to continue roosevelts progressivism.
tafts administration tafts policies not surprisingly given their very different personalities tensions between the outgoing and the incoming president began even before tafts inauguration.
roosevelt expected taft to keep most of the existing cabinet taft wanted some of his own people.
most disappointing to the conservationist roosevelt taft replaced secretary of the interior james r garfield an ardent conservationist with richard a ballinger a seattle lawyer and former reform mayor who was more interested in exploiting public lands than conserving them.
nevertheless taft kept gifford pinchot on at the u s forest service and roosevelt sailed for africa soon after the inauguration confident that the country was in good hands.
taft kept a key roosevelt taft pledge and called congress into special session in early 1909 to lower the nations tariff rates.
ida tarbell one of the best known muckraking journalists insisted that the poor could not afford warm clothing because of the high tariff charged on imported wool and many economists felt that overly high tariffs were protecting industries that no longer needed protection.
income and inheritance taxes seemed more equitable ways to pay for the government.
but not everyone in congress agreed especially rhode island senator nelson aldrich and house speaker joe cannon.
new york representative sereno payne proposed reducing the tariff rates and substituting an income tax.
but when the bill reached the senate aldrich dropped the income tax and revised the tariffs up significantly.
aldrich acknowledged that the republican platform had promised to revise the tariff but he asked where did we ever make the statement that we would revise the tariff downward everyone knew that the downward revision had been the promise but it was not the outcome.
even most moderate republicans criticized the payne aldrich tariff but taft signed the bill.
when congress later passed bills to lower the tariff on cotton wool steel and iron taft vetoed them.
in the process he built an alliance with the conservative aldrich wing of the party losing the support of many roosevelt progressives.
while roosevelt was in africa word came to him in january 1910 that taft had fired pinchot.
pinchot wrote to the former president we have fallen back down the hill you led us up the tariff might be abstract to roosevelt but conservation was the issue nearest and dearest to him and pinchot was the agent tr had counted on to keep the movement alive in the new administration.
on many fronts taft kept his pledge to carry out roosevelts policies in some cases with more vigor than tr had ever shown.
it was taft not roosevelt who decreed an 8 hour workday for government employees and who advocated the sixteenth amendment to the constitution passed in 1913 to ensure that federal income taxes could be collected.
in addition taft was a far tougher trustbuster than roosevelt breaking up john d rockefellers standard oil company and bringing more antitrust suits in his 4 years than roosevelt did in 7.
chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 5 a widely distributed cartoon showed former president roosevelt s disappointment with his hand picked but ensnarled successor president taft.
the unique election of 1912 roosevelt was not alone in his estrangement from the taft administration.
critics abounded and senator robert la follette of wisconsin was hinting broadly that he might challenge taft for the republican presidential nomination in 1912.
la follette was a different kind of progressive from roosevelt.
he advocated a more open nominating process for candidates and an income tax to limit the power of the very rich.
he wanted to destroy the monopolies that roosevelt wanted only to regulate.
la follette was also appalled by concessions to the white south believing that if african americans had been fairly treated then they would have been able to take the places now denied them as farmers and businessmen.
as roosevelt waited la follette campaigned for the nomination.
then in february 1912 la follette gave a speech in philadelphia in which either exhausted or drunk he went on for over 2 hours repeating himself again and again.
he lost not only his audience but also the nomination with that speech.
a week later seven republican governors asked roosevelt to run.
tr announced my hat is in the ring and wrote i will accept the nomination for president if it is tendered to me he also set out to be sure that the 1912 nomination was in fact so tendered.
through the spring taft and roosevelt fought it out taft always reluctantly roosevelt with his usual exuberance.
in the south taft used the party machinery to control the delegates.
roosevelt defended his challenge saying if that be revolution make the most of it taft responded this wrenches my soul 1 do not want to fight theodore roosevelt but sometimes a man in a corner fights.
i am going to fight taft won in the states where delegates were controlled by caucuses while roosevelt won nearly all of the states that held primary elections including pennsylvania california minnesota nebraska maryland south dakota and even tafts home state of ohio.
after seeing the primary returns idaho senator william e borah declared there can be but one result and that is the nomination of mr roosevelt and nebraskas senator george norris happily said taft is out of the race taft however was not out of the race.
he still controlled the party machinery.
when delegates were contested and 254 convention seats were contested the republican national committee decided who should vote at the convention.
the committee awarded 235 of the contested delegates to taft and only 19 to roosevelt sealing the nomination for taft.
two months after the republican convention in early august 1912 a new progressive party held its convention in the same hall.
the 14 000 delegates were mostly middle class reformers social workers teachers and owners of small businesses.
558 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 it was the first major political convention to include female delegates and there were many.
also attending were a few african american delegates from border states and new england none from the deep south where taft controlled the party.
few of the farmers and laborers representing past populist party conventions were there.
the plat form included support for the rights of labor unions conservation womens suffrage the 8 hour workday workplace safety as well as unemployment and old age insurance.
in a doomed effort to court white southern votes the platform was silent on the rights of african americans.
by acclamation the convention nominated theodore roosevelt for president and california governor hiram johnson for vice president.
in the first convention speech by a woman jane addams seconded roosevelts nomination.
roosevelt saying that he felt as fit as a bull moose happily accepted the nomination.
a convention like no other launched a presidential election like no other.
many democrats saw the republican split as the chance for a democratic presidency.
champ clark of missouri the speaker of the house was the frontrunner.
he was popular within the party but was a dull speaker.
oscar underwood of alabama was more conservative but perhaps a better speaker than clark.
others hoped to be kingmakers.
charles murphy the boss of tammany controlled the new york delegation while william jennings bryan controlled many other delegates.
finally the governor of new jersey woodrow wilson campaigned for the nomination.
wilson had only held elected office for 2 years.
he was an expert on constitutional law with a ph d from johns hopkins who had served as the president of princeton university from 1902 to 1910.
he had sought to transform princeton from a country club for rich boys to a serious academic institution.
he battled with faculty alumni and trustees and showed little aptitude for compromise.
in 1910 just as wilson saw some of his most cherished goals defeated at princeton the political bosses who ran the democratic party in new jersey were looking for an appealing candidate for governor.
they offered wilson the nomination and he surprised even his supporters by being a magnetic candidate winning easily.
then to the surprise of the bosses wilson kept his word that he would be independent broke with those who had put him in the governors office and refused to follow their lead in patronage.
he governed as a progressive getting the state to adopt workmens compensation a commission to regulate public utilities and more open election laws winning great popularity as well as the undying hatred of political bosses.
wilson entered the democratic nominating convention as a strong candidate but not the leader.
while clark led on the first ballots wilson kept gaining on the 46 ballot exhausted delegates gave wilson their partys nomination.
with the nominations of roosevelt taft and wilson a former the current and a future president the 1912 election was unique.
in addition a fourth candidate eugene v debs was once again the candidate of the socialist party and by 1912 the socialists were a force to be reckoned with.
in local elections the year before socialist candidates had been elected as mayor in 56 cities and towns and one of the partys candidates victor berger was elected to congress from wisconsin.
the socialist party always highly factionalized enthusiastically nominated debs as their standard bearer for a fourth time.
some socialists worried that roosevelts progressive party would steal their platform but while the progressive party called for governmental oversight of the monopolies the socialists called for government ownership of all large scale industries especially the railroads.
like the progressives the socialist platform also called for shorter working hours workers compensation electoral reform and giving women the right to vote.
however unlike the progressives it also called for ensuring blacks the right to vote.
wilson wrote to a friend that roosevelts strength is altogether incalculable.
ihe contest is between him and me not between taft and me.
he was right.
it was dif ficult for wilson who was running as a progressive democrat to differentiate himself from roosevelts progressive party.
if the contest was to be one of personal popularity no one was more popular than teddy roosevelt.
boston attorney louis d brandeis chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 559 new freedom 5 woodrow wilson s 1912 program for govern ment intervention in the economy to restore i competition by curtailing the business monopolies thereby providing opportunities fqr jnjjyjjuai achievement.
19 4 suggested a way forward to wilson.
while roosevelt spoke of the new nationalism and governmental controls over the monopoly trusts brandeis suggested wilson should speak of a new freedom that would give people the greatest freedom by simply breaking up the great trusts and fostering competition at every level.
four years later brandeis would receive his reward when wilson appointed him as the first jew to serve on the u s supreme court.
in the fall campaign wilson called roosevelt a self appointed divinity who wanted to control the trusts and peoples lives.
wilson in contrast wanted freedom from trusts and from government regulation.
ours is a program of liberty he said theirs is a program of regulation roosevelt struck back saying that wilsons approach was simply the laissez faire doctrine of.
three quarters of a century ago taft morosely stayed on the sidelines.
debs went after them all.
while roosevelt was speaking in milwaukee wisconsin in october a would be assassin shot him at close range.
the bullet lodged in roosevelt s chest but a heavy coat and the text of a long speech that was in the coat pocket prevented a serious injury.
roosevelt with typical pluck went ahead with an hour long speech before allowing himself to be taken to a hospital.
his chances of victory improved as stories of his courage spread.
in the end however the deep division within the republican ranks their failure to crack the democrats hold on the solid south and wilsons use of brandeiss antitrust rhetoric all ensured the outcome.
wilson won the popular vote with over a million votes more than roosevelt who defeated taft by another half million.
debs came in fourth with just over 900 000 votes see map 19 3.
electoral vote popular vote woodrow wilson 435 6 296 547 democrat 82 42 theodore roosevelt 4 118 571 progressive william taft 3 486 720 republican 23 eugene debs 900 672 socialist 6 map 19 3 the election of 1912.
this map shows the breadth of woodrow wilson s electoral victory after roosevelt and taft split the republican vote and debs failed to gain traction as the socialist party candidate.
woodrow wilson s new freedom woodrow wilson planned four major initiatives for his administration conservation access to raw materials banking and finance and the tariff and taxes.
he announced that he would call the new democratic majority congress into a special session in april 1913 a month after his inauguration and months ahead of when it would normally meet.
while wilson spoke to the importance of conservation in his inaugural address and while he did push the creation of the national park service his commitment to conservation did not come close to roosevelts.
wilsonian progressivism focused elsewhere.
only a month after the inauguration wilson broke a custom followed by every president since jefferson and gave a speech in person to a joint session of congress.
widely televised presidential addresses to congress are now such a normal feature of american life that is it easy to forget that no president from jefferson to taft ever spoke directly to congress.
nevertheless wilson did and he continued to do so throughout his two terms in office.
wilsons first congressional victory was the passage of the underwood simmons tariff which the new president signed in october 1913.
cleveland mckinley roosevelt and taft all failed to get tariff reductions through congress mostly because of the power that lobbyists had with the senate.
but wilson managed to embarrass several senators with a very public investigation of the role of lobbyists.
he also met privately with several democratic senators to hear their concerns and shore up their support.
in the end wilson got a new tariff that reduced the tax on goods imported into the united states by at least 10 percent across the board more on some things.
the new law also used the power given in the new sixteenth amendment to introduce the first federal income tax since the civil war starting at 1 percent on incomes above 4 000 considerably more than most americans made in 1913.
part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 woodrow wilson broke a precedent going back to thomas jefferson and began the modern practice of presidential speeches to a joint session of congress.
wilson then turned to reform of the nations banking system.
since andrew jackson closed the bank of the united states in the 1830s the federal governments role in the nations banking system had been very limited.
in the financial panics of 1893 and 1907 j p morgan had acted as the nations banker ensuring that the nations credit system stayed intact.
while morgans interventions were essential to protect the government and the nations largest banks they did little to help farmers or proprietors of small businesses or to allow the government to control the supply of money a role that bryan and his followers had been demanding for a long time.
working closely with virginia senator carter glass wilson was able to create the federal reserve system in a matter of months.
following the advice of brandeis that concessions to big business interests must in the end prove futile the president spent no time with representatives of business but instead built a coalition of the many factions within the democratic party and of progressive republicans.
the final bill passed the house 287 to 85 and the senate after a desperate last minute attempt to derail the bill by frank a vanderlip of the national city bank of new york passed the bill 54 to 34.
before the end of his first year in office wilson and the congress had created the federal reserve that remains the core of the nations banking system.
during the presidential campaign wilson had differentiated himself from roosevelt with his claim that he was the real trustbuster in office he supported his attorney general james mcreynolds in attacking the american telephone and telegraph company united states steel and the new haven railroad all companies in which j p morgan had an interest.
then he went to congress and asked for more authority.
the clayton anti trust act signed in october 1914 outlawed interlocking directorates under which the same individuals might serve on the boards of directors of supposedly competing companies and defined unfair trade practices including the kind of collusion over prices that had allowed john d rockefeller to create the chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 561 1.
19 2 federal trade commission government agency established in 1914 19 j t0 provjc e regulatory oversight of business activity.
19 4 standard oil monopoly.
perhaps most important the clayton act exempted labor unions and farmer cooperatives from the definition of a combination in restraint of trade a charge that had been used in federal court cases against unions since eugene debs was sent to jail the 1890s.
although the bill did not give unions everything they wanted samuel gompers declared it to be the magna carta of labor union organizing.
separate legislation also strengthened the investigative powers of the interstate commerce commission and created a new federal trade commission with a specific if somewhat vague mandate to limit the growth and power of monopolies.
while wilson delivered quickly on some of his reformist campaign pledges he deeply disappointed other followers.
when the house passed legislation outlawing child labor in february 1915 wilson did nothing and the bill died in the senate.
only much later in his presidency did he support effective child labor legislation.
he also disappointed farmers a key democratic constituency when he quietly allowed a plan for rural credits to help farmers with mortgages to die in congressional conference committee.
african americans were greatly disappointed with wilson.
booker t washington had a long standing link to the republican party but during the 1912 campaign younger blacks including african episcopal zion bishop alexander walters and w e b.
du bois endorsed wilson.
it was a significant departure from the african american republican party alliance that had existed since reconstruction.
perhaps these leaders argued this virginia born and georgia reared intellectual could finally break the hold of segregationists on the democratic party.
during the campaign wilson was happy to receive their support but once in office wilson spoke only vaguely of a federal commission to investigate race relations in the united states and allowed his cabinet to set policy that did not support the african american cause.
citing what they said was white anger at racial mingling especially in southern post offices post master general albert s burleson and secretary of the treasury william gibbs mcadoo ordered the segregation of offices rest rooms and eating facilities at the post office treasury department and bureau of printing and engraving.
federal employees who had long worked in racially integrated settings were now segregated by race.
the democratic majority in congress allowed segregationist senators like james k vardaman of mississippi to block black appointments to federal jobs that previous republican presidents had provided.
the black press attacked wilson for the segregation policy and the lack of federal appointments.
wilsons most pointed confrontation about his racial policies was with the african american editor william monroe trotter of boston.
in november of 1913 trotter met with the president to lay out a long list of specific concerns about segregation in the federal service and the lack of african americans being hired in the government.
wilson responded blandly saying now mistakes have probably been made but those mistakes can be corrected a year later trotter led another delegation to the white house and received another round of bland vagueness.
trotter lost his temper saying we are here as full fledged american citizens and reminded wilson of the support he had received from african americans.
wilson in turn lost his temper telling trotter you are an american citizen but you are the only american citizen that has ever come into this office who has talked to me with such a tone the president insisted that trotter be excluded from any future meeting but there would be few future meetings with african americans with or without trotter.
wilsons reputation in the african american community was further tarnished when in early 1915 he allowed one of the first full length motion pictures d w griffiths birth of a nation to be shown at the white house.
the national association for the advancement of colored people was actively protesting the film which though a masterpiece of cinematography was also a glorification of the ku klux kian.
wilson did not endorse the film but the president also refused to announce his nonendorsement.
later wilson signed a letter prepared by his personal secretary saying that the president was entirely unaware of the character of the play before it was presented and power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 part vi becoming an industrial world has at no time expressed his approbation of it nevertheless the film incident along with the segregation of the federal work force seriously undermined wilsons reputation among african americans.
when wilson became president his agenda focused exclusively on domestic policy.
in his first year in office with the underwood tariff the clayton anti trust act as well as the creation of the federal reserve system and the federal trade commission he had extraordinary success.
a little more than a year after the inauguration however a political assassination in the far off town of sarajevo bosnia began a chain of events that would change the presidents and the nations focus in succeeding years.
after 1914 international matters far more than his domestic agenda dominated his administration.
indeed the assassination in the austrian empire in june 1914 can be seen as the ending of the progressive era.
in the new era discussed in the next chapter international matters are central.
quick review which progressive president had the greatest effect on living and working conditions for the american people.
give three reasons to support your answer.
conclusion between 1870 and 1900 americas population almost doubled from 40 million in 1870 to 75 million in 1900 with immigration responsible perhaps for one third of this growth.
as more and more americans crowded into the nations cities drawn there by jobs in americas rapidly expanding industrial economy a new urgency to focus on the challenges of immigration urbanization and industrialization took hold.
by 1900 a rising cohort of americans including intellectuals social reformers and political leaders seemed to recognize that new ideas and new levels of activism would be needed to create a solid foundation for the countrys future.
muckraking journalists such as ida tarbell upton sinclair and lincoln steffens sought to convince other americans to heed the call to solve a wide range of problems related to the health and well being of american society.
some reformers attempted to rein in the excesses of industrialists and the financial markets others focused their attentions on the urban poor the nations education system preservation of the natural world electoral reforms decent wages for the laboring classes industrial safety and sanitation or in one of the strongest movements ending the use of alcohol by americans.
beginning at the city and state level progressive reformers sought elected office and sought to use their offices to implement many progressive reforms in the conduct of elections and in the protection of individuals through such things as pure food and drug laws.
theodore roosevelt who gained the presidency after the assassination of william mckinley in 1901 successfully brought progressivism to the white house.
he expanded the powers of the presidency to control the power of giant corporations protect the nations natural resources and bring a new vitality to electoral politics.
the two presidents who followed him william howard taft and woodrow wilson shared some of roosevelt s reformist tendencies and furthered the goals of progressivism changing in particular the relationship between business and government in the decades leading up to world war i.
chapter review how progressive was the progressive era.
include the work of individuals government policy and philosophy in your answer.
chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics chapter 19 chapter review 19 1 the revolt of the intellectuals explain the role of muckraking journalists and intellectuals in shaping a progressive agenda.
review questions 1.
comparison compare and contrast the ideas of john dewey and william graham sumner.
what assumptions about social and economic inequality underlay each authors position.
constructing an argument how would you explain the popularity of muckraking journalism in the late 1800s.
the transformation of the cities analyze the changes in urban life that inspired progressive reforms and the impact of those reforms on cities.
review questions 3.
contextualization why did many poor and immigrant residents of american cities support political machines.
how might such machines have looked from their point of view.
synthesis what ideas and objectives underlay progressive reform.
historical interpretation in what ways was jane addamss hull house typical of the progressive movement.
it what ways did it depart from other progressive initiatives.
19 2 193 religious responses to the gilded age explain the main currents of religiously based reform movements during the progressive era.
review questions 6.
historical interpretation what light does the rise to prominence of the womans christian temperance union shed on the relationship between social reform and religious revival in the late 1800s.
comparison compare and contrast the strategies and motives of frances willard and carry nation.
how did each contribute to the gains made by the temperance movement.
progressive politics on the national stage analyze the three progressive presidents and their administrations.
review questions 8.
comparison compare and contrast the policies of roosevelt taft and wilson.
what aspects of the progressive agenda did each emphasize.
historical interpretation how did the progressive presidents discussed in this section change the place of the presidential role in american politics.
historical interpretation how did roosevelt and wilson respond to the concerns of african americans.
what light do their actions shed on the issues of race in politics of the late 1800s.
19 4 564 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 war prosperity and depression 1890 1945.
chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change 182 182 iwhdelii i i map 18 1a and map 18 1b expanding southern railroads 1859 1899.
map 1a at top illustrates the extent of railroad lines in 1859 on the eve of the civil war.
map 1b illustrates the expansion of rail lines by 1899.
part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 or three times during a long life can now go quickly safely pleasantly and cheaply several times a day.
farms were connected to towns and towns to cities beyond the imaginings of peoples parents and grandparents.
the railroads that brought people to town also brought goods from around the world while shipping goods that the south produced to world markets.
country stores sold manufactured goods that made life easier and fertilizer that made the land more productive.
in many small towns stores also sold goods on credit making them virtually banks.
in this capacity stores also accepted fields planted in cotton as collateral for loans as cotton remained the prime cash crop of the south.
in addition to cotton new industries were growing in the south in the 1880s.
sawmills and turpentine camps produced lumber and turpentine that was shipped around the world.
phosphate mining expanded but was then eclipsed by coal mining as new markets demanded coal.
tobacco which the south had shipped to the world since the 1600s became a growth industry.
using effective advertising and marketing skills julian carr shipped his bull durham tobacco bags worldwide and washington duke and his son james shipped prerolled cigarettes that quickly became the most popular way to enjoy clean quick and potent tobacco.
iron and steel were produced at the souths fastest growing city of birmingham.
the souths textile production which had involved 10 000 people in 1870 as it had in 1850 employed almost 100 000 by 1900.
finally a new product coca cola developed by asa g candler in 1889 became highly popular and eventually a drink of choice for many on every continent.
nostalgia and celebration of the lost cause the rapid changes in the south made some uneasy.
the movement of southerners white and black in search of jobs and economic opportunities created a sense of dislocation.
c l pettigrew of north carolina like many others remembered a slower pace and complained about that striving rough and eager crowd others mourned to see the white columned porticos of the favorite colonial architecture now maundering in decay as ambitious young people moved to opportunities elsewhere.
simmering in the south were deep generational tensions between confederate veterans and those who had been born too late to remember the war.
a texas veteran wrote to the legislature asking them to be sure that the sons of confederates and the public generally remember the lost cause.
another ex confederate wade hampton insisted i believe now as always that the south was right for veterans like hampton and others and for southern widows of those who had died in the war the memory of the lost cause as a glorious time and a righteous fight made the pain of a sometimes lonely and often economically challenging present more bearable.
southern writers produced romantic stories of the lost cause of the civil war and the days of slavery that preceded it.
thomas nelson page of a prominent virginia family created the plantation school of writing recounting tales of a chivalrous past.
page also started the tradition of the wise and loyal slave who page told his white read ers longed for the days before the war when everyone had a secure place in a well ordered society.
the most famous author of the plantation school joel chandler harris created the fictional elderly black man uncle remus and his animal alter ego brer rabbit.
the uncle remus stories first published in the atlanta constitution in 1879 and then as a popular book portrayed the old south as a romantic and happy place.
wj this ad from the 1890s introduces the new drink coca cola which was one of the many new industries that emerged in the south.
chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to chang religion in the new south religion also played a crucial role in the post reconstruction south.
southerners did not actually attend church in greater numbers than their northern counterparts but religious imagery and biblical language were a strong part of the souths culture.
with the coming of freedom southern blacks quickly joined or established their own churches.
by 1890 there were 1 3 million black baptists in the south.
northern black churches especially the african methodist episcopal and african methodist episcopal zion denominations also built churches for southern blacks.
ihe black church became the place in the segregated south where former slaves could meet with a measure of safety share and build and new communal identity and control the intellectual and cultural life of their own institution.
white southerners also gravitated to churches in the 1880s and 1890s.
baptist bodies were the largest group of white churches in the south but the methodists claimed almost as many members.
also strong were the disciples of christ the presbyterians and in certain areas of the south episcopalians and roman catholics.
in white and black churches nearly all of the clergy were male but women could play a large role in the churches particularly through womens associations and mission groups which provided necessary support to these churches and through which women could exercise a level of autonomy.
a conductor evicts a well dressed black man from a first class coach.
enforcing segregation on the railroad coach was seen by many white southerners as somehow essential to protecting white women.
creating the segregated south the railroads that knit the new south together quickly became the focus of the souths great unresolved issue race.
even though the political rights of african americans had been declining in the south since the defeat of reconstruction in the 1870s the south of the 1880s and early 1890s was not the rigidly segregated place it would become by 1900.
churches were segregated by custom and choice.
schools hospitals and hotels were generally segregated by law.
blacks were confined to the balcony in most theaters and the races did not mix in restaurants.
however in many places of work at many political gatherings and in travel blacks and whites could be found together in the south of the late 1800s.
ihe railroads were certainly not going to build separate lines or even run separate trains and most railroads saw all talk of racial segregation as potentially troublesome and expensive.
nevertheless trouble was brewing.
as passenger railroads developed in the south between 1865 and 1880 they generally offered two classes of service a first class car for women and men who did not smoke or chew tobacco and a second class car often a section of the baggage car for men who used tobacco or people too poor to buy a first class ticket.
in some cases blacks were assumed to belong in the second class car with the tobacco using white men however in many cases blacks rode first class without incident.
in any case a trip that might start without incident could quickly turn ugly.
in the early 1880s a black man was asked by the conductor to leave the first class car after the train crossed the state line from tennessee to georgia.
when he refused he was badly beaten by other passengers.
in 1889 a delegation from the first african baptist church of savannah georgia started their journey to a church convention in indianapolis indiana on the east tennessee virginia and georgia railroad.
the well dressed delegates started out comfortably in first class but they were met at a subsequent train stop by a mob of 50 white men with pistols and clubs who attacked them and threatened to blow your g d d brains out while the railroads did not want to take action state legislatures did.
in railroad cars people of different races and equally important part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 genders might mix in especially close contact given the close seating.
during the late 1800s whites were developing an especially great fear of any contact between black men and white women.
as one person wrote a man would be horrified at the idea of his wife or daughter seated by the side of a burly negro tennessee was the first state to respond enacting a law saying all railroad companies shall furnish separate cars or portions of cars cut off by partition wall which all colored passengers who pay first class rates of fare may have the privilege to enter and occupy.
the law seemed to imply that it was up to blacks whether they wanted to be segregated or not but clearly that idea was not the way the arrangement worked.
across the south trains were rigidly segregated a decade before the 1896 u s supreme court s 7 to l decision in plessy v ferguson declared that separate but equal transportation and by implication other matters did not violate the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment to the u s constitution.
the politics of exclusion the end of the racially integrated governments of the reconstruction era and the almost complete exclusion of african americans from the political life of the south took place in two distinct stages between the 1870s and 1900.
these stages are often merged in the popular mind as if they happened all at once though they did not.
the first step in ending reconstruction took place in the 1860s and 1870s see chapter 14.
black legislators and white legislators who supported them all of whom were republicans were defeated by white democratic segregationists at different times in different states nearly always in elections marked by violence and voter intimidation.
virginia was the first to shift from a republican to a democratic legislature in 1869.
conservative democrats soon also won large majorities in other states north carolina in 1870 georgia in 1871 texas in 1873 alabama and arkansas in 1874 and south carolina and mississippi in 1876.
finally contested elections in louisiana and florida were awarded to the democrats in 1877 as part of the same compromise that put hayes in the white house.
the withdrawal of most federal troops that the newly inaugurated hayes ordered in 1877 was thus the culmination not the cause of the end of reconstruction.
however the defeat of reconstruction was not the end of the story.
while every southern state had a conservative democratic legislature and governor after 1877 quite a few blacks still voted and some were still elected and appointed to public offices in the south for another decade.
black voters could provide the margin of victory in close contests.
most state legislatures had at least a few african american representatives and many federally appointed officials from postmasters to census officials were black.
in 1891 as the arkansas legislature was debating railroad segregation it was a black legislator john gray lucas who objected.
it was also a black delegate to mississippis 1895 state constitutional convention thomas e miller who told the majority that they needed to remember it was your love of power and your arrogance which brought reconstruction on you in most cases the few black office holders remaining were too few in number to have an impact.
nevertheless some whites objected to the close interactions that challenged racial and gender conventions in certain offices such as when a white woman visited the post office to be helped by a black male postmaster.
when the republicans won the white house and congress in 1888 some white southerners feared a repeat of reconstruction perhaps even the appointment of federal election officials who would monitor southern election procedures.
at the same time a new generation of southern whites were tired of the klan style violence that chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to chan 18 1 18 2 183 accompanied elections.
an 1889 article in the jackson mississippi clarion ledger said the old men of the present generation cant afford to die and leave the election to their children and grandchildren with shot guns in their hands a lie in their mouths and perjury on their lips in order to defeat the negroes.
the solution to the election violence that the newspaper wanted was not to hold fair and race neutral elections but rather to establish legal means to exclude all blacks from all political participation.
fears of black political involvement grew in the 1890s when the populist move ment disrupted southern politics.
it was one thing for a handful of blacks in the state legislature to raise questions about a bill before the white majority voted for whatever it wanted.
it was a different matter if the white democratic majority was split between populist and traditional factions and the black representatives had the tie breaking votes or if as happened in north carolina a populist republican ticket with black support could actually win the majority of seats in a state legislature.
in 1896 south carolinas arch segregationist governor ben tillman warned of an unholy alliance between the independents and the negroes for many southern whites the solution was a new set of laws that would ensure white supremacy forever.
political leaders called new state constitutional conventions to ensure that they secured absolute power.
blacks and their white allies had been marginalized by the violence and the voting that ended reconstruction but the new state constitutions of the 1890s moved from marginalization to complete exclusion.
when the work of these new constitutional conventions was done extremely few black voters and no black office holders remained anywhere in what came to be known as the solid south which meant solidly white and democratic.
mississippi rewrote its state constitution in 1890 creating what looked like colorblind obstacles that would in practice stop all blacks from voting.
the most obvious restrictions a literacy test or a poll tax or a property qualification for voters would also exclude many poor whites who were themselves illiterate and who could not meet a property qualification or pay a poll tax.
so mississippis delegates created a complex set of limitations on voting and office.
to be able to vote the new constitution said a person had to have lived in the state for at least 2 years and in the election district for at least 1 a sharecropper who moved for a better chance at life thus lost the right to participate in elections at least for a time.
other states instituted grandfather clauses that said anyone whose grandfather had been a voter was exempt from other restrictions a privilege no descendent of slaves could claim.
those intending to vote in mississippi and elsewhere could not do so if they had been convicted of petty crimes such as arson bigamy or petty theft crimes that blacks were routinely charged with.
ironically conviction for murder rape or grand larceny did not exclude one from voting.
the mississippi convention did require a modest poll tax.
finally the convention adopted a requirement that every voter be able to understand and interpret the state constitution.
white state appointed registrars would decide whose interpretation was reasonable an editorial in the jackson mississippi clarion ledger described the new system i f every negro in mississippi was a graduate of harvard he would not be as well fitted to exercise the right of suffrage as the anglo saxon farm laborer once the new mississippi constitution took effect it had its intended impact.
once other southern states observed what was happening in mississippi they too adopted the approach.
after the u s supreme court declared poll taxes and literacy tests to be constitutional in their 1898 ruling in williams v mississippi there was little chance that any southern state would fail to enact such mississippi style voting tests.
in 1908 texas became the last state of the former confederacy to add a poll tax and across the region that tax was usually one of several mechanisms that ended black voting.
then as though all of the new laws were not enough a new form of violence toward african americans emerged in the late 1800s.
where the kian and other groups had terrorized black communities during reconstruction the spectacle of part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 public lynching became widespread in the following years.
individual african americans often young men were singled out often accused with little or no evidence of raping a white woman and hung in a public spectacle.
the issue was rarely an actual rape but more often a young black mans failure to observe the customs of stepping out of the way for a white person to pass or a black mans challenging the payment of a landowner at the sharecroppers settle or a black man asserting his political rights.
most of all lynching was a way to strike terror into the black community while asserting and celebrating white dominance.
in 1900 the new south was fast becoming a region governed exclusively by white voters and white elected officials and would remain so until the black civil rights movement of the 1950s 1960s and 1970s transformed the region and the nation.
i m2 ml african american responses as the rigid segregation of separate but equal which everyone knew meant separate and very unequal settled on the south and indeed much of the country especially after 1896 african americans debated how to respond to a legal system that excluded them from voting.
in addition they considered their response to being barred from access to quality schooling and to any but the most menial jobs as well as to being restricted from entering rail cars hotels or theaters that served whites.
they also argued responses to cultural expectations that they give way allowing whites to pass in front of them in stores and on sidewalks that they call all whites by their last names while they were called by their first names by whites and that they live with the oppressive knowledge that even the slightest challenge to segregation could be met with not only ostracism but also unimaginable violence.
wells 1862 1931 was one of the african americans who challenged the lynchings that were a key part of the violence used to maintain segregation.
between 1889 and 1918 386 lynchings took place in georgia 373 in mississippi and similar numbers in several other states.
wells argued that the rape charge which was often the excuse for lynching a black man was a thread bare lie and a cover for punishing any black man who challenged the rules of segregation.
in response to her writing a white mob destroyed her printing press at her memphis free press but throughout her life she continued to write publish and organize legal challenges to segregation and especially its maintenance through the violence of lynchings.
in the face of the harsh reality of segregation and exclusion booker t washington 1856 1915 perhaps the nations best known african american leader argued that it was time to adjust to segregation rather than challenge the laws and customs excluding blacks.
washington urged blacks to create an economic foundation for themselves.
in the midst of the harsh realities of the 1890s washingtons course of action seemed the only realistic option.
not all african americans agreed with washington and a young african american scholar w e b.
du bois 1868 1963 became his harshest critic.
du bois criticized compromises and wrote that the problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the color line he described the kind of double consciousness or twon ess that african americans were forced to develop in a country that proclaimed liberty but excluded them by law and custom.
in 1905 du bois joined other african american leaders meeting at niagara falls in a hotel on the canadian side because no hotel on the american side would give them rooms to begin a campaign for every single right that belongs to a free born american political civil and social without compromise.
the niagara movement that emerged from the conference fought for an end to segregation and for full equality for african americans.
four years later in february 1909 du bois others from hr ida b wells barnett became the most effective national spokesperson for the antilynching crusade.
niagara movement african american group organized in 1905 to promote racial integration civil and political rights and equal access to economic opportunity the movement later helped organize the naacp.
chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change 18 1 thinking historically debating booker t washington s cast down your buckets where you are speech on september 18 1895 booker t washington gave a speech to a mostly white audience at the cotton states and international exposition in atlanta georgia.
washington came to the exposition at the height of his career to offer what came to be known as the atlanta compromise that african americans would accept segregation in return for being able to develop economically.
so washington said to those of my race l would say cast down your bucket where you are cast it down in making friends in every manly way with the people of all races with whom we are surrounded.
cast it down in agriculture mechanics in commerce in domestic service and in the professions.
in all things that are purely social we can be as separate as the fingers yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual progress the wisest among my race understand that the agitation of questions of social equality is the extremist folly and that progress in the enjoyment of all the privileges that will come to us must be the result of severe and constant struggle rather than of artificial forcing.
no race that has anything to contribute to the markets of the world is long in any degree ostracized.
it is important and right that all privileges of the law be ours but it is vastly more important that we be prepared for the exercise of these privileges.
the opportunity to earn a dollar in a factory just now is worth infinitely more than the opportunity to spend a dollar in an opera house.
at the time the speech was greeted with great applause most of all on the part of northern white philanthropists who poured money into tuskegee and other ventures supported by washington.
eight years later in 1903 w e.
du bois published the souls of black folk.
du bois was unsparing in his judgment writing mr washington represents in negro thought the old attitude of adjustment and submission in answer to this it has been claimed that the negro can survive only through submission.
mr washington distinctly asks that black people give up at least for the present three things first political power second insistence on civil rights third higher education of negro youth and concentrate all their energies on industrial education the accumulation of wealth and the conciliation of the south.
this policy has been courageously and insistently advocated for over fifteen years and has been triumphant for perhaps ten years.
as a result of this tender of the palm branch what has been the return.
in these years there have occurred 1.
the disfranchisement of the negro.
the legal creation of a distinct status of civil inferiority for the negro.
the steady withdrawal of aid from institutions for the higher training of the negro.
these movements are not to be sure direct results of mr washington s teachings but his propaganda has without a shadow of doubt helped their speedier accomplishment.
the question then comes is it possible and probable that nine millions of men can make effective progress in economic lines if they are deprived of political rights made a servile caste and allowed only the most meager chance for developing their exceptional men.
considering these quotes the lines between du bois and washington could not have been starker.
in reality they were not as stark as the two documents imply.
privately washington provided funds for court challenges of segregation and challenged lynchings but unlike du bois he had been born in slavery and lived and worked in alabama in the heart of a segregated world.
du bois a generation younger was raised in the north and had much less patience with any form of accommodation.
nevertheless between them the two leaders outlined differences that remained in the african american community for decades.
source booker t washington up from slavery an autobiography new york doubleday page 1901 w e b.
du bois the souls of black folk chicago a c mcclurg 1903.
thinking critically 1.
comparison what do you see as the starkest differences between washington and du bois.
contextualization why did du bois believe that economic and political progress for african americans were inextricably linked.
why did washington think they could be separated.
in 516 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 the niagara movement and additional african american leaders including ida b.
wells mary mcleod bethune and mary church terrell joined with white reformers including jane addams john dewey clarence darrow and lincoln steffens.
they created the national association for the advancement of colored people the naacp to fight for full enforcement of the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments bring public exposure and legal challenges to the mostly unpunished wave of lynchings that were happening in all parts of the country and begin what would be a long slow legal process of court challenges to the separate but equal laws that provided the legal foundation for black exclusion.
atlanta compromise an 1895 proposal from bookert.
washington that african americans remain separate from whites while focusing on economic self help.
18 2 national association for the advancement of colored people naacp an interracial organization founded in 1910 dedicated to restoring african american political and social rights.
quick review is new south an appropriate name for the society that emerged after reconstruction.
consider the economics politics and social aspects of the region in formulating your answer.
the politics of conflict from populist movement to populist party 18 2 analyze how agrarian unrest and protest came to have a significant impact on american politics.
in the 1870s and 1880s american farmers were living very difficult lives.
the work was backbreaking.
they had no time for much of an education and far too little time for family or community life.
the economic cycles seemed structured against them.
whenever farmers started to get ahead financially they faced a downturn because of a glut of wheat in russia or overproduction of cotton in egypt or some other issue leaving them in a pattern of debt.
even in good times it seemed that the railroads and middlemen in new york or new orleans or london or paris took the profits that they produced.
perhaps most galling to many farmers was the sense that the rapid changes happening in the rest of the country seemed to be leaving them behind.
it is not accidental that the derogatory word hayseed entered the nations vocabulary at this time.
urban america saw itself as up to date and modern but saw farmers living in isolated rural areas as backward and out of date.
moreover the new technologies that enabled rapid communication let these farmers know just what others in the country thought of them.
jeffersons agrarian ideal seemed like part of a very dim past.
the farmers7 alliance and other farm groups by the beginning of the 1880s many farmers were deeply in debt to the banks on which they depended for their mortgages and for loans to obtain equipment and supplies for the planting year.
railroads that might give a break to john d rockefellers standard oil kept raising the rates to haul farm products to market.
by the time farmers paid off their loans and paid to get the wheat corn and other farm products to market they had little if any money left.
eventually farmers started to do something to change their circumstances.
nelson dunning of the farmers alliance wrote nothing could withstand their power if the farmers of america would organize particularly as he believed in ways the standard oil company had done.
in the farmers alliance and eventually in their own political party farmers who had indeed been observing what the rockefellers and carnegies of the nation were doing tried to create their own power base.
the earliest nationwide farmer organization was the patrons of husbandry also known as the grange farmers gathered in grange halls to celebrate their work and foster a sense of community but they also organized to deal with the chronic debt and the sense that the nations financial arrangements were stacked against them.
especially in the south local grange chapters organized cooperative buying and selling through their own cotton gins and warehouses knowing that they would get better prices for their crops the grange the national grange or the patrons of husbandry a national organization of farmers formed after the civil war to promote the rights and dignity of farmers.
chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change 5 the grange the first national farmers organization painted an idealized picture of farming.
later farmers organizations were less idealistic and more militant.
agricultural wheel an organization of farmers begun in arkansas in 1882.
more militant than the grange it sought to advance farmer s economic status.
farmers alliance a broad mass movement in the rural south and west during the late 1800s encompassing several organizations and demanding economic and political reforms it helped create the populist party.
and better rates from the railroads if they banded together.
the national leadership of the grange focused on lobbying for agricultural colleges attracting more people to farming encouraging crop diversity and promoting a richer home life for farm families.
farmers also started additional organizations.
in 1882 arkansas farmers launched the agricultural wheel.
by 1885 the agricultural wheel had 1 105 local chapters in four states.
ihe wheel became a tough organization that excluded any but working farmers.
the organization used its size to negotiate price reductions with manufacturers of farm implements and got up to 50 percent reductions on the prices of wagons buggies reapers and mowers while organizing its own warehouses to hold crops until prices met expectations.
a number of similar organizations coordinated similar efforts but the largest by far was the farmers alliance which began as the texas alliance in lampasas county texas in the 1870s by ranchers who were dealing with issues of communal and private grazing lands.
after charles w macune was elected president of the texas organization in 1886 the alliance grew rapidly.
macune had trained as a pharmacist and a physician before he settled in milam county texas in 1879 where he practiced medicine while farming on the side.
but his rural medical practice gave him a sense of the problems the ranchers and the farmers faced particularly the isolation and the lack of economic clout.
518 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 under macune s leadership the farmers alliance became a business organization organizing the farmers including ranchers of texas and eventually the nation to use the best of corporate practices to fight with the organizations they saw oppressing them.
the alliance sought to get a better financial deal for farmers through the negotiating power of a large organization demanding lower prices for the things they bought and higher prices for the products they sold.
ihe texas farmers alliance grew from 38 000 members in 1886 to 225 000 members in 1889 almost half of all of the eligible farmers in texas.
in 1887 the alliance merged with the arkansas based agricultural wheel and continued to grow with local units stretching from north carolina to california and from texas to the dakotas.
in 1890 macune moved to a national headquarters in washington dc and the alliance had over 1 million members.
under macunes leadership the farmers alliance steered clear of direct political involvement.
the goal of the alliance was simple farmers would combine their power to equal the power of other businesses.
they were not opposed to monopolies they wanted to be one.
the washington office published the national economist mailed to farmers across the country while sponsoring lecturers organizers and corresponding secretaries to spread alliance ideas.
the organization sought to overcome rural isolation and lack of educational opportunities through lending libraries schools conferences and social occasions for farm families.
most of all the alliance sought to open a new era of prosperity for farmers through tough negotiations on their behalf.
macune believed that whites and blacks had different economic interests and insisted that the farmers alliance should include only white farmers.
when the agricultural wheel joined the alliance it dropped its black members.
in response to macunes segregationist policy african american farmers created their own colored farmers national alliance and cooperative union that had 1 2 million members by 1890.
given the political and social disenfranchisement that black farmers faced they organized primarily through black churches.
in many communities the black baptist church and the colored farmers alliance had virtually the same membership.
lacking the resources to publish their own materials or hire lecturers or organizers the black organization never had the clout of the white alliance even though it had more members.
while the farmers alliance was racially segregated it welcomed women as members and leaders as did the colored farmers alliance.
fully a quarter of the members of the colored farmers alliance were women.
in contrast to the grange which had special positions for women the farmers alliance opened all positions to both women and men.
annie l diggs of kansas was one of the senior editors of the national reform press association the white alliances publishing house.
mary e lease of kansas was the most famous of the alliances many speakers while marion todd of illinois was considered to be the most effective theoretician for the movement.
bettie munn gay who had turned a highly mortgaged texas farm into a successful cotton growing operation became one of the leaders in the texas alliance.
women and men within the alliance debated womens suffrage and occasionally argued over the prohibition of alcohol.
but they were united in a commitment to improve the life of farm families economically as well as intellectually and culturally ending the terrible isolation that farm families experienced.
defining a national agenda while macune focused the farmers alliance on cooperative economic efforts and stayed out of electoral politics other leaders wanted more direct political involvement.
in california the president of the state farmers alliance marion cannon became convinced after long battles with the southern pacific railroad that only public ownership of the railroads would allow farmers to get a fair deal.
alliance lecturer marion todd published railways of europe and america in 1893 in which she argued for i8j io colored farmers national alliance and cooperative union an organization of southern black farmers formed in texas in 1886 in response to the southern farmers alliance which did not accept black people as members.
it helped launch the populist party.
chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change 18 2 1 american voices mary e lease women in the farmers alliance 1891 e lease a well known speaker for the farmers alliance twt rose to national fame telling kansas farmers to raise less corn and more hell and then traveling the nation to recruit members and build support for the organization.
in 1891 she gave a speech to the national council of women of the united states part of which is presented here.
madam president friends and fellow citizens i use that term with somewhat pardonable pride when i remember that the alliance league of kansas has given to the women of my sunflower humanity loving temperance loving state of kansas the right of political suffrage.
the subject assigned to me to day women in the farmers alliance cannot be intelligently discussed nor fully understood until the necessity for the formation of the farmers alliance is first shown and its aims and purposes briefly stated.
it must be evident to every intelligent man and woman to day that there is something radically wrong in the affairs of this nation my friends the lash of the slave driver s whip is no longer heard in this country but the lash of necessity is driving thousands to unrequited toil.
conscienceless capital is robbing manhood of its prime mothers of their motherhood and sorrowful children of sunshine and of joy.
look around you.
what do you behold to day.
a land which less than four hundred years ago we received fresh from the hands of god a continent of unparalleled fertility and yet in this land of plenty and unlimited resources the cry of humanity is going up from every corner of this nation.
the plaint of motherhood the moans of starving children.
capital buys and sells to day the very heart beats of humanity oh yes we can point to the rivers bridged to the transcontinental railway connecting ocean with ocean to wonderful churches and cathedrals he can point to the most wonderful system of agriculture that ever brought joy to a hungry world he can jostle his rags against the silken garments his toil has secured he can walk shelterless and sad by the side of the home he has helped to build he can wipe the sweat from his weary face and reflect that the twenty thousand of american millionaires who own one billion five hundred million dollars gathered from the toils and tears of sixty four millions of american people have it in their power to name their governors and our legislators and representatives and congressmen and they do name them and they have named them for the last quarter of a century and they have it in their power to fix the price of labor to fix the price for every ton of coal.
source mary e lease speech to the national council of women of the united states assembled in washington dc feb 24 1891 thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis according to mary lease why was there a necessity for the formation of the farmers alliance and what should be its political agenda.
historical interpretation what importance should we attach to the fact that a number of women mary lease among them played prominent roles in farmers movements and the people s party.
subtreasury system a proposal fora unit of the u s treasury department or subtreasury to own warehouses that would store farmer s crops until prices rose.
managing railways in ways similar to how the government managed post offices.
some in the alliance wanted a federal commission to limit the power of the railroads but cannon and todd were convinced that the railroads were too big to be tamed and that a government takeover was the only answer.
even macune came to advocate for what he called the subtreasury system a unit he wanted to have created within the u s department of the treasury that would provide low interest loans to farmers.
these loans would be secured by cotton wheat and other staple crops.
the subtreasury would protect its investment and support farmers through a federal system of warehouses and grain elevators in 1 000 counties across the country where the government would ensure minimum prices for crops and hold them until they sold at that price.
if speculators could use the telegraph to make money buying and selling crop futures why couldnt farmers with the right government support use the same technical arrangements to ensure their own profits.
although alliance leaders took up the subtreasury idea and some politicians like tom watson of georgia became advocates the leadership of the democratic party resisted as did virtually all republicans.
in the end the subtreasury was never created.
as a result many within the alliance began to question the value of staying out of politics.
520 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 more than public ownership of railroads or the subtreasury idea the political issue r that engaged u s farmers was federal fiscal policy.
when the government limited j the supply of currency farmers had a very difficult time paying their debts getting j loans or getting the price they wanted for their crops.
when the government made i more funds available the resulting inflation made it easier to pay debts because the i debt amounted to less in current dollars and made it easier to sell the products of the i farms.
although easing the supply of money improved the situation of farmers one policy made it difficult to do the nation s adherence to the gold standard requiring that every dollar in circulation be backed by a dollars worth of gold in a bank vault.
during the civil war the federal government had temporarily dropped the gold standard.
instead it created federal bank notes known as greenbacks because of their color essentially printing dollars based not on gold but on the full faith and credit of the governments promise to pay.
ihe government also allowed the additional use of silver as backing for currency during the war.
both of these policies eased the supply of money significantly but they also fueled inflation since with more dollars available any dollar was worth less.
farmers liked inflation but investors and bankers hated it.
after the civil war the nations bankers demanded a return to the gold standard by gradually withdrawing greenbacks from circulation as the government paid down its civil war debt and then in 1873 demonetizing silver so only gold and not silver could be used for coins or backing for dollars in circulation.
these policies were effective in curbing inflation but they led to an extremely tight money supply tight credit and challenging times for farmers.
ihe tight money of the 1880s was thus a direct result of federal policy and the farmers alliance as well as the other farmer organizations were determined to change the policy.
some advocated expanding the number of greenbacks others supported the coinage of more silver and some called for both but all agreed that something needed to be done.
populism becomes a political party 18 2 i ihe rapid growth of the farmers alliance in the 1880s brought into the organization many state leaders who advocated direct political involvement.
leonidas l polk of north carolina was the strongest of all these leaders.
a confederate hero polk made his fortune in real estate development when the carolina central railroad crossed his old family plantation in 1873.
he was active in the methodist church and in the grange.
he also helped ensure the end of reconstruction in his state while helping recreate the democratic party there.
polk lobbied for the creation of a state department of agriculture became its first commissioner in 1877 and in 1886 published his own newspaper progressive farmer.
in 1888 he brought the state organization he led into the farmers alliance and within the year 42 000 north carolina farmers were members of the national organization.
other states had similar leaders.
south carolinas benjamin r tillman had served in a militia that kept blacks and republicans out of politics.
he became active in the state grange in the 1880s and became convinced that the yoke of the credit system was keeping farmers down.
he convened a large meeting of white farmers in 1886 lobbied for a state agricultural college and created a 20 000 member south carolina alliance that remained independent of the national organization.
georgia s tom watson was a lawyer and friend and follower of the farmers alliance though as a nonfarmer he could not join.
nevertheless he was elected to congress as a farmers alliance candidate in 1890 expanding the movement of the alliance into politics.
as the price of cotton fell to the lowest level in 30 years in 1891 and the farm economy continued to worsen throughout the 1890s watson tillman polk and others rallied for a change.
the nations largest labor unions the knights of labor and the womens christian temperance union had recently launched a new political organization the peoples party also known as the populist party at a convention in cincinnati in 1891 that was advocating for many of the reforms to currency people s party usually known as the populist party a major third party of the 1890s formed to fight for the rights of working people.
chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change 5 and regulation of railroads that the alliance wanted.
if the farmers alliance were to merge with the peoples party they could win elections and have their voices heard in state capitals in congress perhaps even the white house.
macune continued to oppose such political involvement preferring farmer controlled cooperative economic development.
polk became the leader of those who said yes to political involvement and specifically to joining the people s party.
everyone knew that the 1892 convention of the farmers alliance would decide the issue.
macune retired from the alliance and spent the next 30 years practicing medicine and law while preaching in methodist churches in rural texas.
the peoples or populist party grew dramatically.
the colored farmers alliance and smaller groups like the farmers mutual benefit association also joined.
the widespread assumption was that when the peoples party now a multiracial coalition of farmers labor and womens groups held their national convention in omaha nebraska in july 1892 they would nominate leonidas polk for president.
a month before the convention however polk suddenly died.
the peoples party nominated james b weaver of iowa a former union general and james g field a former confederate from virginia as his running mate.
polks charisma did not adhere to the new nominees.
nevertheless weaver won over a million votes in the 1892 presidential election that ultimately returned cleveland to the white house.
not since the late 1850s when the republican party had come out of nowhere had the nation witnessed anything like the phenomenal growth of the populists as the members of the peoples party quickly came to be known.
populist candidates won the governors office in colorado and kansas in the 1892 elections.
populists elected marion cannon to congress from southern california as well as congressmen from colorado kansas nebraska and north carolina.
they elected eight representatives to the california state legislature a group that held the balance between the democrats and republicans and almost succeeded in electing californias u s.
two years later populist candidates won over 1 5 million votes electing seven to the u s house six to the u s senate and many to state legislatures.
in a partnership with republicans populists won control of the north carolina legislature the only time since reconstruction when the democrats had lost control of a state and sent marion butler to the u s senate.
in 1894 populist candidates won 41 percent of the vote for statewide offices in colorado 39 percent in washington state 39 percent in kansas and 36 percent in texas.
populists were elected to congress from alabama kansas nebraska and north carolina.
the populists it seemed were gaining power.
as the populists approached the 1896 presidential elections the republican and democratic parties were keeping a worried eye on them and at the same time borrowing parts of their message.
no one borrowed more from the populists than the young former congressman from nebraska william jennings bryan.
bryan was a democrat not a populist but his views on many issues most of all his advocacy for the unlimited coinage of silver were the same as those of the populists and anathema to leaders of the democratic party including president cleveland who was not seeking reelection but who wanted a successor more like himself.
nevertheless bryan worked tirelessly for the democratic nomination courting as many silver delegates to the partys 1896 convention in chicago as possible.
when the democrats finally met in early july the debate on the platform was intense pitting those who wanted to hold to the gold standard against the free silver democrats who agreed with the populists.
bryan spoke to the convention electrifying the gathering as he concluded if they dare to come out in the open field and defend the gold standard as a good thing we shall fight them to the uttermost having behind us the producing masses of the nation and the world.
having behind us the commercial interests and the laboring interests and all the toiling masses we shall answer their demands for a gold standard by saying to them you shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns.
you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.
part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 522 after the cheering stopped the democrats not only adopted a silver platform but also nominated bryan for president.
the populists were torn about what to do since bryan s views seemed so close to their own and with him they might actually win the white house.
although divided between those who wanted to maintain their independence and those who were willing to compromise the populist convention that met in july nominated bryan as their candidate for president.
by joining forces with the democrats they were confident of victory.
the republicans nominated william mckinley a genial congressman from ohio and the last civil war veteran to run for president.
in the fall campaign managed by marcus alonzo hanna a wealthy supporter who was emerging as something close to a modern professional political advisor the republicans equated a vote for bryan with a rebellion against the nation.
they linked the republican ticket with the flag patriotism and economic caution.
they called mckinley the advance agent of prosperity and some like a young theodore roosevelt described the democrats and populists as plotting a social revolution and the subversion of the american republic in the contest the notions of patriotism economic caution and northeast regional distrust of the south and west won.
a comfortable majority elected mckinley though the results show how deeply divided the country had become see map 18 2.
the populists never recovered from their loss in 1896.
those who had supported bryan and the alliance with the democratic party blamed those who did not.
populists who had not wanted to compromise blamed those who had sold out and supported a democrat.
african americans whose votes had been essential to populist victories in many close contests were deeply disillusioned at how quickly populist leaders like tom watson turned into arch segregationists after 1897.
the populist party continued for a short time but the enthusiasm and confidence were destroyed by the divisions over the 1896 election.
in 1900 and 1904 the party nominated tom watson who having courted black voters in the 1890s now campaigned on a platform of white supremacy even while he maintained the populist economic program.
the democrats renominated bryan in 1900 but he did poorly without populist support and in the face of prosperity and mckinleys considerable popularity.
the new socialist party emerging from northern labor unions began to contest presidential elections taking many of the populists labor union supporters.
a moment and a movement had passed although its efforts did in the end lead to the adoption of the silver standard.
in the early 1900s national interest turned elsewhere although many elements of the populist platform were adopted and became the basis for a later progressive movement championed by both republicans and democrats after 1900.
the farmers of the south and west who had organizing themselves so successfully and had bridged heretofore uncrossed gender barriers were never able to resolve their racial divisions.
never again would they have the same level of political power.
quick review was politics the best way for the farmers to address their grievances.
why or why not.
what might have been a more effective strategy.
ariz new terr.
mexico terr.
3 4 8 10 okla terr.
13 17 si 23 6 12 xv indian terr 15 electoral vote by state republican william mckinley democratic william j bryan 271 176 minor parties 447 24 15 1f 12 12 11 9 11 13 f a v popular vote 7 104 779 6 502 925 265 155 13 872 859 i ip map 18 2 the election of 1896.
this map of the electoral votes in the 1896 presidential election shows how deeply divided the country was.
states where farming was dominant voted over a hpiminnl fnr rr an worker protest and the rise of organized labor explain the tensions in industrial america that led to major labor strife between the 1870s and 1914.
the great railroad strike of 1877 began spontaneously in baltimore maryland and martinsburg west virginia on july 16 and 17 1877 after the management of several railroads announced a wage cut.
at camden junction 2 miles from baltimore a fireman simply refused to keep the train moving.
soon others joined and before long all rhanfor ift rp nnnsps to industrialism.
responses to change u traffic on the baltimore 8c ohio railroad had come to a halt.
the management then fired the strikers.
in response others joined the strike and by july 19 rail workers prevented all freight from leaving pittsburgh.
now mostly forgotten the strike inspired some americans frightened others and for decades shaped peoples responses to the countrys rapid growth and industrialization.
the strike was marked by widespread violence.
a large crowd of strikers and their supporters in baltimore attacked state militia troops who then fired on the crowd killing 11 people.
in pittsburgh a huge crowd hurled insults and rocks at a militia unit who then started shooting killing 20.
the crowd vented its fury on the pennsylvania railroad burning everything in sight.
by july 22 some 39 pennsylvania railroad buildings 104 engines and more than 1 200 freight cars had been destroyed.
as news of the violence spread strikes took place all along the major rail lines from new york and new jersey to indiana and illinois.
black and white workers went out on strike together.
in st louis missouri a week long general strike led workers to take control of the city.
workers went on strike as far away as kansas city and san francisco.
women played a crucial role and the baltimore sun reported about the very active part taken by the women who are the wives and mothers of the firemen.
they look famished and wild and declare for starvation rather than have their people work for the reduced wages in response to a plea from the railroad management president hayes declared that a state of insurrection existed and called out federal troops who armed with rapid fire gatling guns put an end to the strike.
former president grant criticized his successor noting the irony that he himself had been criticized for sending the army to protect black voting rights but now however there is no hesitation about exhausting the whole power of the government to suppress a strike on the slightest intimation that danger threatens but in the eyes of the new president attacks on black voters and attacks on the property of the railroad companies were two different things.
others drew their own lessons from the 1877 uprising.
e l godkin editor of the nation called for doubling the size of the u s army but instead something new was created the national guard made up of part time soldiers who could be called out when needed.
after 1877 states created national guard units and built massive national guard armories stern stone buildings where arms might be stored in case of a new insurrection.
these national guard armories can still be seen in many cities a monument to the 1877 rail strike.
twisted track and the wheels of burned out rail cars show some of the 10 million damage caused by the 1877 railroad strike.
524 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 the strikes also inspired the rise of labor unions that sought to help workers organize to demand new rights rather than just vent their fury.
these unions sometimes led to additional uprisings but in addition they brought about changes in how corporations did business.
the knights of labor founded by tailors in philadelphia in 1869 the knights of labor quickly emerged to become the countrys largest and most powerful labor union after the 1877 strike.
the knights welcomed white and black workers immigrants as well as the native born and skilled and unskilled workers.
terence v powderly was the head or grand master workman of the knights of labor in the 1870s and 1880s.
powderly believed that isolated workers and small local unions were doomed to defeat when facing railroads and other large corporations and he wanted his union to have the same organizational power as the largest corporations.
under powderlys leadership the knights tried to avoid violence.
the knights believed that workers and owners had more in common than their differences and hoped that eventually many workers could become independent owners rather than a permanent labor force.
the union campaigned for government support of agricultural cooperatives an 8 hour work day equal pay for women and government ownership of railroads and banks.
powderly took the commitment to racial integration seriously.
at their october 1886 convention in richmond virginia powderly caused quite a stir in the local community by inviting an african american delegate francis ferrell to introduce him to the meeting.
in 1883 they organized a successful strike against the western union telegraph company and in 1885 were strong enough to win a strike against several railroads that agreed to restore lost wages and hire back all striking workers.
for powderly the success of the 1885 strike showed what a strong union could do.
by 1886 the knights had 700 000 members.
in an even larger railroad strike that began in marshall texas in 1886 some 9 000 workers stopped freight on lines in texas missouri arkansas and kansas.
strikes it seemed were becoming a national phenomenon and the knights were in the forefront.
however while national leaders of the knights urged peaceful negotiations in the 1886 strike strikers pushed rail cars off tracks and set fires to railroad buildings.
to avoid further violence the knights called off the strike while claiming a victory that was not really theirs.
the railroad strike of 1886 showed the power of a union to bring the trains and thus the country to a halt.
it also demonstrated the split between many members of the knights who harbored deep hatred for industrial owners and union leadership that still sought conciliation.
while the knights remained strong and were an essential element in the populist political campaigns of the 1890s the split was never fully healed.
in time other unions some more moderate some more radical would replace the knights.
1st the knights of labor labor union that included skilled and unskilled workers irrespective of race or gender founded in 1869 132 american federation of labor a f.
of l labor organization formed in 1886 as a federation of smaller elite craft unions.
the american federation of labor while the knights of labor attempted to organize all workers those in some of the more skilled trades created their own separate unions.
in 1886 many of these small elite unions came together to create the american federation of labor with 50 000 members.
samuel gompers of the cigar makers union was elected as its president and except for 1 year served as president of the a f of l until his death in 1924 by which time it had grown to 3 million members by far the strongest labor union in the united states.
under gomperss leadership the a f.
of l continued to organize workers in separate craft unions with membership in each union restricted to workers in a specific trade such as cigar makers or plumbers or iron molders.
gompers carefully avoided larger issues preferring to negotiate specifically for immediate ends increased wages job security an 8 hour day benefits and the right of the union to bargain collectively for workers.
we fight only for immediate objects that can be realized in a few years gompers said.
he was happy to leave political ideology and more far reaching social change to others.
if the growth in the a f of l s membership is a measure it was a successful strategy.
chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change 525 18 1.
i is j j j 18 3 haymarket the name given to the strike rally and bombing that took place around haymarket square in chicago in may 1886 as well as to the subsequent executions of four leaders of the incident.
haymarket 1886 on may 4 1886 many of the tensions in the united states exploded at chicagos haymarket square.
between 40 000 and 60 000 of chicagos workers went on strike on saturday may 1 chanting their demands for an 8 hour work day eight hours for work eight hours for rest eight hours for what we will the a f of l supported the strike.
so did socialists and anarchists in chicagos diverse immigrant communities.
socialism and anarchism though quite different political philosophies were both very strong in chicago.
socialists believed that the workers should own the means of production and that private ownership of factories businesses and lands should be abolished in favor of ownership by all which often meant government ownership.
anarchists deeply distrusted any government including a socialist government and disdained elections as fraudulent exercises in futility.
in place of government anarchists wanted small local voluntary organizations.
they believed that by abolishing higher authorities a new era of peace and freedom would come.
nevertheless for two anarchist leaders albert parsons and august spies the 8 hour movement was an opportunity to bring skilled and unskilled workers together as a step toward their larger goal.
as the strike continued on monday may 3 spies issued a call for a mass meeting to be held the following night at haymarket square and asked albert parsons to join him.
perhaps 3 000 people showed up at the haymarket rally.
but just as the rally was ending and parsons himself was enjoying a beer at a nearby tavern a police contingent marched into the rally to end it.
someone no one ever found out who threw a bomb into the middle of the police ranks killing one police officer.
six more officers soon died of their wounds.
as news of the haymarket bomb spread newspapers blamed anarchists and socialists for the violence.
eventually albert parsons august spies and six others were tried and convicted for being part of a general conspiracy to annihilate the police force and destroy property even though none of them could possibly have thrown the actual bomb.
appeals and a nationwide campaign for clemency ensued.
samuel gompers who certainly disagreed with anarchists nevertheless said that parsons spies and the others had been fighting for labor from different sides of the house in spite of all the appeals four including parsons and spies were hung on november 11 1887.
haymarket as the strike rally bombing and executions all came to be called was a pivotal moment in american labor history.
for some the trial and executions were a validation of the rule of law.
for others the trial and execution of men who never threw the bomb and did not have any known links to whoever did provided proof that justice was not possible for those who protested in gilded age america.
lucy parsons alberts widow spent the rest of her long life speaking and writing about their cause.
emma goldman a young girl at the time traced her own career as a life long radical organizer to the stories of the haymarket martyrs.
homestead strike 1892 while the 1886 strike for an 8 hour day was a national event other strikes followed none more important than the 1892 homestead strike at andrew carnegies plant at homestead pennsylvania.
by the 1890s carnegie owned a dozen plants in western pennsylvania and northern west virginia.
workers at these huge mills turned out a quarter of the nations steel supply and earned 40 million per year in profits for carnegie.
carnegie wanted to be seen as a friend to working people but profits still came first.
in 1892 when workers at carnegies homestead steel mill went on strike carnegie left his top lieutenant henry clay frick in charge while he remained at his castle in scotland.
frick decided that the time had come to break the 24 000 member amalgamated association of iron steel and tin workers.
in june 1892 when it came time to negotiate a new contract frick offered only a cut in salary.
when the union rejected the offer frick closed the plant fired all of the workers and built an 8 foot fence around it.
he then hired new nonunion workers 526 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 coxey s army a protest march of unemployed workers led by businessman jacob coxey demanding a public works highway program and guaranteed jobs during the depression of the 1890s.
and 300 pinkerton agents to protect them.
the pinkerton agency had been created to support the north during the civil war but turned into a quasi police force for industrial owners who were caught in conflict with unions in the late 1800s.
the homestead workers fought back.
on july 6 when two barges of pinkerton detectives came down the river to the plant strikers who had been patrolling the area rushed the pier.
no one knows who shot first but both sides kept shooting.
eventually between five and nine steelworkers and between three and ten pinkerton agents were killed.
pennsylvanias governor sent 8 000 militia troops to homestead to keep the peace and frick brought in new workers who began operating the mill.
union leaders were arrested but were acquitted it was hard to find an antiunion jury in the region.
public opinion generally blamed carnegie and frick for the bloodshed.
nevertheless frick had won his battle.
he had defeated the union and reopened the mills with nonunion workers.
unlike andrew carnegie he did not care about public opinion.
carnegie also blamed frick for the troubles and the two never spoke again but carnegie also did not reinstate the union.
coxey s army 1893 94 in 1893 a grand worlds fair the columbian exposition opened in chicago.
like earlier fairs this one displayed the nations technological marvels and industrial success including 400 buildings lit with 10 000 electric lights.
while the fair was a booming success the nations economy was collapsing in the panic of 1893.
j p morgan rescued the countrys gold reserves see chapter 17 but did not end the terrible unemployment.
by the end of the year one fifth of those who had been working before the panic were out of a job.
many were desperate and the contrast between the desperation and the fairs glitter was obvious.
an ohio businessman jacob coxey was dazzled when he attended the chicago fair but deeply touched by the poverty and desperation he saw among unemployed in the city.
back in his hometown of massillon ohio near akron coxey announced a plan to put the unemployed to work building roads.
coxey argued that america needed to improve its mostly dirt roads and also end unemployment.
the solution was clear to him.
congress should appropriate 500 million in government bonds and offer every man who wanted to work 1 50 per day for an 8 hour day fixing the countrys highways.
coxey assumed that the key was putting men not necessarily women to work.
and coxey insisted if congress did not act the unemployed should march to washington and demand action.
although only about 100 marchers assembled at the beginning of the march by the time the march got to homestead pennsylvania site of the carnegie strike it had grown to 600.
all along the way people gave them food and shelter.
coxey marched into washington dc on schedule on may 1 1894.
the new york times called the march a battle between law and anarchy federal troops were put on alert.
by mid may some 800 coxeyites were in the district of columbia a number that grew to 1 200 in august.
but congress dominated as it was by the corporate interests did not pass coxeys legislation or do anything else to aid the unemployed.
in august police scattered coxey5s army as they were called by the press.
coxey returned to ohio where he lived to the age of 97 and died in 1951 still advocating federally financed highway improvement and pleased to see his goals partially fulfilled by the new deals employment programs in the 1930s.
the american railway union the pullman strike of 1894 and the socialist party the american railway union was created in 1893 and led by eugene v debs who would go on to play an important role in american labor and political life for the next several decades.
debs was born in 1855 in terre haute indiana and left school at 15 to take a job on the railroads.
in 1875 he joined the brotherhood of locomotive firemen but soon came to believe that having different unions for engineers firemen brakemen and for the workers who maintained the tracks was a recipe for defeat.
his response was to help organize one union for everyone who worked on the railroads chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change coxey s army with their supporters marched though towns from ohio to washington dc on their way to make their demands of congress.
almost immediately after its founding the american railway union won a strike against the great northern railroad in 1894.
it looked like a new force was emerging.
but then debs found himself pulled into a strike he did not want and the early successes of the american railway union turned to failure when the new union was involved in another strike at the pullman palace car company.
george pullman did not operate a railway he made railway cars the very best railway cars anywhere in the united states.
pullman cars were elegant sleeping cars that cost four times as much as other railway cars and that allowed travelers who could afford the accommodations to cross the country in comfort.
having designed and manufactured the cars pullman leased the cars and their staff to various rail lines that attached them to regular trains.
both pullman and the lines profited handsomely from the exchange.
to keep his employees out of industrial strife pullman built his own town pullman illinois 12 miles outside of chicago.
in pullman 8 000 workers and their families lived in 1 400 houses that they rented from the company.
they were provided with schools an athletic club free lectures a local theater and health care.
the housing at pullman was substantially better than housing available to most other industrial workers but the rents were high and the rules strict.
pullman did not allow alcohol and he had spotters who kept an eye on the behavior and home life of his employees.
facing the panic of 1893 pullman thought that the only prudent thing was to lay off some workers and cut wages for the rest.
he did not however reduce rents in pullman since he also expected the town to pay its own way.
nevertheless in spite of the depressed economy the pullman company paid its standard dividends to its shareholders.
in response the workers went on strike.
ninety percent of the residents of pullman did not show up for work.
they called on debs and the american railway union for support.
debs told the pullman workers that the midst of a depression was a terrible time to call a strike and urged them to postpone.
they refused and debs felt bound to support them.
the american railway union refused to handle any train that had a pullman car attached.
by june rail traffic through chicago had stopped.
the union took special 528 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 care to keep the mail trains running so there would be no reason for federal intervention but the federal government intervened anyway.
the cleveland administration obtained an injunction ordering the strikers back to work and when they refused cleveland ordered 14 000 federal troops to chicago to end the strike.
when the army arrived in chicago there was a riot and 34 people were killed.
federal authorities not only ended the strike but also arrested debs and disbanded the union.
ihe strike and the jail term transformed debs.
he went to jail a charismatic labor leader.
he came out convinced that the american economic system was permanently stacked against workers and their unions and that the only way to bring about change was political.
he supported the populist movement in the 1896 election but then founded the socialist party in the united states.
the socialists advocated government ownership of the nations major industries and a mandate for higher salaries for workers.
in the national elections of 1904 through 1920 except 1916 debs ran for president as the partys candidate winning hundreds of thousands of votes and giving himself a platform to advocate for a completely different economic system.
miners and their unions the steel that was transforming america required two key ingredients iron ore and coal to fuel the smelting process that turned iron into steel.
coal also heated most of the nations cities and coal fired generators produced much of the nations electricity.
these two ingredients had to be mined from deep in the earth as did several other resources of great importance to the united states.
gold and silver were still the most valued forms of exchange.
lead pipes provided water to most houses.
bringing these resources to the industrial process required the backbreaking and dangerous work of miners.
as the united states industrialized the need for mines and miners grew exponentially however since every dollar paid to a miner increased the cost of finished products or reduced the profits of those who owned the manufacturing process mine owners were determined to keep the pay of miners as low as possible recruiting new immigrants who found themselves with few options.
18 1 18 j 18 3 of the pullman strike.
chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change 52 united mine workers of america a new union organized in 1890 to bring together mine workers in the eastern half of the united states in one organization that eventually became a national union.
even before the great railway strike of 1877 the countrys coal miners had been an angry lot.
coal had been mined in pennsylvanias schuylkill valley for generations but in the 1860s and 1870s miners had to dig deeper than ever using pumps to lower the water table and machinery to ventilate the mines.
those deep mines were dangerous.
the pumps could fail or a new stream could break through and drown miners.
tunnels could collapse.
methane or other dangerous gasses could collect and kill miners before they knew what was happening.
and of course the very properties that made coal valuable made fire an ever present danger.
in the aftermath of the panic of 1873 the mine owners cut pay and in response the miners union called a strike.
by january 1875 pennsylvania coal production stopped.
since cities were heated with coal midwinter seemed like a good time to win a strike but the mine owners had stockpiled coal and the cities stayed warm while miners starved.
by july 1875 the strike was defeated and the miners went back to work at the reduced wages.
the failure of the 1875 strike produced a secret organization among the irish immigrant coal miners in pennsylvania the molly maguires who attacked and sometimes murdered foremen superintendents and even a mine owner.
the mine owners hired the pinkerton detective agency which had played an important role in the homestead strike.
a pinkerton agent infiltrated the mollys and eventually 10 men were convicted of murder based on their involvement in the molly maguires and were executed in june 1877.
in the 1880s and 1890s new efforts were made to create a new and stronger union among the coal miners of pennsylvania ohio virginia and west virginia that was focused not on violence against owners but on victories for the workers.
the united mine workers of america was founded in columbus ohio in 1890.
the new unions charter called for ensuring that the miners received a fair share of the wealth they created fully compatible with the dangers of our calling the united mine workers of america was open to all races and religions to avoid the divisions that had undermined earlier unions.
during an 1894 coal strike in alabama the chicago tribune reported for the first time in this district no distinction as to color was made.
negroes marched in companies sandwiched between the white men.
a negro and a white miner carried a banner it was an all too rare moment in american labor history.
under the leadership of a former knights of labor member john mitchell who knew how to call a strike and when to call for arbitration the united mine workers won a 10 percent raise in 1900 and then in 1903 won another raise along with recognition for the union and guarantees of fair weighing of the coal since miners were paid by the weight of the coal they dug and often felt that they were cheated.
by the early 1900s the mine workers of the eastern part of the country were better paid and living in better conditions than had been thought possible even a few years earlier although it had been a hard road for them to get there.
mining developed later in the west than in the east see chapter 16 but expanded rapidly.
in 1883 gold was discovered in the coeur dalene region of idaho the narrow northern part of the state.
before long the gold was played out but deposits of silver lead and coal were found.
the lead and coal however were buried much deeper than silver and gold and western miners found themselves working deep underground in dangerous conditions as employees of large corporations that were financed by eastern stockholders.
several unions merged in 1891 to create the miners union of the coeur dalenes.
when the price for silver and lead fell on national markets in 1892 the miners union went on strike to protest a cut in wages from 3 50 a week to 3 00 a week for a 7 day week of 10 hour days.
as in pennsylvania the mine owners hired the pinkerton agency to infiltrate the union and pitched battle broke out between unionized miners and nonunion workers.
the governor of idaho called for federal troops to end a state of insurrection and rebellion in april 1899 striking miners used dynamite to blow up the bunker hill mine in the coeur dalene region after the mine superintendent fired all union workers.
the governor of idaho frank steunenberg who had been elected with union support in 530 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 1896 called for federal troops to restore order.
when steunenberg was assassinated in 1905 the western federation of miners was blamed but none of its leaders were convicted.
the struggles in the west continued and some of the union leaders especially the charismatic william d big bill haywood became national labor leaders.
the industrial workers of the world on june 27 1905 over 200 delegates gathered in chicago to found a new union the industrial workers of the world known as the wobblies.
the iww s founders wanted to create one big union of all workers no matter what their trade or skill.
western federation of miners leader big bill haywood opened the convention saying they were there to build a working class movement that shall have for its purpose the emancipation of the working class eugene v debs expressed the hope that the time had come to begin the work of forming a great economic or revolutionary organization of the working class mother jones lucy parsons and other labor leaders joined in launching the iww.
industrial workers of the world iww popularly known as wobblies organized in i 1905 to bring together the nation s workers in one big union to fight for a radically different economic system that favored workers over owners.
american voices mother jones victory at arnot 1897 mother jones became a union organizer and traveled the country supporting mine workers other unions and later the socialist party and the industrial workers of the world.
she was arrested often but continued leading strikes with approaches such as described below from her autobiography most likely an incident that took place during the united mine workers strike of 1897.
in arnot pennsylvania a strike had been going on 4 or 5 months.
the men were becoming discouraged sunday afternoon i held a meeting you ve got to take the pledge i said.
rise and pledge to stick to your brothers and the union till the strike s won.
the men shuffled their feet but the women rose their babies in their arms and pledged themselves to see that no one went to work in the morning then the company tried to bring in scabs nonunion workers.
i told the men to stay home with the children for a change and let the women attend to the scabs.
i organized an army of women housekeepers.
on a given day they were to bring their mops and brooms and the army would charge the scabs up at the mines i selected as leader an irish woman who had a most picturesque appearance.
she had slept late and her husband had told her to hurry up and get into the army.
she had grabbed a red petticoat and slipped it over a thick cotton night gown.
she wore a black stocking and a white one.
she had tied a little fringed shawl over her wild red hair.
her face was red and her eyes were mad.
i looked at her and felt that she could raise a rumpus.
i said you lead the army up to the drip mouth.
take that tin dishpan you have with you and your hammer and when the scabs and the mules come up begin to hammer and howl.
then al of you hammer and howl and be ready to chase the scabs with your mops and brooms.
don t be afraid of anyone.
up the mountain side yelling and hollering she led the women and when the mules came up with the scabs and the coal she began beating on the dishpan and hollering and all the army joined in with her.
the sheriff tapped her on the shoulder.
my dear lady said he remember the mules.
don t frighten them.
she took the old tin pan and she hit him with it and she hollered to hell with you and the mules.
from that day on the women kept continual watch of the mines to see that the company did not bring in scabs.
every day women with brooms or mops in one hand and babies in the other arm wrapped in little blankets went to the mines and watched that no one went in.
and all night long they kept watch.
they were heroic women.
in the long years to come the nation will pay them high tribute for they were fighting for the advancement of a great country.
the last of february the company put up a notice that all demands were conceded before i left the union held a victory meeting the women came for miles in a raging snow storm for that meeting little children trailing on their skirts and babies under their shawls.
many of the miners had walked miles.
it was one night of real joy and a great celebration.
source mary harris jones the autobiography of mother jones chicago charles h kerr 1990 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what unique strategy did mother jones employ during the 1897 miners strike.
comparison compare the strategy used by mother jones with that used by workers during the homestead strike.
do you think the different strategies help explain the differences in outcome that you note.
chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change 53 the iww supported strikes all over the country like this one by women from the ladies tailors union on the picket line during the uprising of the 20 000 garment workers strike.
the convention adopted a constitution that began by organizing industrially we are forming the structure of the new society within the shell of the old.
this mission was very different from the incremental goals of the american federation of labor.
for the iww contract negotiations and strikes were only a step within the shell of the old to help launch the new world.
in the early 1900s workers were not embarrassed to sing about their dreams and the iww song book described them in songs including one that mocked the idea that the poor should hope that youll get pie in the sky when you die instead of taking action now.
another iww song promised that if the workers took a notion they could bring the current economy to a halt.
the iww was attacked by the press the corporate world and the government.
it was also torn by ideological splits personality tensions and factional divisions.
but for 15 years the iww was a major force in labor organizing around the country and included some of the countrys most charismatic labor leaders among its members.
the garment industry and the triangle shirtwaist fire of 1911 the garment industry one of the nations largest employed mostly women.
between 1900 and 1910 new york city became the nations center in the manufacture of ready to wear clothing.
led by innovative owners much of the work moved from the small sweatshops of the lower east side to larger factories in the new high rise buildings of 10 and 12 stories in southern manhattan.
max blanck and isaac harris operated their factory the triangle shirtwaist company in greenwich village.
there over 500 workers most of them young jewish and italian women assembled the popular shirtwaists as womens blouses were called that were sold in department stores across the country.
in new york city alone over 40 000 people worked in the garment trades in the early 1900s.
although divided by language yiddish italian english and a host of other languages the garment workers joined together to protest low salaries.
the international ladies garment workers union ilgwu had a tough organizer clara lemlich who had emigrated from russia in 1903 and who led women in a number of strikes.
during some of the strikes factories hired replacement nonunion workers while police arrested strikers or thugs beat them up.
women from new yorks social elite including anne morgan daughter of j p morgan sometimes joined the picket lines and they too were sometimes arrested or beaten.
in the late fall of 1909 as the ilgwu considered a general strike in the garment industry many including a f of l president samuel gompers urged caution.
but clara lemlich said i have no further patience for talk 1 move that we go on a general strike workers cheered and the strike began.
factories all over manhattan were picketed that fall.
the garment industry owners organized their own association and refused to give in to the strikers demands.
striking garment workers got help from the national leadership of the a f.
of l and from the western federation of miners whose leader big bill haywood sent word that the western miners are hearty admirers of your courage and fighting qualities they also got support from society women like morgan and from african american women who were being recruited as strikebreakers but who refused though in a meeting they asked the union to exercise a proper consideration of the claims and demands of the men and women of color who desire to enter the various trades the long strike ended in exhaustion for both sides in early 1911 when the union and the owners agreed to a compromise.
on saturday march 25 1911 only a month after the strike ended a fire started under one of the cutting room tables 132 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 bread and roses strike a spontaneous strike of workers in the mills of lawrence massachusetts in 1912 at the triangle shirtwaist factory.
perhaps a cigarette butt had been tossed in the bin of cotton scrap and dust which exploded in a massive fire.
workers tried to put the fire out with buckets of water they kept on each floor but it spread too rapidly.
the fire started on the eighth floor and quickly filled the cutting room with smoke.
flames spread up airshafts to the ninth and tenth floors.
workers ran for exits some of which had been blocked by the owners who fearful of theft insisted that all workers use only one exit.
new yorks firefighters arrived but none had ladders that could reach to the eighth or higher floors.
some workers were quickly consumed by flames.
more than 50 jumped from the windows and 20 were killed when a flimsy fire escape on the outside of the building collapsed.
in the end 146 workers most of them young women were killed in the triangle shirtwaist factory fire the deadliest industrial catastrophe in manhattan for decades.
eventually the triangle shirtwaist fire led to new industrial regulations and important labor reforms.
at the time however when devastated husbands parents friends and relatives lined up at the makeshift morgue on twenty sixth street to try to identify the bodies only the terrible loss seemed real.
bread and roses the lawrence strike of 1912 a few months after the triangle fire on new years day 1912 a new massachusetts law limited the work week to 54 hours a cut from the 56 hour norm in the mills of lawrence.
the management of the mill companies complied with the law and cut wages accordingly.
they saw little reason to worry about any protest.
the workers of lawrence spoke 45 different languages and were divided into different crafts less than one in ten was a union member.
cutting their pay seemed both prudent and low risk.
but when the pay cuts appeared in the pay envelopes workers immediately started to walk off the job.
an estimated 14 000 workers were on strike by the end of the first day.
in response to the strikers spontaneous action the iww then at the height of its influence sent some of its top organizers to lawrence.
they planned smaller meetings by language groups and large rallies on the lawrence common.
to get around a city ordinance that banned gatherings in front of any of the mills the strikers devised a new tactic a moving picket line in which strikers did not stop but kept walking in a continuous line around the mill.
when iww leaders were accused of putting women in the front lines the iwws elizabeth gurley flynn responded the iww has been accused of putting the women in the front.
the truth is the iww does not keep them in the back and they go to the front at some point in the strike when women with their babies in their arms marched through the streets of lawrence with signs reading we want bread and roses too the strike was given a new name.
the public generally supported the strikers and the mill owners eventually agreed to an increase in salary and no discrimination against strikers.
the bread and roses strike was a success probably the greatest success in the iwws short history.
ludlow colorado 1914 in the mountains of southern colorado brutal working conditions persisted in the coal mines that were owned by john d rockefeller.
on september 15 1913 delegates from the mining camps gathered at trinidad colorado and voted for a strike demanding recognition for their union a 10 percent increase in wages an 8 hour day the right to elect those who would weigh the coal free choice of stores and doctors chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change 53 violence during a coal strike in ludlow colorado in 1914 in which at least 30 people including 11 children were killed.
rather than only company stores and doctors and enforcement of colorado mining laws.
mother jones told the miners dont be afraid boys.
fear is the greatest curse we have within a week 80 to 90 percent of the miners were on strike.
ihe strike lasted 14 months.
it was long and bloody.
the coal companies evicted the striking miners from their company owned housing and the union arranged tent camps.
violence erupted between the coal companys guards and strikers and by the end of the first month more than 20 people had been killed.
worse violence followed.
on april 20 1914 militia troops recruited by the coal company took up positions around the miners camp at ludlow colorado and the nervous inhabitants then took up their own positions.
no one knew who fired the first shot but one shot quickly led to several hours of murderous fighting.
tents burst into flame possibly from a bullet striking something explosive.
over 30 people were killed including several women and 11 children found under one of the tents where they had huddled for safety.
the ludlow massacre became a rallying cry for labor and the loss of life especially of children permanently tarnished and troubled the rockefeller family.
president woodrow wilson sent u s army troops to restore order and the united mine workers union declared that ending the strike was doing the best thing possible for the men on strike who have suffered so long in order that justice might be done further justice would take much longer.
183 quick review was the violence that accompanied many strikes inevitable.
why or why not.
conclusion the rapid industrialization of the united states after the civil war generated wealth and progress for some americans and serious new problems for others.
very quickly the disparities that emerged created new and violent tensions in the united states.
in the south the end of reconstruction set the region on a path that would continue to deny civil rights and economic opportunities to african americans for many decades to come.
combined with the countrys growing indifference to the original goals of reconstruction the new south successfully limited the advancement of african americans through legal exclusions.
even as the south was opening up to the world with the introduction of new railroad lines and the diversification of its economy power and prosperity came only to some.
those who were excluded fought back particularly african americans who challenged segregation violence and their economic exclusion.
farmers white and black also challenged their economic exclusion from the prosperity that gilded age america was generating.
through a number of organizations especially the farmers alliance and later the populist party farmers sought economic might equal to the giant corporations and political access at the highest levels.
industrial workers also organized to fight for their rights.
new unions the knights of labor the american federation of labor the united mine workers of america and the industrial worker of the world sought to protect workers rights.
the nation was wracked by strikes from the railroad strike of 1877 to the miners strike in pueblo colorado in 1914 as well as tragedies including the triangle shirtwaist fire of 1912.
between the railway strike of 1877 and the colorado strike of 1914 american workers fought to better their lives and working conditions.
while some owners were sympathetic the nation was divided by a great gulf between those who owned the industries and those who worked in them.
grand visions of a different kind of society were born but not achieved.
more basic demands for higher pay safer conditions shorter work days were only partially met and it would be another 2 decades during the great depression and new deal era that industrial workers could get much of what they were asking for from 1877 onward.
chapter review how did some of the disenfranchised workers blacks farmers etc.
attempt to make their voices heard in the late 1800s and early 1900s.
why were their tactics different.
how successful were they.
534 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 chapter 18 chapter review 18 1 conflict in the new south analyze how the combined impact of industrialism and the end of reconstruction created the unique character of the new south.
review questions 1.
historical interpretation what was new about the new south.
constructing an argument what factors contributed to the increased rigidity of racial segregation and renewed white efforts to exclude blacks from political life in the late 1800s.
comparison compare and contrast the response of booker t washington and w e b.
de bois to racial segregation and discrimination.
to what groups within the white community might each appeal.
the politics of conflict from populist movement to populist party analyze how agrarian unrest and protest came to have a significant impact on american politics.
review questions 4.
historical interpretation what factors contributed to the rise of farmers organizations in the late 1800s.
crafting an argument how would you explain the emphasis that farmers political representatives placed on federal fiscal policy.
contextualization what factors contributed to the nomination of william jennings bryan by both the peoples party and the democrats.
worker protest and the rise of organized labor 183 explain the tensions in industrial america that led to major labor strife between the 1870s and 1914 review questions 7.
comparison compare and contrast the knights of labor and the american federation of labor.
how would you characterize the approach of each to the challenges facing american workers in the late 1800s and early 1900s.
historical interpretation what role did government play in the labor disputes of the late 1800s.
crafting an argument what group or groups bears greatest responsibility for the violence that often accompanied labor disputes in the late 1800s and early 1900s.
chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the many ideas that were labeled progressive and the impact of those ideas on life in the united states.
learning objectives the revolt of the intellectuals explain the role of muckraking journalists and intellectuals in shaping a progressive agenda.
the transformation of the cities analyze the changes in urban life that inspired progressive reforms and the impact of those reforms on cities.
religious responses to the gilded age explain the main currents of religiously based reform movements during the progressive era.
progressive politics on the national stage analyze the three progressive presidents and their administrations.
no one individual symbolized the progressive movement as much as theodore roosevelt.
as an advocate of the outdoor life a trustbuster and a conservationist he captured the hearts of many americans in the early 1900s.
theodore roosevelt had been president for less than 4 months in december 1901 when he sent his first annual message to congress.
the new president said that in light of the tremendous and highly complex industrial development in the country the old laws and the old customs which were once quite sufficient to regulate the accumulation and distribution of wealth are no longer sufficient he asked congress for new laws and new presidential authority to meet the new situation.
roosevelt was ready to act.
roosevelt rejected the radicalism of democrats like william jennings bryan or socialists like eugene v debs.
he insisted it cannot too often be pointed out that to strike with ignorant violence at the interest of one set of men almost inevitably endangers the interests of all he was full of praise for the corporate leaders who had created great wealth.
nevertheless he asserted there is a wide spread conviction in the minds of the american people that the great corporations known as trusts are in certain of their features and tendencies hurtful to the general welfare and since the conditions are now wholly different therefore wholly different action is called for as roosevelt defined those wholly different actions in the weeks and months that followed it became clear that he was charting a new course in american politics.
he was no radical but he was not a mckinley republican either.
he was determined to address the anger that fueled strikes though costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 k536 part vi becoming an industrial world power certainly not to adopt the economic changes advocated by many strikers.
in addition he was committed to changing urban and industrial conditions and conserving the countrys natural resources.
as a result of his efforts roosevelt and the two presidents who followed him william howard taft and woodrow wilson came to be known as the progressive presidents.
presidential politics however were far from the only aspect of the larger progressive movement that dominated american life between 1890 and 1917 and indeed led to the electoral success of roosevelt and his successors.
this chapter seeks to understand the many ideas that were labeled progressive and the impact of those ideas on life in the united states.
the revolt of the intellectuals 19 1 explain the role of muckraking journalists and intellectuals in shaping a progressive agenda.
long before theodore roosevelt became president numerous people in the united states were thinking about how best to respond to the extraordinary changes brought about by immigration urbanization and the rapid industrialization of the country.
upper class reformers newspaper reporters ministers writers and college professors proposed new ways of ordering economic and political life.
at the end of the 1800s rapid industrialization and urbanization across the united states produced a radically different intellectual climate.
new ideas and those who envisioned them began to shape the future of industrialized america.
utopian idealists henry george a young journalist in california was deeply troubled by the railway strike of 1877.
two years later he published progress and poverty.
the book quickly became a bestseller.
george understood that there were benefits from industrialization but the result he said was that f rom all parts of the civilized world come complaints of want and suffering and anxiety among the working classes as a solution george proposed a 100 percent tax on any increase in the value of land or any rents on land.
he argued we already take some rent in taxation.
we have only to make some change in our modes of taxation to take it all george said that his proposal would reduce the value and cost of land thus allowing workers to turn to farming if they wished which would create a labor shortage that would inevitably raise wages and improve conditions in factories.
while many economists argued with georges logic the single tax movement became a political force and single tax clubs sprang up everywhere.
in 1886 new yorks central labor union persuaded george to run for mayor of the city.
although george lost his campaign led to a permanent reform coalition in new york.
ten years after georges book edward bellamy a journalist from massachusetts published looking backward in 1888.
the book described a new perfect society in which class and class warfare had disappeared in a country of prosperous citizens who enjoyed their lives free of poverty or wealth and also free of lawyers and politics.
in contrast to bellamys hopeful work ignatius donnelly wrote caesars column in 1891 a book that described a country rigidly divided between a large working class living brutal lives and a small comfortable elite.
in donnelly s fictional story a few americans are able to escape from their world and start a happy new community organized around the platforms of the greenback party the knights of labor and the farmers alliance.
george bellamy and donnelly and other authors like them were often unrealistic.
their images of a new perfect society seem romantic and their economic proposals unworkable.
nevertheless in a county groping its way to a different economic order all of them gave ideas energy and optimism to other reformers.
significant dates 1879 progress and poverty by henry george published frances e willard elected president of woman s christian temperance union 1881 henry demarest lloyd publishes expose of standard oil company 1889 ellen starr and jane addams open hull house in chicago hazen s pingree elected as reform mayor of detroit michigan 1893 mcclure s magazine publishes first issue 1897 samuel m golden rule jones elected reform mayor of toledo ohio 1899 john dewey s school and society published 1901 theodore roosevelt becomes president at william mckinley s assassination 1904 ida tarbell s history of the standard oil company published 1906 upton sinclair s the jungle published 1912 woodrow wilson defeats theodore roosevelt william howard taft and eugene v debs for the presidency and launches new freedom 1913 federal reserve system launched 1914 clayton anti trust act 1917 walter rauschenbusch s a theology for the social gospel published single tax movement proposed by henry george in 1879 the single tax a 100 tax on any increase in the value of real estate was designed to keep property values low and therefore limit the accumulation of wealth while spreading opportunity more broadly in the society.
