chapter 13 the civil war 1861 1865 259 key terms and people in this chapter election of 1860 conscription praft william carney abraham lincoln stonewall jackson ulysses s grant confederate states of battle of antietam william t sherman america battle hymn of republic philip bazaar jefferson pavis emancipation election of 1864 lincoln s first inaugural proclamation second inaugural fort sumter battle of gettysburg address anaconda plan gettysburg address appomattox court house robert e lee battle of vicksburg john wilkes gooth ess ent ial questions what underlying factors caused the civil war.
what specific events led to the outbreak of the conflict.
what were the contrasting visions of lincoln and jefferson davis.
what roles did individuals play in determining the outcome of the war.
r the election of 1860 by the late 1850s deep divisions existed among americans over the future of the nation and especially over the institution of slavery.
in the presidential election of 1860 the republican party nominated the former u s representative from illinois abraham lincoln.
honest abe ran on a platform that opposed the extension of slavery in the territories but not the system of slavery in the south.
democrats could not agree on a candidate.
northern and southern democrats chose separate candidates.
the split in their party allowed lincoln to win the election with only 39 of the popular vote.
lincoln did not campaign in the south and not surprisingly did not win a single southern state.
lincoln as he looked after winning the 1860 election.
chapter 13 the civil war 1861 1865 261 three weeks after davis spoke lincoln responded to the challenge posed by the secession in his first inaugural address.
lincoln reassured southerners that he would not interfere with slavery in the south.
but he warned that the constitution was based on the idea that the union of these states is perpetual and that no state can lawfully get out of the union thus he would do his utmost to preserve the union by force if necessary.
he denied jefferson davis claim that southern states had a lawful right to leave it.
he further stated that even if the constitution were taken to be a simple contract it could not be legally cancelled without an agreement between all the states both north and south.
he saw the union as a union of people not states.
march 1861 lincoln delivers his first inaugural address.
acting as an amateur historian when lincoln delivered his inaugural address thousands came not just to see the new president but to hear what he had to say about the crisis facing the nation.
part of his address was a direct appeal to the seceding southern states.
in your hands my dissatisfied fellow countrymen not in mine is the momentous issue of civil war.
the government will not assail you.
you can have no conflict without being yourselves the aggressors.
you have no oath registered in heaven to destroy the government while i shall have the most solemn one to preserve protect and defend it we are not enemies but friends.
we must not be enemies.
though passion may have strained it must not break our bonds of affection.
the mystic chords of memory stretching from every battlefield and patriot grave to every living heart and hearthstone all over this broad land will yet swell the chorus of the union when again touched as surely they will be by the better angels of our nature what message was lincoln giving to southern states in his address.
fc how did his views on the union differ from those of jefferson davis.
firing on fort sumter fort sumter was a federal fort in charleston harbor south carolina.
the garrison of federal troops stationed there was running out of food and supplies and had no way of obtaining these onshore after south carolina seceded.
chapter 13 the civil war 1861 1865 263 could the civil war have been avoided or was it inevitable.
imagine that you are president lincoln in 1861.
write a short speech to the southern states to convince them not to secede from the union.
acting as an amateur historian look at the following four viewpoints on the causes of the civil war.
three of them are from primary sources from the time of the civil war.
the fourth one provides the views of a modem historian.
stephens confederate vice president sumner s speech thomas jefferson s ideas rested upon the assumption of the equality of races.
this was an error our new government is founded upon exactly the opposite idea its foundations are laid its cornerstone rests upon the great truth that the negro is not equal to the white man that slavery subordination to the superior race is his natural and normal condition.
alexander stephens confederate vice president march 1861.
t here are two causes to this war.
one is slavery and the other is state rights.
if slavery were out of the way there would be no trouble from state rights.
the war is for slavery nothing else.
the south seeks to install this barbarism as the truest civilization.
slavery is declared to be the corner stone of their new structure.
republican senator charles sumner in a speech delivered in july 1863.
lincoln s speech a modern historian my object in this struggle is to save the union.
if i could save the union without freeing any slave i would do it and if i could save it by freeing all the slaves i would do it and if i could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone i would also do that.
i here state my purpose and i intend no modification of my often expressed personal wish that all men everywhere could be free.
president abraham lincoln in a speech delivered in august 1862 if the north fought to uphold the justice power and authority of the federal government the opposite many assume must be that the south fought for the power of the states.
but the equation did not balance in that way the north did not fight at first to end slavery but the south did fight to protect slavery.
it is vital that we grasp this truth before it fades even further from view.
edward ayers professor of history university of richmond april 2011 based on these viewpoints write a short essay of one page on what you see as the main causes of the civil war.
refer to at least two of these documents in your essay.
chapter 13 the civil war 1861 1865 265 for the next four years americans were engaged in the bloodiest conflict in their history.
southerners were fighting to defend their independence and preserve their way of life even though this included denying independence to others the slaves.
northerners fought to maintain national unity.
later they also fought to end the system of slavery.
when the war began the north enjoyed several important advantages over the south transportation.
the north had a superior transportation system with more railroads canals ports and roads.
population.
the north s population was 22 million in 1860 compared to only six million free citizens in the south.
the north had more factories and grew more food.
the south was primarily rural and agricultural.
it produced mainly cotton and cash crops to be sold to others.
the south lacked manufacturing centers.
leadership.
jefferson davis president of the confederacy lacked the political skills of president lincoln.
however the south appeared to have superior military leadership in the early years of the war with commanders such as general lee.
naval power.
the south had few war ships while the north had a powerful navy which blockaded southern ports and helped in the mississippi campaign.
this naval power would prove decisive.
although the north had superior wealth and resources southerners thought they had one very important advantage they were fighting to defend their own way of life.
categorize the advantages and disadvantages of the north and the south during the war as either political economic or social.
wartime strategies northerners adopted a long term strategy first suggested by general winfield scott that was aimed at strangling the south.
because the north hoped to surround and strangle the south like a giant anaconda snake this plan became known as the anaconda plan president lincoln ordered a naval blockade of the confederacy that was practically unchallenged.
his objectives were to prevent southerners from receiving supplies from europe to block southern states from exporting cotton to prohibit the south from importing war materials and to thwart the creation of a confederate navy.
u project without permission j in july 1861 a union army of 30 000 soldiers marched towards richmond but was defeated at the battle of manassas also called the battle of bull run.
general stonewall jackson and other confederate leaders commanding 22 000 soldiers forced the union army to retreat.
jackson displayed remarkable skill on the battlefield which inspired his soldiers.
he is widely regarded as one of the best confederate commanders.
later he was accidentally shot by confederate troops returning from battle.
chapter 13 the civil war 1861 1865 267 stonewall jackson 1824 1863 jefferson davis and robert e lee decided that the best way to end the war was to invade the north.
in late 1862 lees forces crossed into maryland.
confederate and union forces fought a major battle at antietam creek.
at the battle of antietam also known as the battle of sharpsburg six thousand soldiers were killed in just one day the bloodiest single day of the war.
lee retreated to virginia but to lincolns disappointment union leaders did not pursue his forces.
applying what you have learned why were more battles fought in the south than in the north.
chapter 13 the civil war 1861 1865 269 acting as an amateur historian julia ward howe by the start of the civil war john browns body had become a popular marching song of the union army.
one day julia ward howe watched as union soldiers marched off to war singing john browns body howe believed the tune needed better words.
in 1861 she scrawled the verses almost without looking at the paper the battle hymn of the republic first appeared in a magazine as a battle song for the republic.
before long the entire nation was inspired by her hymn and singing her words based on the old tune.
below are the first and fifth stanzas of the battle hymn of the republic mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the lord he is trampling out the vintage where the grapes of wrath are stored he hath loosed the fateful lightning of his terrible swift sword his truth is marching on.
he has sounded forth the trumpet that shall never call retreat he is sifting out the hearts of men before his judgment seat oh be swift my soul to answer him.
be jubilant my feet.
our god is marching on.
explain the meaning of these two stanzas in your own words.
research the battle hymn of the republic on the internet.
read how these words have been interpreted by historians and see how your interpretation matches those.
emancipation proclamation 1862 president lincoln did not originally believe he had the power to end slavery.
however as the war progressed he believed he should do so if it would help save the union.
lincoln used the victory at antietam as the occasion for announcing the emancipation proclamation.
the death toll was now so great that lincoln wanted to give the war effort a greater moral purpose.
lincoln also wanted to prevent britain and france which opposed slavery from taking sides with the south.
finally he wanted to prevent southern states from using black troops for combat and to keep border states such as missouri from deserting the north for the south.
the emancipation proclamation only freed the slaves in rebelling states not in the loyal border states.
it was the most controversial document of lincolns presidency.
the announcement of the proclamation met with both hostility and jubilation in the north.
on approving it lincoln remarked i never in my life felt more certain that i was doing right than i do in signing this paper name chapter 13 the civil war 1861 1865 271 the gettysburg address lincoln was invited to the battlefield of gettysburg in 1863 to dedicate a cemetery to the union soldiers who had died there.
he spoke for only two minutes.
simply and eloquently lincoln explained the meaning of the civil war to the 20 000 people who had come to see him.
acting as an amateur.
historian by the third year of bloodshed lincoln began to feel that the war was being fought not just to preserve the union but to test the system of democracy itself.
the purpose of the war was to see if the american experiment in democracy launched in 1776 could survive.
lincoln told his listeners that those who had sacrificed their lives had already made holy the ground where they were buried.
the best that those still living could do was to continue with the terrible task that the fallen soldiers had died for lincoln stands to deliver the gettysburg address.
the world will little note nor long remember what we say here but it can never forget what they the soldiers who died did here.
it is for us the living rather to be dedicated here to the great task remaining before us that from these honored dead we take increased devo tion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain that this nation under god shall have a new birth of freedom and that government of the people by the people for the people shall not perish from the earth what did lincoln see as the great task remaining.
why do you think this speech is one of the most famous in american history.
the battle of vicksburg.
meanwhile union forces had captured new orleans and were slowly working their way up the mississippi river in order to divide the south in two.
vicksburg was located on top of a 200 foot bluff allowing the confederacy to control movement along the mississippi river.
in the spring of 1863 general ulysses s grants armies focused on taking vicksburg to trap the confederate army.
the day after the battle of gettysburg vicksburg surrendered after a 47 day siege.
the battle of vicksburg name chapter 13 the civil war 1861 1865 273 learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below.
describe each of the topics listed complete the graphic organizer by briefly identifying each of these individuals william carney ulysses s grant philip bazaar chapter 13 the civil war 1861 1865 275 the devastation caused by union armies in the south caused many confederates to lose hope.
general lees army slowly dwindled.
by late 1864 half of his soldiers had deserted to return home to protect their families.
in april 1865 richmond the capital of the confederacy fell to union armies.
a few days later lee met grant at appomattox court house virginia.
under the terms of the agreement the officers and men of lees army surrendered and were pardoned.
all confederate arms were collected by union troops as captured property.
both generals signed the document of surrender.
the war was finally over.
richmond virginia lay in ruins in 1865.
lincoln s assassination.
just weeks after the surrender president lincoln was assassinated on april 15 1865 in washington d c exactly four years after his call to put down the rebellion.
lincoln was shot in the back of the head by the actor john wilkes booth who thought lincoln was a tyrant.
lincoln died the next day.
had lincoln lived he was prepared to forgive the south and to work together as americans dedicated to a system of government based on liberty equality and unity.
lincolns greatest achievement was his ability to energize and mobilize the nation by appealing to its highest ideals while acting with malice towards none rewrite one or two paragraphs of the emancipation proclamation or the gettysburg address using your own words.
look for photographs of the war by noted photographer matthew brady and other primary documents on the internet.
write a paragraph describing three items you found during your research.
use resources from your school library or internet to write a brief biography of abraham lincoln robert e lee ulysses s grant william t sherman william carney or philip bazaar.
name chapter 13 concept map breakdown of compromise the civil war 1861 1865 sectionalism s avery grant takes command battle of gettysburg j f battle of vicksburg z turning points the course of the civil war slaves in rebelling states freed r emancipation proclamation draft riots i election of resources of north and south t7 stonewall jackson 1 lincoln s second inaugural address the end of the i.
civil war sherman s march to the sea northern strategy towards none anaconda plan lincoln s leadership blockade appomattox court house south choke off z 1 their economy lee surrenders to grant civil war ends conscription i draft capture the mississippi river firmness strong leader perseverance naval blockade of south kept changing generals j battle hymn 01 the republic julia ward howe l 22 chapter study cards p v causes of the civil war highlights of the civil war i sectionalism.
the north south and west i each developed its own unique way of life.
s i a slavery.
abolitionists in the north thought.
slavery should be ended.
i southerners feared northerners would try i j to abolish slavery.
1 debate over extension of slavery in west.
i breakdown of compromise.
i election of lincoln.
j states rights.
the right of a state to with i draw from the union.
north s strategy.
anaconda plan.
naval blockade of southern ports.
capture control of the mississippi river.
main events of the war 1861 1865.
firing on fort sumter 1861.
battle of antietam 1862.
emancipation proclamation 1862.
battle of gettysburg 1863.
battle of vicksburg 1863.
sherman s march to the sea.
appomattox court house.
lee surrenders.
i 277 name chapter 13 the civil war 1861 1865 279 now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 which two individuals received a congressional medal of honor for their service to the nation in the civil war.
f jefferson davis and robert e lee f hist 8 a j g william carney and philip bazaar h stonewall jackson and hiram rhodes revels j dred scott and stephen douglas 3 what was the most important advantage the north had during the civil war.
a unified popular support for the war effort econi2 p j b superior military leadership c economic aid from great britain and france d greater human and economic resources 4 what warning did abraham lincoln give the south in his first inaugural address.
f he would act to end slavery.
hist 8 c g he would act to keep the south dependent on the north.
h he would act to preserve the union.
j he would act to protect the freedom of the seas.
use the timeline and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
kansas republican lincoln nebraska party douglas act formed debates john brown s raid democratic party splits on nominees republicans select lincoln lincoln elected south carolina secedes s c fires on ft sumter civil war begins i 5 based on the information in the timeline which statement is accurate.
a john browns raid immediately led to the attack on fort sumter.
hist i b b lincoln was the first elected democratic president.
c most southern states had seceded before lincoln was elected.
d south carolina seceded in the same year that lincoln was elected.
6 which would be considered a major cause of the civil war.
f northern states objected to high tariffs.
his 8 b g southern states wanted to allow the importation of african slaves.
h southern states claimed the right to secede from the union.
j democrats demanded a recount of votes in the election of 1860.
name chapter 13 the civil war 1861 1865 281 11 what was a major result of the civil war.
a states now had the right to secede from the union.
govt 17j8 b the power of the federal government was strengthened.
c the south could collect tariffs on imports.
d the judiciary became the major branch of the federal government.
use the chart and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
selected battles of the civil war 1861 1865 year battle description 1861 april july fort sumter south carolina bull run virginia union forces surrender at charleston.
union army routed by confederates.
1862 sept dec antietam virginia fredericksburg virginia first major union defeat of lee lee halts union advance to richmond.
1863 may july july chancellorsville virginia vicksburg mississippi gettysburg pennsylvania lee defeats union.
lee invades north.
grant captures vicksburg.
lee s invasion north halted lee retreats.
1864 sept atlanta georgia sherman s march to the sea 1865 april appomattox virginia lee surrenders to grant civil war ends.
12 based on the information in the chart why was the impact of the war more destructive in the south than in the north.
f most major battles took place in the south.
hist 8 b j g the south lacked the support of major european allies.
h the souths resources were not as great as those in the north.
j the souths economy was too weak to support a long war.
13 the tariff issue of 1832 and the secession of the southern states in the 1860s were similar in that both concerned the constitutional issue of a statesrights c popular sovereignty govt i7 b j b representation in congress d republicanism use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
this war is not being waged on our part for the purpose of conquest or interfering with the rights of established institutions of the states but to defend and maintain the supremacy of the constitution and to preserve the union 14 which individual held the beliefs expressed in this quotation.
f john brown h jefferson davis g abraham lincoln j robert e lee chist8 c j chapter 13 the civil war 1861 1865 283 19 he hath loosed the fateful lightning of his terrible swift sword his truth is marching on in which nineteenth century song are these words found.
a battle hymn of the republic c america the beautiful acuit 26 a j b star spangled banner d god bless america use the timeline and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
confederate army lincoln union forces stop wins a victory issues the confederate general sherman llllilli at the battle of emancipation advances marches against manassas i proclamation i at gettysburg 1 atlanta.
7 1861 7 1862 hsfisaisossbssi 1863 z 1864 it 20 which event belongs in the box in this sequence of events.
f the kansas nebraska act is passed in congress.
g jefferson davis named president of the confederacy.
h general robert e lee surrenders his forces at appomattox court house.
j john brown captured at harpers ferry attempting a slave uprising.
21 which is the best description of abraham lincolns leadership qualities.
a he was unable to communicate his ideas effectively.
b he refused to listen to opposing points of view.
c he sought to compromise but did not shy away from using force.
d he lacked military experience which made him ineffective in wartime.
22 despite the norths superior resources the south won many battles.
the civil war lasted four years from 1861 to 1865.
which might help to explain these developments.
f the north was more dependent on foreign aid than the south.
g the underground railroad was important to the southern cause.
h guided by capable leaders like stonewall jackson southerners were fighting to maintain their way of life.
j personal wealth was a key factor in determining the outcome of the war.
23 how did jefferson davis and abraham lincoln disagree on the nature of the federal union.
a davis believed the states should replace the constitution with new articles of confederation while lincoln disagreed.
b d davis believed slavery should be extended throughout the united states while lincoln wanted slavery limited to the south.
davis believed sovereign states had the right to legally leave the union while lincoln opposed this claim.
davis believed agricultural and industrial regions could not remain in the same union while lincoln believed the south needed to industrialize.
chapter 14 the reconstruction era 285 a.
during the reconstruction era southern states needed to rebuild their economies and to be re admitted into the union.
b lincoln sought to treat the south leniently by asking 10 of its voters to take an oath of allegiance and have the state ratify the thirteenth amendment.
when he was assassinated the next president andrew johnson sought to follow lincolns plan by treating the south leniently pardoning former confederates.
c one of the biggest issues facing the south was the fate of the freedmen.
despite experiments during the war the freedmen were not given their own land.
the federal government set up the freedmens bureau with offices throughout the south to help the freedmen adjust and to set up schools to educate them.
d southern state legislatures created black codes based on older slave codes.
these limited the civil rights and freedom of movement of the freedmen.
e radical republicans in congress were outraged by the black codes.
they passed the civil rights bill granting freedmen their civil rights.
this act later became the fourteenth amendment.
the congress passed military reconstruction dividing the south into districts governed by the army.
former confederate leaders lost their political rights while the freedmen were given the right to vote.
f congress also impeached president johnson.
he was impeached accused by the house of representatives but the senate failed to remove him from office.
g during reconstruction three amendments were added to the constitution.
the thirteenth amendment abolished slavery.
the fourteenth amendment guaranteed all citizens equal protection of the laws and due process the fifteenth amendment prohibited denial of voting rights on the basis of race.
h during reconstruction freedmen carpetbaggers and scalawags held power in southern governments.
for the first time african americans were elected to government posts.
hiram rhodes revels became the first african american elected to congress.
reconstruction governments built roads schools and took steps towards racial equality.
however after northern troops were withdrawn southern states passed segregation laws in the 1880s.
i southerners also developed a new economy during reconstruction.
many former slaves became tenants and sharecroppers giving a share of their crops to the landowner.
new industries developed in the south especially in larger cities.
this period also saw the opening of the great plains to settlement in the west.
congress passed the homestead act and morrill act during the civil war giving away federal lands to settlers in the west.
the completion of the transcontinental railroad 1869 helped develop the west.
k the indian wars forced indians onto government reservations while the widespread massacre of the buffalo on the great plains destroyed their food supply.
in 1887 the dawes act meant to help indians failed to respect tribal customs and led to the loss of most of their remaining land.
l the civil war provided a great stimulus to industrial production in the north.
new banking laws and higher tariffs helped northern industries to expand.
immigration from europe stimulated the growth of northern cities while workers organized into trade unions for higher wages and better working conditions.
name chapter 14 the reconstruction era 287 the looming battle between lincoln and congress over reconstruction never occurred.
in 1865 only a few days after the south surrendered lincoln was assassinated.
the new president andrew johnson was from the border state of tennessee and lacked president lincolns stature and authority.
initially congress believed johnson would not be lenient on the south.
johnson made wealthy planters write personal letters for clemency.
one senator remarked about johnson i thank god that you are here.
lincoln had too much of the milk of human kindness to deal with these dam rebels.
now they will be dealt with according to their just deserts but in the end president johnson followed lincolns plan of lenient treatment.
johnson was especially sympathetic to poor southern whites.
he recognized newly formed southern state governments and pardoned most rebel leaders.
many southern states then elected former confederate leaders for seats in the new congress.
portrait by matthew brady of president andrew johnson.
the black codes another problem facing the south was how to deal with the millions of freed slaves known as freedmen.
during the war the union army had even given some freed slaves land in the sea islands of south carolina and georgia as an experiment.
congress established the freedmens bureau to help the freed slaves with food clothing and medical care.
some of these agents were former northern veterans empowered to settle disputes between the freedmen and their former masters.
the bureau also searched for lost family members made slave marriages legal opened schools to teach former slaves to read and write and organized to demand their civil rights.
the new southern states were slow to extend voting rights to the freedmen.
some freedmen called for southerners to give them their own land and tools 20 acres and a mule but southern governments refused to do so.
a freedmens bureau school.
instead southern states passed black codes based on older slave codes in order to regulate the lives of the freedmen.
the aim of these codes was to preserve traditional southern society despite the abolition of slavery.
for example the black codes made it illegal for freedmen to hold public office to travel freely or to serve on juries.
any freed man found without a job could be fined and jailed.
name the impeachment of president johnson even before 1867 a number of radicals had called for johnsons removal fearing that reconstruction could never be successful so long as he remained in office.
to enforce its program congress passed the tenure of office act limiting the presidents power to dismiss his own cabinet members.
johnson refused to obey this law which he believed was unconstitutional.
when johnson dismissed his secretary of war congressional leaders moved to remove johnson from office through the process of impeachment.
under the constitution this process involves two steps.
johnson was first impeached accused by the house of representatives.
next the process moved to the senate where the radical republicans fell one vote short of removing johnson from office.
chapter 14 the reconstruction era 289 impeachment hearing for president a ndrew johnson.
the grant presidency shortly after the attempt to remove johnson from office ulysses s grant 1869 1877 the republican candidate was elected president.
although grant had been a brilliant general his administration was characterized by weak presidential leadership and widespread corruption at the national and local levels.
his two terms in office coincided with the rest of reconstruction.
following the civil war the radical republicans in congress introduced three new constitutional amendments the thirteenth fourteenth and fifteenth amendments known as the civil war amendments.
their purpose was to abolish slavery provide citizenship to the freedmen and guarantee their civil rights.
the thirteenth amendment 1865 neither slavery nor involuntary servitude except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted shall exist within the united states or any plate subject to their jurisdiction.
lincolns emancipation proclamation has been called a hollow document since it freed no slaves the proclamation only freed persons held as slaves in rebelling states.
lincoln realized that as president he had no legal grounds to single handedly end the institution of slavery.
he recognized that the emancipation proclamation needed to be followed by a constitutional amendment in order to guarantee the abolition of slavery.
passed in 1865 the thirteenth amendment abolished slavery throughout the nation confirming the intent of the emancipation proclamation.
name chapter 14 the reconstruction era 291 one special motive behind the fifteenth amendment was the republican desire to secure its power base in both the north and the south for future elections.
african american voters were expected to support republicans.
ratification of the amendment actually had little effect in the south since terrorism and special hurdles to voting were later used to prevent african americans from voting once reconstruction ended.
it which plan for reconstruction that of lincoln johnson or the radical republicans would you have favored.
debate these plans with your class.
compare the impeachment of president andrew johnson with the more recent impeachment of president bill clinton.
when do you think impeachment of a president is justified.
it make a poster explaining the civil war amendments in your own words.
women reformers who had been key to the abolitionist movement were greatly disappointed when the fifteenth amendment guaranteed the right to vote for freedmen but not for women.
in 1872 susan b anthony was arrested for illegally leading a group of women to vote in rochester new york in the presidential election.
an all male jury found her guilty of the election laws.
the judge ordered anthony to pay a 100 fine which she refused to pay.
acting as an amateur.
historian susan b anthony asked to say a few words before judge ward hunt passed his sentence.
she told the court your honor all forms of law are made by men interpreted by men administered by men in favor of men and against women.
your verdict of guilty against a citizen for the exercise of that citizens right to vote is simply because that citizen was a woman and not a man.
but yesterday that same man declared it a crime punishable with a fine and imprisonment for you or me to give a cup of cold water a crust of bread or a nights shelter to a fugitive as he was making his way to canada.
every man or woman in whose veins coursed a drop of human sympathy violated that wicked law regardless of consequences and was justified in so doing n ow women to get their voice in this government take it.
i have taken mine and mean to take it at every possible opportunity what historic comparison did susan b anthony make to prove her point.
later that night anthony wrote in her diary that the trial was the greatest judicial outrage history has ever recorded why do you think she felt that way.
chapter 14 the reconstruction era 293 reconstruction was a first step in correcting the many injustices done to african americans since colonial times.
republican governments came to power in each southern state.
african americans held positions of authority in southern governments for the first time.
new state constitutions established free statewide public school systems open to african americans as well as to whites.
reconstruction governments built new hospitals orphanages roads and railroads.
they banned racial discrimination.
representative of the changes taking place in the south was the election of hiram rhodes revels.
he became the first african american to serve in the u s congress.
born in north carolina revels attended college in the north and became a minister.
he helped raise two regiments of african americans during the civil war.
during reconstruction he moved to mississippi where he served in local and state governments before being elected as a u s.
senator in 1870.
in the senate he spoke on behalf of racial equality and amnesty for former confederates.
senator charles sumner a radical republican spoke of the importance of revels election the declaration was only half established by independence.
the greatest duty remained behind.
in assuring the equal rights of all we complete the work hiram revels 1827 1901 the sharecropping system following the war plantation owners in the south faced a dilemma.
even if a family still owned a large amount of land they could not farm it by themselves they needed workers.
the southern economy was in such shambles that in many instances landowners lacked the money to buy seed and farm implements much less to hire laborers.
to deal with the souths economic problems plantation owners and freedmen developed the system of sharecropping as a replacement for slavery.
former plantation owners provided livestock tools and land to former slaves in exchange for a share of the crop.
other former slaves became tenant farmers paying rent for use of the land.
a group of sharecroppers work the land raising cotton.
their arrangements soon developed into a new means of oppression of the freedmen.
the larger plantations even printed their own paper money as an advance to their tenant farmers against the following years crop rather than giving them real cash.
plantation money could only be used at plantation stores which often charged high prices for basic necessities.
chapter 14 the reconstruction era 295 african american leaders such as booker t washington author of the book up from slavery and w e b.
dubois founder of the n a a c p spoke out against these injustices.
but it would take another 80 years before these conditions were reversed by the civil rights movement of the 1960s and the efforts of leaders like dr martin luther king jr see acting as an amateur.
historian write a skit showing relations between a freedman and his for mer master during the reconstruction era.
use the internet or school library to conduct research on one of the southern states during the reconstruction era.
write a brief report on the problems faced by people in that state and how they tried i to overcome their problems.
z learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing some of the key institutions and developments during the period of reconstruction.
freedmen s bureau black codes1 reconstruction acts key developments during reconstruction new south impeachment trial sharecropping system name chapter 14 the reconstruction era 297 the state could then sell this land and use its earnings to fund public colleges that taught agriculture and the mechanical arts.
sixty nine colleges were founded using these land grants.
although they began as agricultural and technical schools many of these colleges grew into large public universities that later helped educate millions of americans.
the settlement of the frontier the american frontier has generally been defined as the line separating areas of settlement from unsettled wilderness territory.
from another point of view the american frontier marked the dividing line between areas where native americans lived and areas where more technologically advanced peoples lived.
since the arrival of the first colonists the american frontier had moved slowly westwards.
by the end of the civil war american settlers occupied the mid western prairies and had a foothold along the pacific coast.
between these two lines was a vast expanse of territory.
much of this last frontier consisted of the great plains home to millions of buffalo and the native american indians who lived off their food and hides.
from about 1860 to 1890 these herds of buffalo were destroyed the native americans were forced onto reservations and the great plains were divided into farms and ranches.
the impact of the transcontinental railroad the extension of the railroads was one of the principal factors behind the settlement of the great plains.
before the civil war northerners and southerners could not agree on a route for a transcontinental railroad.
after the south seceded it was clear that the route would go through the north.
after the war separate crews of engineers and laborers worked from california eastward and from the middle of the country westward.
name chapter 14 the reconstruction era 299 native americans indians had once occupied all of the united states.
native americans were composed of many different groups speaking hundreds of languages.
the advancing line of settlement and diseases from eurasia like smallpox had severely reduced native american populations and pushed them westwards.
by the end of the civil war native american indians nevertheless still occupied the great plains.
as settlers moved westward they killed off millions of buffalo essential to indian survival.
tribes like the sioux lived by hunting the millions of buffalo that grazed the great plains.
however with the homestead act and completion of the transcontinental railroad land hungry settlers wanted this land for themselves.
the indian wars.
expansion into the great plains and mountain regions by miners ranchers and settlers led to a growing number of conflicts with the native american indian population of the west.
from the 1840s to the 1880s the u s military fought several battles usually in the form of small skirmishes in an effort to clear routes to the west for white settlers and to establish government control over this vast territory.
during these indian wars the u s army defeated the plains indians and forced them onto reservations.
the technological superiority of the federal troops made resistance by the native american indians impossible.
government reports estimate that as many as 45 000 indians and 19 000 whites were killed.
the reservation once a particular native american tribe submitted to federal authority its members were settled on reservations.
reservation lands were usually smaller than the lands from which the tribe was removed and often consisted of undesirable land.
the federal government promised food blankets and seed but this policy clashed with tribal customs since native americans were traditionally hunters not farmers.
shoshone on the reservation at ft washahie wyoming 1892 name chapter 14 the reconstruction era 301 learning with graphic organizers 4.
complete the graphic organizer below by summarizing the provisions of the homestead morrill and dawes acts and describing their effects.
homestead act 1862 major provisions of the act what effect did the act have dawes act 1887 major provisions of the act name chapter 14 the reconstruction era 303 immigration.
industrial growth also led to increased immigration.
the development of ocean going passenger vessels made the journey to america easier cheaper and faster for many immigrants.
immigrants continued to come from germany and ireland but they were now joined by newcomers from italy russia austria hungary and poland.
anti union cartoon showing a competent worker supporting an incompetent one on his back.
one of the main reasons for the rapid economic growth of the north following the civil war was the increasing exploitation of industrial workers.
gains in industrial productivity were made at terrible costs to workers.
working conditions at factories were often hazardous.
employers hired the cheapest possible laborers.
immigrants were willing to work for low wages.
factories often employed women and children at especially low pay.
the 1860s saw the emergence of labor as an organized force in the united states.
a trade union is an association of workers who act together in making demands to employers for higher wages and better working conditions.
the earliest unions were also mutual assistance societies.
members contributed part of their wages to create a fund to help members who became sick or died.
trade unions were formed on a national scale between 1861 and 1866.
the first attempt to unite all trade unions into a single federation took place in 1866 with the formation of the national labor union.
however in 1872 this union disbanded because of internal friction.
in 1869 the national labor union was succeeded by the knights of labor.
by 1886 they had grown into a national organization with more than 700 000 members.
their policies pushed for state and national laws to improve conditions.
the knights demanded an 8 hour work day higher wages safety codes in factories an end to child labor and equal pay for women.
they backed restrictions on immigration which they saw as competition for their jobs.
in what ways did the further growth of industry contribute to the birth of a national labor movement at this time.
were labor unions justified in opposing immigration to the united states.
explain your answer.
why do you think the initial public reaction was hostile to labor unions.
chapter 14 the reconstruction era 305 bom in missouri mark twain 1835 1910 was the first major american writer bom away from the east coast.
two of his masterpieces adventures of tom sawyer and adventures of huckleberry finn chronicled life along the mississippi river.
his fictional characters spoke like real people and sounded distinctively american using local dialects newly invented words and regional accents.
his honest and candid approach revealed what life was really like for many african americans along the mississippi.
as he grew older his writings came to express the sad view that all human motives were selfish.
today he is best remembered as a humorist who used sharp wit comedy and exaggeration to attack false pride and self importance.
mark twain american music the music of america is the culmination of many different styles that have grown and changed over the years.
american music has been especially influenced by both african and european musical styles.
slave spirituals and work songs grew in popularity after the civil war.
chamber music and parlor songs were also quite popular in many american homes during this period.
stephen foster 1826 1864 was a noted composer whose songs were uniquely american in theme characterizing a love of home work politics battlefields slavery and plantation life.
his songs included my old kentucky home and oh.
susana in these years most small towns in america had an amateur brass or wind band.
many of these bands originated in the military.
brass bands were especially popular in parades.
john philip sousa was a key early composer who composed many marches.
he is most famous for the stars and stripes forever.
acting as an amateur historian select one of the artists writers or musicians mentioned in this section.
research that individuals work on the internet or at your school or local library.
then write a brief report specifically referring to at least two of that individuals works.
explain how those works are representative of this period in united states history.
name chapter 14 concept map literature mark twain culture in the post civil war period americas second industrial revolution frederick remington immigration and urbanization origin5 of labor movement xl new inventions f dawes act i 1887 j indian wars 1 1 bessemer i process j sought to americanize indians winslow homer zl x k james whistler thomas eakins knights of labor national labor unions the politics of reconstruction plans i hnnnhmmohnnamflmmnaihaianmlmi i 1 a 1 i lincoln s plan.
sought lenient treatment i j of south 10 of voters swear allegiance to j i constitution state would be readmitted.
johnson s plan.
allowed southern state 8 governments to be make up of former con j i federates.
states passed black codes which i j restricted freedmen s rights.
i radical reconstruction plan.
a group of i j congressmen sought to punish the south.
i reconstruction act imposed harsh treat 1 i ment with military rule in south.
j civil rights act and fourteenth amend i ment gave rights to freedmen.
s impeachment.
radical republicans tried j but failed to impeach president johnson.
ba aaaa an ga sag n bbb m bbb ssa sebs aaaa xea can ebb saa asa an aaa sbb bh aaa raa ebb bj m aaa bbb bsh asa civil war amendments to be readmitted to the union each southern i state had to approve these amendments thirteenth amendment 1865.
abolished slavery in the nation.
j fourteenth amendment 1868.
teed states give citizens basic civil rights and equality including due process of law i and equal protection of the law.
fifteenth amendment 1870.
gave the i right to vote to former slaves but not i women.
despite these amendments southern states 1 deprived african american of their rights when 8 northern troops withdrew in 1877.
i 307 name chapter 14 the reconstruction era 309 use the table and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
population of select western cities 1860 1890 name of city population in 1860 population in 1890 denver colorado 2 603 106 713 omaha nebraska 1 883 140 352 portland oregon 2 874 46 385 san francisco california 56 802 298 997 source population abstract of the united states 2 what conclusion can be drawn about the effect of the transcontinental railroad on these western cities.
f these cities became corrupt and crime ridden.
fsrj7 d j g their populations increased greatly.
h most native american indians relocated to these cities.
j the railroad had little impact on these cities.
3 which statement describes an important aspect of the radical republican plan for the reconstruction of state governments after the civil war.
a southerners should be made to pay for their rebellion.
f hist 9 a j b the union should be restored as quickly as possible.
c the freedmen should have to purchase their freedom.
d the freedmen should not be prevented from voting.
4 which best describes one way in which industrialization changed life in the united states following the civil war.
f low cost goods became more available.
fsts 28 b g slave labor was still permitted in factories in the south.
h there was an increased reliance on the domestic system in the northeast.
j technological innovations made immigrant labor unnecessary.
5 the thirteenth fourteenth and fifteenth amendments to the constitution dealt primarily with a the rights of workers to form labor unions fcovt 16 b i b protecting the rights of women c the rights of formerly enslaved people d limiting the rights of former confederate leaders 6 elizabeth cady stanton and susan b anthony were best known for their efforts to f prohibit the manufacture and sale of alcohol g form labor unions oti 22 w j h obtain the right to vote for women j expose government corruption name chapter 14 the reconstruction era 311 use the table and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
federal land policy in the 1800s land given by federal goverr iment as acres of land homestead grants 213 9 million acres to support railroad construction 129 0 million acres for common schools 73 2 million acres for agricultural and mechanical colleges 11 1 million acres to war veterans revolutionary war war of 1812 mexican war 68 2 million acres source the public domain and nineteenth century transfer policy 11 which conclusion can be drawn from this table.
a the most land was given away under the morrill act.
hist 9 d b education was the greatest priority in giving away land.
c the homestead act had the greatest impact on western land settlement.
d railroads were prevented from taking part in federal land giveaways.
12 which legislation would a landless settler heading west in the 1860s most likely have supported.
f dawes act h reconstruction act t hist 9 d g homestead act j civil rights act 13 both the homestead act 1862 and the morrill act 1862 were efforts by the federal government to a provide land to minority groups csjstwj b resolve conflicts with native american indians c encourage settlement west of the mississippi river d support settlement of former plantation lands 14 immediately after the civil war which action by white southern legislators most enraged northern congressmen.
f enacting the black codes hist 9 c j g granting voting rights to african americans h by forcing african americans to move to the north j refusing to let african americans participate in the sharecropping system 15 what was the economic impact of the transcontinental railroad on the united states immediately following the civil war.
a it brought about the manufacture of safer products.
f sts 27 d b it promoted a decrease in european immigration.
c it limited the abuses of the larger railroad companies.
d it led to an expansion of trade from the east to the west coast.
name chapter 14 the reconstruction era 313 23 a major criticism of the dawes act 1887 was that it a had too many loopholes to be enforceable cnist j b granted the most valuable western lands to native american indians c gave native american indians better job opportunities than other americans d forced native americans to make changes that conflicted with their culture 24 which was a result of the completion of the transcontinental railroad in 1869.
f it ended the need for overseas trade with europe.
i sts 27 d g it led to a decline in settlers moving to the west.
h it reduced the influence of businesses on the u s economy.
j it created a more unified national economy for sharing resources.
25 which was a direct result of the growth of industry in the north and midwest following the civil war.
a a decline in the number of urban factories.
sts 28 b j b a movement of people from rural areas to cities c a decline in the number of goods that people bought d a sharp increase in the price of manufactured goods 26 what was the impact of the fourteenth amendment on the power of state governments.
f it reduced the power of the president over the states.
govt i6 bt g it increased the power of state governments over their citizens.
h it allowed the federal government to restrict the actions of state governments.
j it prevented congressional interference with states rights.
based on the lyrics below and your knowledge of social studies answer the following question.
we mean to make things over we are tired of toil for naught with but bare enough to live upon and never an hour for thought we want to feel the sunshine and we want to smell the flowers we are sure that god has willd it and we mean to have eight hours.
were summoning our forces from the shipyard shop and mill chorus.
eight hours for work eight hours for rest eight hours for what we will.
eight hours for work eight hours for rest eight hours for what we will.
blanchard eight hours 1878 27 in the decades following the civil war the ideas expressed in these lyrics reflected the goals of which group in american society.
a labor union members c sharecroppers cult 24 b j b plantation owners d businesses owners name.
