chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 st petersburg 502 000 1 439 000 moscow 373 000 e u r op e 1 120 000 vienna 426 000 1 662 000 arctic circle 60n london 2 320 000 6 480 000 north america chicago 29 963 1 717 000 los angeles 1 610 107 000 30n tropic of cancer berlin 446 000 2 424 000 paris 1 314 000 3 330 000 new york 682 000 4 242 000 mexico city 170 000 344 000 at l a n t i c ocean o c e an 1 500 3 000 mi.
500 000 to 1 000 000 1 to 2 million n buenos aires 74 000 806 000 3 000 km.
city population under 100 000 so paulo 205 000 30s ocean 100 000 to 500 000 tropic of capricorn 1 500 120e 90e indian south america shanghai 250 000 837 000 calcutta 413 000 1 085 000 lagos 25 000 40 000 pac i f ic tokyo 567 000 1 497 000 beijing 1 648 000 1 100 000 bombay 575 000 780 000 africa 0 equator asi a 2 to 3 million 3 to 5 million over 6 million 150w 120w 90w 60w 30w 0 30e 60e 60s 413 000 population 1 085 000 map 25 1 size of world cities since 1850 sources united nations world urbanization prospects the 2005 revision tertius chandler and gerald fox 3000 years of urban growth new york academic press 1974 u s census spencer h brown public health in lagos 1850 1900 perceptions patterns and perspectives international journal of african historical studies 25 no.
1992 345 josephine olu abiodun the challenges of growth and development in metropolitan lagos in the urban challenge in africa growth and management of its large cities ed.
carole rakodi new york united nations university press 1997 193 195 united nations demographic yearbook.
rst as a ten story building in chicago in 1885 the skyscraper was made usable by the perfecting of the electric elevator.
an opinionated chicago architect louis sullivan 1856 1924 contributed formidably to the further development of the skyscraper with his famous principle that form follows function nesting loftily above city streets in the new steel skeleton high rises that sullivan helped to make popular many americans were becoming modern cliff dwellers.
americans were also becoming commuters carted daily between home and job on the mass transit lines that radiated out from central cities to surrounding suburbs.
electric trolleys powered by wagging antennae from overhead wires propelled city limits explosively outward.
by the end of the century the nations rst subway opened in boston london had led the way interactive map by building a subway as early as 1863.
the compact and communal walking city its boundaries xed by the limits of leg power gave way to the immense and impersonal megalopolis carved into distinctly different districts for business industry and residential neighborhoods which were in turn segregated by race ethnicity and social class.
rural life could not compete with the siren song of the city see figure 25 1.
industrial jobs above all drew people off farms in america as well as abroad and into factory centers.
but the urban lifestyle also held powerful attractions.
the predawn milking of cows had little appeal when compared with the late night glitter of city lights particularly alluring to young adults yearning for independence.
electricity indoor plumbing and telephones whose numbers leapt from the growth of cities lower broadway 1875 horses still abounded in new york and other cities when this lithograph was made but they would soon be displaced by street railways and automobiles.
some 50 000 in 1880 to over 1 million in 1900 all made life in the big city more enticing.
engineering marvels like the skyscraper and new yorks awesome brooklyn bridge a harplike suspension span dedicated in 1883 further added to the seductive glamour of the gleaming cities.
cavernous department stores such as macys in new york and marshall fields in chicago attracted urban middle class shoppers and provided urban workingclass jobs many of them for women.
the bustling emporiums also heralded a dawning era of consumerism and accentuated widening class divisions.
when carrie meeber novelist theodore dreisers ctional heroine in sister carrie 1900 escapes from rural boredom to chicago just before the turn of the century it is the spectacle of the citys dazzling department stores that awakens her fateful yearning for a richer more elegant way of life for entry into the privileged urban middle class whose existence she had scarcely imagined in the rustic countryside.
the move to the city introduced americans to new ways of living.
country dwellers produced little household waste.
domestic animals or scavenging pigs ate food scraps on the farm.
rural women mended and darned worn clothing rather than discard it.
household products were sold in bulk at the local store without wrapping.
mail order houses such as sears and montgomery ward which increasingly displaced the rural general store in the late nineteenth century at rst did not list trash barrels or garbage cans in their catalogues.
in the city however goods came in throwaway bottles boxes bags and cans.
apartment houses had no adjoining barnyards where residents might toss garbage to the hogs.
cheap ready to wear clothing and swiftly changing fashions pushed old suits and dresses out of the closet and onto the trash heap.
waste disposal in short was an issue new to the urban age.
and the mountains of waste that urbanites generated further testied to a cultural shift away from the virtues of thrift to the conveniences of consumerism.
chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 figure 25 1 the shift to the american city this chart shows the percentage of total population living in locales with a population of twenty ve hundred or more.
note the slowing of the cityward trend from 1970 on.
the jagged skyline of americas perpendicular civilization could not fully conceal the canker sores of a feverish growth.
criminals ourished like lice in the teeming asphalt jungles.
sanitary facilities could not keep pace with the mushrooming population explosion.
impure water uncollected garbage unwashed bodies and droppings from draft animals enveloped many cities in a satanic stench.
baltimore was described as smelling like a billion polecats.
the cities were monuments of contradiction.
they represented humanity compressed remarked one observer the best and the worst combined in a strangely composite community they harbored merchant princes and miserable paupers stately banks 5 1 19 8 39 7 51 2 54 0 69 9 73 6 73 7 75 2 77 the brooklyn bridge the brooklyn bridge opened on may 24 1883.
it had taken thirteen years to build and was the largest suspension bridge in the world as well as the rst made of steel wire.
on opening day an astonishing 1 800 vehicles and 150 300 people made the short but breathtaking trek between the new york city boroughs of manhattan and brooklyn.
the rst person to cross was emily warren roebling the daughter in law of the original designer john augustus roebling and the wife of his son washington roebling who had taken over the job when his father died suddenly in 1869.
when washington fell ill himself emily learned civil engineering and oversaw much of the remaining work on the bridge.
urban problems and sooty factories green grassed suburbs and treeless ghettos towering skyscrapers and stinking tenements.
the glaring contrasts that assaulted the eye in new york reminded one visitor of a lady in ball costume with diamonds in her ears and her toes out at the boots worst of all were the human pigsties known as slums.
they seemed to grow ever more crowded more lthy and more rat infested especially after the perfection in 1879 of the dumbbell tenement see fig ure 25 2.
so named because of the outline of its oor plan the dumbbell was usually seven or eight stories high with shallow sunless and ill smelling air shafts providing minimal ventilation.
several families were sardined onto each oor of the barracks like structures and they shared a malodorous toilet in the hall.
in these fetid warrens conspicuously in new yorks lung block hundreds of unfortunate urbanites coughed away their lives.
flophouses abounded where the half starved and unemployed might sleep for a few cents on verminous mattresses.
small wonder that slum dwellers strove mightily to escape their wretched surroundings as many of them did.
the slums remained foul places inhabited by successive waves of newcomers.
to a remarkable degree hardworking people moved up and out of them.
cities were dangerous for everyone.
in 1871 twothirds of downtown chicago burned in a raging re that left ninety thousand people homeless and destroyed more than fteen thousand buildings.
closely packed wooden structures fed the insatiable ames prompting chicago and other wary cities to require stone and iron buildings downtown.
the wealthiest began to leave the risky cities behind and head for semirural suburbs.
these leafy bedroom communities eventually ringed the brick and concrete cities with a greenbelt of afuence.
the new immigration the powerful pull of the american urban magnet was felt even in faraway europe.
a seemingly endless stream of immigrants continued to pour in from the old mother continent in each of the three decades from the 1850s through the 1870s more than 2 million migrants had stepped onto americas shores.
by the 1880s the stream had swelled to a rushing torrent as more than 5 million cascaded into the country.
a new high for a single year was reached in 1882 when 788 992 arrived or more than 2 100 a day see figure 25 3.
air shaft living room bed room living room parlor bed room p u b l i c h a l l bed bed room room air shaft 50 0 living room parlor fire escape parlor bed room w c parlor bed room w c fire escape 10 living room figure 25 2 dumbbell tenement this was the standard architectural plan for the human warehouses on new yorks lower east side.
despite the innovation of an air shaft to bring light and ventilation to the middle of the building only one room in each of the apartments was directly exposed to sunlight and open air.
all families on a oor shared the toilet w c in the hallway.
chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 in thousands 1 900 1 800 1 700 1 600 1 500 1 400 amnesty granted to certain undocumented immigrants 1 300 1 200 prosperity 1 100 anti jewish pogroms in europe 1 000 postwar flood cuban and haitian refugees panic of panic of quota system revised quotas applied world war i indochina refugees displaced persons year figure 25 3 annual immigration 1860 2006 after 1924 these numbers include only legal documented immigrants.
the 1989 total includes 478 814 people granted permanent residence status under the amnesty provisions of the 1986 immigration reform and control act.
the 1990 total includes 880 372 people granted permanent residence under these provisions.
the peak came in 1991 when 1 123 162 people were affected by amnesty.
sources statistical abstract of the united states relevant years department of homeland security yearbook of immigration statistics 2006.
until the 1880s most immigrants had come from the british isles and western europe chiey germany and ireland.
also signicant were the more than 300 000 chinese immigrants.
many of these earlier immigrants had faced virulent nativism especially the irish and the chinese.
in fact the latter were legally excluded in 1882 see p 549.
but by the last decades of the century the old european immigrants had adjusted well to american life by building supportive ethnic orga ni zations and melding into established farm communities or urban craft unions.
although many still lived worked and worshiped among their own they were largely accepted as american by the native born.
in the 1880s the character of the immigrant stream changed drastically see figure 25 4.
the so called new immigrants came from southern and eastern europe.
among them were italians jews croats slovaks greeks and poles.
they came from countries with little history of democratic government where people had grown accustomed to cringing before despotism and where opportunities for advancement were few.
these new peoples totaled only 19 percent of the inpouring immigrants in the 1880s but by the rst decade of the twentieth century they constituted an astonishing 66 percent of the total inow.
they hived together in cities like new york and chicago where the little italys and little polands soon claimed more inhabitants than many of the largest cities of the same nationality in the old world see makers of america the italians pp.
largely illiterate and impoverished many immigrants at rst were content to live within these tightly bound communities based on native language and religion.
there they worshiped in orthodox or roman catholic churches or synagogues and in some cases nourished radical political ideas.
there too they felt sheltered from americans who revived old nativist the new immigrants million 5 789 000 2 928 000 1 847 000 1 069 000 540 000 1 110 000 181 000 1 593 000 926 000 2 753 000 figure 25 4 old and new immigration by decade in the 1880s the sources of immigration to the united states shifted from the british isles and western europe to southern and eastern europe.
a century later the old mother continent of europe would account for only 10 percent of immigrants to america see figure 42 4 on p 1094.
leading nations of the old immigration england ireland germany leading nations of the new immigration italy austria hungary russia 1871 1880 1881 1890 1891 1900 1901 1910 1911 1920 fears that had plagued old immigrants in the 1840s and 1850s fears that these new immigrants would not or could not assimilate to life in their new land.
the skeptics who included some immigrants of the earlier wave began asking whether the nation had become a melting pot or a dumping ground.
southern europe uprooted why were these bright shawled and quaint jacketed strangers hammering on the gates.
in part they left their native countries because europe seemed to have no room for them.
the population of the old world was mulberry street on new york citys lower east side ca.
1900 population densities in early twentieth century american cities were among the highest in the world.
mulberry street shown in this photo was at the heart of new yorks little italy neighborhood.
makers of america theafricanthe great italians american migration w ho were the new immigrants these southern and eastern european birds of passage that ocked to the united states between 1880 and 1920.
prominent and typical among them were the italians some 4 million of whom sailed to the united states during the four decades of the new immigration.
they came from the southern provinces of their native land the heel and toe of the italian boot.
these areas had lagged economically behind the prosperous industrial region of northern italy.
the north had been the seat of earlier italian glory as well as the fountainhead of the successful movement to unify the country in 1860.
there industry had been planted and agriculture modernized.
unication raised hopes of similar progress in the downtrodden south but it was slow in coming.
southern italian peasants tilled their elds without fertilizer or machinery using hand plows and rickety hoes that had been passed down for generations.
italian immigrants arriving at ellis island ca.
1910 from such disappointed and demeaned conditions southern italians set out for the new world.
most came to the united states but signicant numbers headed for argentina to work in agriculture.
almost all of them were young men who intended to spend only a few months stuff their pockets with earnings and return home.
at least half of the italian immigrants did indeed repatriate as did comparable numbers of the other new immigrants with the conspicuous exception of the jews who had ed their native lands to escape religious persecution.
most of the italian immigrants to the united states sailed through new york harbor sighting the statue of liberty as they debarked from crowded ships.
many soon moved on to other large cities but so many remained that in the early years of the twentieth century more italians resided in new york than in the italian cities of florence venice and genoa combined.
since the immigrant italians with few exceptions had been peasant farmers in the old country the u s government encouraged them to practice their ances pietro learning to write on jersey street the sons shall teach the fathers the old saying goes.
many immigrants learned english from their children who attended american schools like this youngster and parent in early twentieth century new jersey.
italian immigrant women doing piecework at home in new york ca.
1910 italian construction workers ca.
1910 tral livelihood here believing they would more rapidly assimilate in the countryside than in the ethnic enclaves of the cities.
but almost all such ventures failed.
the farmers lacked capital and they were in any case more interested in earning quick money than in permanently sinking roots.
although they huddled in the cities italian immigrants did not abandon their rural upbringing entirely.
much to their neighbors consternation they often kept chickens in vacant lots and raised vegetables in small garden plots nestled between decaying tenement houses.
those who bade a permanent farewell to italy clustered in tightly knit communities that boasted opera clubs italian language newspapers and courts for playing bocci a version of lawn bowling imported from the old country.
pizza emerged from the hot wood burning ovens of these little italys its aroma and avor wafting into the hearts and stomachs of all americans.
the italians typically earned their daily bread as industrial laborers most famously as longshoremen and construction workers.
they owed their prominence in the building trades to the padrone system the padrone or labor boss met immigrants upon their arrival and secured jobs for them in new york chicago the west or wherever there was an immediate demand for labor.
the padrone owed his power to his ability to meet the needs of both italian newcomers and american bosses and he often managed to manipulate both for his own gain.
lacking education the italians as a group remained in blue collar jobs longer than some of their fellow new immigrants.
many italians valuing vocation over schooling sent their children off to work as early in their young lives as possible.
before world war i less than 1 percent of italian children enrolled in high school.
over the next fty years italian americans and their offspring gradually prospered moving out of the cities into the more afuent suburbs.
many served heroically in world war ii and availed themselves of the gi bill to nance the college educations and professional training their immigrant forebears had lacked.
chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 growing vigorously.
it nearly doubled in the century after 1800 thanks in part to abundant supplies of sh and grain from america and to the widespread cultivation in europe of that humble new world transplant the potato.
american food imports and the galloping pace of european industrialization shook the peasantry loose from its ancient habitats and customary occupations creating a vast footloose army of the unemployed.
europeans by the millions drained out of the countryside and into european cities.
most stayed there but some kept moving and left europe altogether.
about 60 million europeans abandoned the old continent in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
more than half of them moved to the united states while their compatriots spread out across the globe to south america canada africa and australia.
masses of people were already in motion in europe before they felt the tug of the american magnet.
this european diaspora dominated by immigration to the united states was in many ways simply a by product of the urbanization of europe america fever proved highly contagious in europe.
the united states was often painted as a land of fabulous opportunity in the america letters sent by friends and relatives already transplanted letters that were soiled by the hands of many readers.
we eat here every day wrote one jubilant pole what we get only for easter in our native country the land of the free was also blessed with freedom from military conscription and institutionalized religious persecution.
jewish women working in a sweatshop ca.
1910 countless immigrant women found their rst american employment in shops like this.
mary antin 1881 1949 who came to america from russian poland in 1894 when thirteen years of age later wrote in the promised land 1912 so at last i was going to america.
really really going at last.
the boundaries burst.
the arch of heaven soared.
a million suns shone out for every star.
the winds rushed in from outer space roaring in my ears america.
america prot seeking americans trumpeted throughout europe the attractions of the new promised land.
industrialists wanted low wage labor railroads wanted buyers for their land grants states wanted more population and steamship lines wanted more human cargo for their holds.
in fact the ease and cheapness of steam powered shipping greatly accelerated the transoceanic surge.
as the century lengthened savage persecutions of minorities in europe drove many shattered souls to american shores.
in the 1880s the russians turned violently upon their own jews chiey in the polish areas.
tens of thousands of these battered refugees survivors of centuries of harassment as hated outcasts ed their burning homes.
they made their way to the sea manuscript census data 1900 rticle i of the constitution requires that a census of the american people be taken every ten years in order to provide a reliable basis for congressional apportionment.
early censuses gathered little more than basic population numbers but over the years the census takers have collected information on other matters as well including occupational categories educational levels and citizenship status yielding copious raw data for historical analysis.
the census of 1890 was the rst to use punch cards and electric tabulating machines which greatly expanded the range of data that could be assembled and correlated though the basic information was still hand recorded by individual canvassers who a went door to door to question household members and ll out the census forms.
those handwritten forms as much as the aggregate numbers printed in the nal census tally can furnish invaluable insights to the historian.
despite its apparent bureaucratic formality the form shown here richly details the lives of the residents of a tenement house on new yorks lower east side in 1900.
see in particular the entries for the goldberg family.
in what ways does this document reect the great demographic changes that swept late nineteenth century america.
what light does it shed on the character of immigrant ghettos.
what further use might historians make of information like this.
chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 board cities of the atlantic coast notably new york.
jews had experienced city life in europe a circumstance that made them virtually unique among the new immigrants.
many of them brought their urban skills of tailoring or shopkeeping to american cities.
destitute and devout eastern european jews were frequently given a frosty reception not only by old stock americans but also by those german jews who had arrived decades earlier and prospered in the united states some as garment manufacturers who now employed their coreligionists as cheap labor.
many of the immigrants never intended to become americans in any case.
a large number of them were single men who worked in the united states for several months or years and then returned home with their hard earned roll of american dollars.
some 25 percent of the nearly 20 million people who arrived between 1820 and 1900 were birds of passage who eventually returned to their country of origin.
for them the attraction of the american magnet was never strong.
even those who stayed in america struggled heroically to preserve their traditional culture.
catholics expanded their parochial school systems and jews established hebrew schools.
foreign language newspapers abounded.
yiddish theaters kosher food stores polish parishes greek restaurants and italian social clubs all attested to the desire to keep old ways alive.
yet time took its toll on these efforts to conserve the customs of the old world in the new.
the children of the immigrants grew up speaking uent eng lish sometimes mocking the broken grammar of their parents.
they often rejected the old country manners of their mothers and fathers in their desire to plunge headlong into the mainstream of american life.
reactions to the new immigration americas government system nurtured in wide open spaces was ill suited to the cement forests of the great cities.
beyond minimal checking to weed out criminals and the insane the federal government did virtually nothing to ease the assimilation of immigrants into american society.
state governments usually dominated by rural representatives did even less.
city governments overwhelmed by the sheer scale of rampant urban growth proved woefully inadequate to the task.
by default the business of ministering to the immigrants needs fell to the unofcial governments of the urban political machines led by bosses like new yorks notorious boss tweed.
taking care of the immigrants was big business indeed.
trading jobs and ser vices for votes a powerful boss might claim the loyalty of thousands of followers.
in return for their support at the polls the boss provided jobs on the citys payroll found housing for new arrivals tided over the needy with gifts of food and clothing patched up minor scrapes with the law and helped get schools parks and hospitals built in immigrant neighborhoods.
reformers gagged at this cynical exploitation of the immigrant vote but the political boss gave valuable assistance that was forthcoming from no other source.
the nations social conscience slumbering since the antislavery crusade gradually awakened to the plight of the cities and especially their immigrant masses.
prominent in this awakening were several protestant clergymen who sought to apply the lessons of christianity to the slums and factories.
noteworthy among them was walter rauschenbusch who in 1886 became pastor of a german baptist church in new york city.
also conspicuous was washington gladden who took over a congregational church in columbus ohio in 1882.
preaching the social gospel they both insisted that the churches tackle the burning social issues of the day.
the sermon on the mount they declared was the science of society and many social gospelers predicted that socialism would be the logical outcome of christianity.
these christian socialists did much to prick callous middle class consciences thus preparing the path for the progressive reform movement after the turn of the century.
one middle class woman who was deeply dedicated to uplifting the urban masses was jane addams 1860 1935.
born into a prosperous illinois family addams was one of the rst generation of collegeeducated women.
upon her graduation she sought other outlets for her large talents than could be found in teaching or charitable volunteer work then the only permissible occupations for a young woman of her social class.
inspired by a visit to eng land she acquired the decaying hull mansion in chicago in 1889.
there she established hull house the most prominent though not the rst american settlement house.
soft spoken but tenacious addams became a kind of urban american saint in the eyes of many admirers.
the philosopher william james told her you utter instinctively the truth we others vainly seek she was a broad gauge reformer who courageously condemned women in the city hull house these immigrant children playing games at the settlement house that jane addams founded in chicago were having some fun while also getting instruction from a settlement house worker in how to be a proper american.
war as well as poverty and she eventually won the nobel peace prize in 1931.
but her pacism also earned her the enmity of some americans including the daughters of the american revolution who choked on her antiwar views and expelled her from membership in their august orga ni zation.
located in a poor immigrant neighborhood of greeks italians russians and germans hull house offered instruction in eng lish counseling to help newcomers cope with american big city life child care services for working mothers and cultural activities for neighborhood residents.
following jane addamss lead women founded settlement houses in other cities as well.
conspicuous among the houses was lillian walds henry street settlement in new york which opened its doors in 1893.
the settlement houses became centers of womens activism and of social reform.
the women of hull house successfully lobbied in 1893 for an illinois antisweatshop law that protected women workers and prohibited child labor.
they were led in this case by the black clad florence kelley a guerrilla warrior in the urban jungle.
armed with the insights of socialism and endowed with the voice of an actress kelley was a lifelong battler for the welfare of women children blacks and consumers.
she later moved to the henry street settlement in new york and served for three decades as general secretary of the national consumers league.
the pioneering work of addams wald and kelley helped blaze the trail that many women and some men later fol lowed into careers in urban reform and the new profession of social work.
for these female reformers and for many other women the city offered a new kind of frontier opportunity.
more than a million women joined the work force in the single decade of the 1890s.
strict social codes prescribed which women might work and what jobs they might hold.
because employment for wives and mothers was considered taboo the vast majority of working women were single.
their jobs depended on their race ethnicity and class.
black women had few opportunities beyond domestic ser vice.
white collar jobs as social workers secretaries department store clerks and telephone operators were largely reserved for native born women.
immigrant women tended to cluster in particular industries as jewish women did in the garment trades.
although hours were often long pay low and advancement limited a job still bought workingwomen some economic and social independence.
after contributing a large share of their earnings to their families many women still had enough money in their pocketbooks to enter a new urban world of sociability excursions to amusement parks with friends on days off saturday night dances with the fellas narrowing the welcome mat antiforeignism or nativism earlier touched off by the irish and german arrivals in the 1840s and 1850s chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 bared its ugly face in the 1880s with fresh ferocity.
the new immigrants had come for much the same reasons as the old to escape the poverty and squalor of europe and to seek new opportunities in america.
but nativists viewed the eastern and southern europeans as culturally and religiously exotic hordes and often gave them a rude reception.
the newest newcomers aroused widespread alarm.
their high birthrate common among people with a low standard of living and sufcient youth and vigor to pull up stakes raised worries that the original anglo saxon stock would soon be outbred and outvoted.
still more horrifying was the prospect that it would be mongrelized by a mixture of inferior southern european blood and that the fairer anglo saxon types would disappear.
one new eng land writer cried out in anguish o liberty white goddess.
is it well to leave the gates unguarded.
native born americans voiced additional fears.
they blamed the immigrants for the degradation of urban government.
some trade unionists assailed the alien arrivals for their willingness to work for starvation wages that seemed to them like princely sums and for importing in their intellectual baggage such seemingly dangerous doctrines as socialism communism and anarchism.
many business leaders who had welcomed the ood of cheap manual labor began to fear that they had embraced a frankensteins monster.
looking backward older immigrants trying to keep their own humble arrival in america in the shadows sought to close the bridge that had carried them and their ancestors across the atlantic.
in response to nativists who condemned the new immigrants as despicable human specimens threatening to drag down the american race the jewish immigrant playwright israel zangwill 1864 1926 celebrated the new superior american emerging out of what he called the great melting pot of european races america is gods crucible the great melting pot where all the races of europe are melting and re forming.
germans and frenchmen irishmen and englishmen jews and russians into the crucible with you all.
god is making the american.
antiforeign orga ni zations reminiscent of the know nothings of antebellum days were now revived in a different guise.
notorious among them was the american protective association apa which was created in 1887 and soon claimed a million members.
in pursuing its nativist goals the apa urged voting against roman catholic candidates for ofce and sponsored the publication of lustful fantasies about runaway nuns.
organized labor was quick to throw its grow ing weight behind the move to choke off the rising tide of foreigners.
frequently used as strikebreakers the restrictions on immigration wage depressing immigrants were hard to unionize because of the language barrier.
labor leaders argued not illogically that if american industry was entitled to protection from foreign goods american workers were entitled to protection from foreign laborers.
congress nally nailed up partial bars against the inpouring immigrants.
the rst restrictive law passed in 1882 banged the gate shut in the faces of paupers criminals and convicts all of whom had to be returned at the expense of the greedy or careless shipper.
congress further responded to pained outcries from organized labor when in 1885 it prohibited the importation of foreign workers under contract usually for substandard wages.
in addition to the rst federal restrictions on immigration the year 1882 brought forth a law to bar completely one ethnic group the chinese.
hitherto america at least ofcially had embraced the oppressed and underprivileged of all races and creeds.
hereafter president grover cleveland 1837 1908 declared in 1897 it is said.
that the quality of recent immigration is undesirable.
the time is quite within recent memory when the same thing was said of immigrants who with their descendants are now numbered among our best citizens.
the gates would be padlocked against defective undesirables plus the chinese.
in later years other federal laws lengthened the list of undesirables to include the insane polygamists prostitutes alcoholics anarchists and people carrying contagious diseases.
a proposed literacy test long a favorite of nativists because it favored the old immigrants over the new met vigorous opposition.
it was not enacted until 1917 after three presidents had vetoed it on the grounds that literacy was more a mea sure of opportunity than of intelligence.
in 1886 the statue of liberty arose in new york harbor a gift from the people of france.
on its base were inscribed the words of emma lazarus give me your tired your poor your huddled masses yearning to breathe free the wretched refuse of your teeming shore.
to many nativists those noble words described only too accurately the scum washed up by the new immigrant tides.
yet the uprooted immigrants unlike natives lucky enough to have had parents who caught an earlier ship became american citizens the hard way.
they stepped off the boat many of them fullgrown and well muscled ready to put their shoulders to the nations industrial wheels.
the republic owes much to these latecomers for their brawn their brains their courage and the yeasty diversity they brought to american society.
churches confront the urban challenge lady liberty being readied for travel a centennial birthday present from the french people the statue of liberty arrived from france in 1886.
the swelling size and changing character of the urban population posed sharp challenges to american churches which like other national institutions had grown up in the country.
protestant churches in chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 morning service at moodys church 1908 thousands of chicagoans found the gospel and a helping hand at evangelist dwight lyman moodys church.
although moody himself died in 1899 his successors continued to attract throngs of worshipers to his church which could hold up to ten thousand people.
particular suffered heavily from the shift to the city where many of their traditional doctrines and pastoral approaches seemed irrelevant.
some of the larger houses of worship with their stained glass windows and thundering pipe organs were tending to become merely sacred diversions or amusements.
reecting the wealth of their prosperous parishioners many of the old line churches were distressingly slow to raise their voices against social and economic vices.
john d rockefeller was a pillar of the baptist church j pierpont morgan of the episcopal church.
trinity episcopal church in new york actually owned some of the citys worst slum property.
cynics remarked that the episcopal church had become the republican party at prayer some religious leaders began to worry that in the ageold struggle between god and the devil the wicked one was registering dismaying gains.
the mounting emphasis was on materialism too many devotees worshiped at the altar of avarice.
money was the accepted mea sure of achievement and the new gospel of wealth proclaimed that god caused the righteous to prosper.
into this spreading moral vacuum stepped a new generation of liberal protestants.
with roots in the unitarian revolt against orthodox calvinism liberal ideas came into the mainstream of american protes tantism between 1875 and 1925 despite frequent and bitter controversies with fundamentalists.
entrenched in the leadership and seminaries of the dominant denominations liberal protestants adapted religious ideas to modern culture attempting to reconcile christianity with new scientic and economic doctrines.
they rejected biblical literalism urging christians to view biblical stories as models for christian behavior rather than as dogma.
they stressed the ethical teachings of the bible and allied themselves with the reform oriented social gospel movement and urban revivalists like dwight lyman moody a former shoe salesman who captivated audiences with his message of forgiveness.
their optimistic trust in community fellowship and their focus on earthly salvation and personal growth attracted many followers.
they helped protestant americans reconcile their religious faith with modern cosmopolitan ways of thinking.
simultaneously the roman catholic and jewish faiths were gaining enormous strength from the new immigration.
by 1900 roman catholics had become the largest single denomination numbering nearly 9 million communicants.
cardinal james gibbons 1834 1921 an urban catholic leader devoted to american unity was immensely popular with roman cath the impact of darwin s ideas olics and protestants alike.
acquainted with every president from johnson to harding he employed his liberal sympathies to assist the american labor movement.
by 1890 the variety loving americans could choose from 150 religious denominations 2 of them brandnew.
one was the band playing salvation army whose soldiers without swords invaded america from eng land in 1879 and established a beachhead on the countrys street corners.
appealing frankly to the down andouters the boldly named salvation army did much practical good especially with free soup.
the other important new faith was the church of christ scientist christian science founded by mary baker eddy in 1879 after she had suffered much ill health.
preaching that the true practice of christianity heals sickness she set forth her views in a book entitled science and health with key to the scriptures 1875 which sold an amazing 400 000 copies before her death.
a fertile eld for converts was found in americas hurried nerve racked and urbanized civilization to which eddy held out the hope of relief from discords and diseases through prayer as taught by christian science.
by the time she died in 1910 she had founded an inuential church that embraced several hundred thousand devoted worshipers.
urbanites also participated in a new kind of religious af liated orga ni zation the young mens and womens christian associations.
the ymca and the ywca established in the united states before the civil war grew by leaps and bounds.
combining physical and other kinds of education with religious instruction the ys appeared in virtually every major american city by the end of the nineteenth century.
darwin disrupts the churches the old time religion received many blows from modern trends including a booming sale of books on comparative religion and on historical criticism as applied to the bible.
most unsettling of all were the writings of the eng lish naturalist charles darwin.
in lucid prose he set forth the sensational theory that higher forms of life had slowly evolved from lower forms through a process of random biological mutation and adaptation.
though not the rst scientist to propose an evolutionary hypothesis darwin broke new ground with his idea of natural selection nature in his view blindly selected organisms for survival or death based on random inheritable variations that they happened to possess.
some traits conferred advantages in the struggle for life and hence better odds of passing them along to offspring.
by providing a material explanation for the evolutionary process darwins theory explicitly rejected the dogma of special creations which ascribed the design of each xed species to divine agency.
darwins radical ideas evoked the wrath of scientists and laymen alike.
many zoologists like harvards louis agassiz held fast to the old doctrine of special creations by 1875 however the majority of scientists in america and elsewhere had embraced the theory of organic evolution though not all endorsed natural selection as its agent.
many preferred an alternative mechanism proposed earlier by the french biologist jean baptiste lamarck who argued that traits acquired during the course of an individuals life could shape the future genetic development of a species.
lamarckians briey tamed the unsettling darwinian view of chance mutation and competitive inheritance but darwins version would become scientic orthodoxy by the 1920s.
clergymen and theologians responded to darwins theory in several ways.
at rst most believers joined scientists in rejecting his ideas outright.
after 1875 by which time most natural scientists had embraced evolution the religious community split into two camps.
a conser vative minority stood rmly behind the scripture as the infallible word of god and they condemned what they thought was the bestial hypothesis of the darwinians.
their rejection of scientic consensus as a student at harvard medical school william james 1842 1910 was inuenced by darwinian science.
he reviewed darwins theory in his rst published article in 1865 a doctrine like that of transmutation of species.
cannot but be treated with some respect and when we nd that such naturalists.
many of whom but a few days ago were publicly opposing it are now coming round one by one to espouse it we may well doubt whether it may not be destined eventually to prevail.
chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 spawned a muscular view of biblical authority that eventually gave rise to fundamentalism in the twentieth century.
most religious thinkers parted company with the conser vatives and atly refused to accept the bible in its entirety as either history or science.
these accommodationists feared that hostility toward evolution would alienate educated believers.
over time an increasing number of liberal thinkers were able to reconcile darwinism with christianity.
they heralded the revolutionary theory as a newer and grander revelation of the ways of the almighty.
as one commentator observed some call it evolution and others call it god.
darwinism undoubtedly did much to loosen religious moorings and to promote skepticism among the gospel glutted.
while the liberal efforts at compromise did succeed in keeping many americans in the pews those compromises also tended to relegate religious teaching to matters of personal faith private conduct and family life.
as science began to explain more of the external world commentators on nature and society increasingly refrained from adding religious perspectives to the discussion.
the lust for learning public education continued its upward climb.
the ideal of tax supported elementary schools adopted on a nationwide basis before the civil war was still gathering strength.
americans were accepting the truism that a free government cannot function successfully if the people are shackled by ignorance.
beginning about 1870 more and more states were making at least a gradeschool education compulsory and this gain incidentally helped check the frightful abuses of child labor.
spectacular indeed was the spread of high schools especially by the 1880s and 1890s.
before the civil war private academies at the secondary level were common and tax supported high schools were rare numbering only a few hundred.
but the concept that a high school education as well as a grade school education was the birthright of every citizen was now gaining impressive support.
by 1900 there were some six thousand high schools.
in addition free textbooks were being provided in increasing quantities by the taxpayers of the states during the last two decades of the century.
other trends were noteworthy.
teacher training schools then called normal schools experienced a striking expansion after the civil war.
in 1860 there were only twelve of them in 1910 over three hundred.
kindergartens earlier borrowed from germany also began to gain strong support.
the new immigration in the 1880s and 1890s brought vast new strength to private catholic parochial schools which were fast becoming a major pillar of the nations educational structure.
public schools though showering benets on children excluded millions of adults.
this deciency was partially remedied by the chautauqua movement a successor to the lyceums which was launched in 1874 on the shores of lake chautauqua in new york.
the organizers achieved gratifying success through nationwide public lectures often held in tents and featuring well known speakers including the witty mark twain.
in addition there were extensive chautauqua courses of home study for which 100 000 people enrolled in 1892 alone.
crowded cities despite their cancers generally provided better educational facilities than the old oneroom one teacher red schoolhouse.
the success of the public schools is con rmed by the falling of the illiteracy rate from 20 percent in 1870 to 10 7 percent in 1900.
americans were developing a profound faith often misplaced in formal education as the sovereign remedy for their ills.
booker t washington and education for black people war torn and impoverished the south lagged far behind other regions in public education and african americans suffered most severely.
a staggering 44 percent of nonwhites were illiterate in 1900.
some help came from northern philanthropists but the foremost champion of black education was an ex slave booker t washington who had slept under a board sidewalk to save pennies for his schooling.
called in 1881 to head the black normal and industrial school at tuskegee alabama he began with forty students in a tumbledown shanty.
undaunted he taught black students useful trades so that they could gain self respect and economic security.
washingtons self help approach to solving the nations racial problems was labeled accommodationist because it stopped short of directly challenging white supremacy.
recognizing the depths of southern white racism washington avoided booker t washington and w e b.
du bois booker t washington 1856 1915 in a famous speech in new orleans in 1895 washington grudgingly acquiesced in social separateness for blacks.
on that occasion he told his largely white audience in all things that are purely social we can be as separate as the ngers yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual progress w e b.
du bois 1868 1963 in 1961 at the end of a long lifetime of struggle for racial justice in the united states du bois renounced his american citizenship at the age of ninety three and took up residence in the newly independent african state of ghana.
the issue of social equality.
instead he grudgingly acquiesced in segregation in return for the right to develop however modestly and painstakingly the economic and educational resources of the black community.
economic independence would ultimately be the ticket washington believed to black political and civil rights.
washingtons commitment to training young blacks in agriculture and the trades guided the curriculum at tuskegee institute and made it an ideal place for slave born george washington carver to teach and research.
after carver joined the faculty in 1896 he became an internationally famous agricultural chemist who provided a much needed boost to the southern economy by discovering hundreds of new uses for the lowly peanut shampoo axle grease sweet potato vinegar and soybean paint.
other black leaders notably dr w e b.
du bois assailed booker t washington as an uncle tom who was condemning their race to manual labor and perpetual inferiority.
born in massachusetts du bois was a mixture of african french dutch and indian blood thank god no anglo saxon he would add.
after a determined struggle he earned a ph d at harvard the rst of his race to achieve that goal.
the honor i assure you was harvards he said.
he demanded complete equality for blacks social as well as economic and helped found the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp in 1909.
rejecting washingtons gradualism and separatism he argued that the talented tenth of the black community should be given full and immediate access to the mainstream of american life.
an exceptionally skilled historian sociologist and poet he died as a self exile in africa in 1963 at the age of ninety ve.
many of du boiss differences with washington reected the contrasting life experiences of southern and northern blacks.
chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 w e b.
du bois 1868 1963 wrote in his 1903 classic the souls of black folk it is a peculiar sensation this double consciousness this sense of always looking at ones self through the eyes of others of measuring ones self through the eyes of others.
one ever feels his two ness an american a negro two souls two thoughts two unreconciled strivings two warring ideals in one dark body whose dogged strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder.
the hallowed halls of ivy colleges and universities also shot up like lusty young saplings in the decades after the civil war.
a college education increasingly seemed indispensable in the scramble for the golden apple of success see table 25 1.
even women and african americans were nding new opportunities for higher education.
womens col leges such as vassar were gaining ground and universities open to both genders were blossoming notably in the midwest.
by 1880 every third college graduate was a woman.
by the turn of the century the black institutes and academies planted during reconstruction had blossomed into a crop of southern black colleges.
howard university in washington d c hampton institute in virginia atlanta university and numerous others nurtured higher education for blacks until the civil rights movement of the 1960s made widespread attendance at white institutions possible.
the truly phenomenal growth of higher education owed much to the morrill act of 1862.
this enlightened law provided a generous grant of public lands to the states for support of education.
land grant colleges most of which became state universities in turn bound themselves to provide certain ser vices such as military training.
the hatch act of 1887 extending the morrill act provided federal funds for the establishment of agricultural experiment stations in connection with the land grant colleges.
these two pieces of legislation spawned over a hundred colleges and universities including such institutions as the university of cal i fornia 1868 ohio state university 1870 and texas a m 1876.
table 25 1 educational levels 1870 2005 year number graduating from high school number graduating from college 16 000 24 000 44 000 95 000 156 000 311 000 667 000 1 221 000 1 199 700 1 858 000 2 889 000 3 043 000 2 503 000 2 833 000 3 109 000 9 371 12 896 15 539 27 410 37 199 48 622 122 484 186 500 432 058 392 440 792 656 929 417 1 048 631 1 237 875 1 439 264 median number of school years completed high school graduates as a percentage of 17 year old population 8 1 8 2 8 4 8 6 9 3 10 5 12 2 12 5 12 7 na na 2 0 2 5 3 5 6 4 8 8 16 8 29 0 50 8 59 0 69 5 76 9 71 4 74 2 na na people twenty ve years and over.
1910 1930 based on retrogressions of 1940 data 1940 was the rst year mea sured.
source folger and nam education of the american population a 1960 census monograph.
sources digest of education statistics 1992 2006 a publication of the national center for education statistics statistical abstract of the united states relevant years.
intellectual frontiers stanford university under construction late nineteenth century private philanthropy richly supplemented government grants to higher education.
many of the new industrial millionaires developing tender social consciences donated immense fortunes to educational enterprises.
a philanthropist was cynically described as one who steals privately and gives publicly in the twenty years from 1878 to 1898 these money barons gave away about 150 million.
noteworthy among the new private universities of high quality were cornell 1865 and leland stanford junior 1891 the latter founded in memory of the deceased fteen year old only child of a builder of the central pacic railroad.
the university of chicago opened in 1892 speedily forged into a front rank position owing largely to the lubricant of john d rockefellers oil millions.
rockefeller died at ninety seven after having given some 550 million for philanthropic purposes.
signicant also was the sharp increase in professional and technical schools where modern laboratories were replacing the solo experiments performed by instructors in front of their classes.
towering among the specialized institutions was johns hopkins university opened in 1876 which maintained the nations rst high grade graduate school.
several generations of american scholars repelled by snobbish eng lish cousins and attracted by painstaking continental methods had attended german universities.
johns hopkins ably carried on the germanic tradition of profusely footnoted tomes.
reputable scholars no longer had to go abroad for a gilt edged graduate degree.
dr woodrow wilson among others received his ph d from johns hopkins.
the march of the mind homegrown inuences shaped the modern american university as much as german models.
antebellum colleges had stressed the unity of truth or the idea that knowledge and morality existed in a single system.
religious instruction in moral philosophy and natural theology served as pillars of the old classical curriculum.
in the wake of the darwinian challenge when religion and science seemed less compatible university reformers struggled to reconcile scientic education and religion to preserve the unity of moral and intellectual purpose.
when that effort faltered university educators abandoned moral instruction and divorced facts from values other pressures also helped doom the traditional curriculum.
the new industrialization brought insistent demands for practical courses and specialized vocational training in the sciences.
the elective system where students selected courses was gaining popularity.
reformers also emphasized elds of concentration to prepare students for entry into a profession.
specialization not synthesis became the primary goal of a university education.
the reform spirit received a powerful boost in the 1870s when dr charles w eliot a vigorous young chemist became president chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 of harvard college and embarked upon a lengthy career of educational statesmanship.
as a sign of the secularizing times eliot changed harvards motto from christo et ecclesiae for christ and church to veritas truth.
medical schools and medical science after the civil war were prospering.
despite the enormous sale of patent medicines and so called indian remedies good for man or beast the new scientic gains were reected in improved public health.
revolutionary discoveries abroad such as those of the french scientist louis pasteur and the eng lish physician joseph lister left their imprint on america.
the popularity of heavy whiskers waned as the century ended such hairy adornments were now coming to be regarded as germ traps.
as a result of new health promoting precautions including campaigns against public spitting life expectancy at birth was measurably increased.
one of americas most brilliant intellectuals the slight and sickly william james 1842 1910 served for thirty ve years on the harvard faculty.
through his numerous writings he made a deep mark on many elds.
his principles of psychology 1890 helped to establish the modern discipline of behavioral psychology.
in the will to believe 1897 and varieties of religious experience 1902 he explored the philosophy and psychology of religion.
in his most famous work pragmatism 1907 he pronounced americas greatest contribution to the history of philosophy the concept of pragmatism that the truth of an idea was to be tested above all by its practical consequences see makers of america pioneering pragmatists pp.
the appeal of the press books continued to be a major source of edication and enjoyment for both juveniles and adults.
best sellers of the 1880s were generally old favorites like david coppereld and ivanhoe.
well stocked public libraries the poor persons university were making encouraging progress especially in boston and new york.
the magnicent library of congress building which opened its doors in 1897 provided thirteen acres of oor space in the largest and costliest edice of its kind in the world.
a new era was inaugurated by the generous gifts of andrew carnegie.
this openhanded scotsman book starved from pasteur came the word pasteurize from lister came listerine.
the penny press the chicago daily news was but one of several cheap masscirculation newspapers that ourished in the new urban environment of gilded age america.
in his youth contributed 60 million for the construction of nearly 1700 public libraries all over the country with an additional 750 scattered around the eng lishspeaking world from great britain to new zealand.
by 1900 there were about nine thousand free circulating libraries in america each with at least three hundred books.
roaring newspaper presses spurred by the invention of the linotype in 1885 more than kept pace with the demands of a word hungry public.
but the heavy investment in machinery and plant was accompanied by a growing fear of offending advertisers and subscribers.
bare knuckle editorials were to an increasing degree being supplanted by feature articles and noncontroversial syndicated material.
the day of slashing journalistic giants like horace greeley was passing.
sensationalism at the same time was capturing the public taste.
the semiliterate immigrants com reformers and writers bined with strap hanging urban commuters created a protable market for news that was simply and punchily written.
sex scandal and other human interest stories burst into the headlines as a vulgarization of the press accompanied the growth of circulation.
critics now complained in vain of these presstitutes two new journalistic tycoons emerged.
joseph pulitzer hungarian born and near blind was a leader in the techniques of sensationalism in st louis and especially with the new york world.
his use of colored comic supplements featuring the yellow kid gave the name yellow journalism to his lurid sheets.
a close and ruthless competitor was the youthful william randolph hearst who had been expelled from harvard college for a crude prank.
able to draw on his cal i fornia fathers mining millions he ultimately built a powerful chain of newspapers beginning with the san francisco examiner in 1887.
unfortunately the overall inuence of pulitzer and hearst was not altogether wholesome.
although both championed many worthy causes both prostituted the press in their struggle for increased circulation both stooped snooped and scooped to conquer their air for scandal and sensational rumor was happily somewhat offset by the introduction of syndicated material and by the strengthening of the news gathering associated press which had been founded in the 1840s.
apostles of reform magazines partially satised the public appetite for good reading notably old standbys like harpers the atlantic monthly and scribners monthly.
possibly the most inuential journal of all was the liberal and highly intellectual new york nation which was read largely by professors preachers and publicists as the weekly day of judgment launched in 1865 by the irish born edwin l godkin a merciless critic it crusaded militantly for civil ser vice reform honesty in government and a moderate tariff.
the nation attained only a modest circulation about ten thousand in the nineteenth century but godkin believed that if he could reach the right ten thousand leaders his ideas through them might reach tens of millions.
another journalist author henry george was an original thinker who left an enduring mark.
poor in formal schooling he was rich in idealism and in the milk of human kindness.
after seeing poverty at its worst in india and land grabbing at its greediest in cal i fornia he took pen in hand.
his classic treatise progress and poverty undertook to solve the great enigma of our henry george 1839 1897 wrote in progress and poverty 1879 our boasted freedom necessarily involves slavery so long as we recognize private property in land.
until that is abolished declarations of independence and acts of emancipation are in vain.
so long as one man can claim the exclusive ownership of the land from which other men must live slavery will exist and as material progresses on must grow and deepen.
times the association of progress with poverty according to george the pressure of a growing population on a xed supply of land unjustiably pushed up property values showering unearned prots on owners of land.
a single 100 percent tax on those windfall prots would eliminate unfair inequalities and stimulate economic growth.
george soon became a most controversial gure.
his single tax idea was so horrifying to the propertied classes that his manuscript was rejected by numerous publishers.
finally brought out in 1879 the book gradually broke into the best seller lists and ultimately sold some 3 million copies.
george also lectured widely in america and britain where he left an indelible mark on eng lish fabian socialism.
georges proposals resounded for decades.
as late as 1903 a young female follower applied for a patent for the landlords game which bore a striking resemblance to parker brothers later monopoly released in 1935.
in the earlier game the point was not to amass property but to expose the unfair advantage enjoyed by the landlord and to show how the single tax would discourage speculation edward bellamy a quiet massachusetts yankee was another journalist reformer of remarkable power.
in 1888 he published a socialistic novel looking backward in which the hero falling into a hypnotic sleep awakens in the year 2000.
he looks backward and nds that the social and economic injustices of 1887 have melted away under an idyllic government which has nationalized big business to serve the public interest.
to a nation already alarmed by the trust evil the book had a magnetic appeal and sold over a million copies.
scores of bellamy clubs sprang up to discuss this mild utopian socialism and they heavily inuenced american reform movements near the end of the century.
makers of america thepioneering great africanpragmatists american migration n ineteenth century americans among them proper bostonians of an intellectual bent had a habit of joining clubs.
luminaries such as the philosopher ralph waldo emerson the novelist nathaniel hawthorne and the natural scientist louis agassiz regularly met for sumptuous food and social conversation at the saturday club.
younger members of bostons polite society mimicked their elders at a ju nior edition known simply as the club in a world without academic conferences or professional forums serious intellectual conversations in the united states tended to occur at private philosophical and literary societies or simply at regular gatherings in a scholars home study.
one club founded in cambridge massachusetts in january 1872 lasted only nine months but its members left a lasting mark on american intellectual life.
it was in the earliest seventies that a knot of us young men in old cambridge calling ourselves halfironically half deantly the metaphysical club.
used to meet sometimes in my study sometimes in that of william james recalled charles sanders peirce in 1907.
peirces metaphysical club was hardly a success by most conventional standards.
it kept no records of its proceedings.
its members missed meetings and except for peirce made no mention of its existence in their letters diaries or writings.
some of their relatives despised it.
a young henry james novelist brother of william griped it gives me a headache merely to know of it but it did boast an impressive roster of members including three young men in their early thirties who eventually became foundational gures in their respective elds the logician and scientist peirce the medical doctor psychologist and philosopher william james and the jurist and legal scholar oliver wendell holmes jr with their harvard friend and fellow philosopher chauncey wright they assembled frequently in their homes and usually over a bottle of rum argued over the meaning of life and the nature of the universe.
joined later by the philosophers john dewey and george herbert mead these thinkers gave earliest expression to a distinctive american philosophy known as pragmatism pragmatism sprouted in the fertile intellectual soil of the late nineteenth century atlantic world.
the ground had already been tilled by the naturalist charles darwin whose revolutionary contributions to evolutionary science greatly inuenced the early pragmatists.
in place of xed species darwin had posited a natural world of chance change and contingency.
thinkers like peirce and james applied darwins insights from biology to elds such as philosophy logic and psychology.
to them old ways of thinking that assumed absolute truths sanctioned by religious teaching or idealist philosophy no longer made sense in the william james 1842 1910 physician psychologist and philosopher charles sanders peirce 1839 1914 mathematician and logician oliver wendell holmes jr 1841 1935 supreme court justice and scholar john dewey 1859 1952 educator and philosopher darwinian age.
instead they welcomed the provisional fallible nature of experimental knowledge.
as james put it pragmatism means the open air and possibilities of nature as against dogma articiality and the pretence of nality in truth in short they embraced uncertainty and developed an entire philosophical system around it.
the true value of an idea said the pragmatists lay in its ability to solve problems.
while all the pragmatists were far ranging in their intellectual pursuits dewey demonstrated his faith in the unity of theory and practice by becoming a public intellectual and social activist.
he founded the laboratory school at the university of chicago in 1896 to experiment with an educational philosophy rooted in learning by doing he promoted an ethical vision of american society by linking arms with progressive reformers in the 1910s and he championed democratic ideals by promoting third party politics in the 1930s and anti stalinist agitation in the 1940s.
throughout a prolic career that spanned three generations dewey continually stressed the positive virtues of experience cooperation and democracy and he urged philosophers to abandon futile debates about knowledge in favor of tackling the real problems of men holmes as a justice on the massachusetts supreme judicial court for twenty years and on the u s supreme court for another three decades similarly followed pragmatisms injunction to evaluate the effects of ideas rather than simply adopt prescriptions from the past.
from his personal experience ghting in the civil war where he nearly died from his wounds holmes acquired a bleak skepticism toward jurisprudence.
while on the bench he became renowned for his masterfully crafted dissents most famously asserting the principle of judicial deference to legislatures in lochner v new york 1905 and protecting freedom of speech even freedom for the opinions that we loathe in abrams v united states 1919.
many commentators on pragmatism have considered it the quintessential expression of american practicality.
to its critics pragmatism symbolizes the vulgar can do attitude and narrow anti intellectualism of the american middle class.
to its celebrants pragmatism offers a needed correction to conventional philosophy by accepting the uncertain and provisional nature of knowledge reconciling science and culture and promoting an ethical ideal of democracy.
pragmatism went out of fashion during the cold war era ca.
1945 1990 when americans believed in moral certainties such as the superiority of the united states and the value free empiricism of science.
but it has enjoyed a striking renewal in recent years.
as new kinds of uncertainty ranging from terrorist violence to scientic dilemmas raise fresh challenges in the twenty rst century many modern american intellectuals are harking back to pragmatism.
first formulated in the cozy con nes of cambridges metaphysical club more than a century ago pragmatism offers todays thinkers a philosophy of life built on experimentation ethical commitment and open ended democratic debate.
chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 postwar writing as literacy increased so did book reading.
post civil war americans devoured millions of dime novels usually depicting the wilds of the woolly west.
paintbedaubed indians and quick triggered gunmen like deadwood dick shot off vast quantities of powder and virtue invariably triumphed.
these lurid paperbacks were frowned upon by parents but goggle eyed youths read them in haylofts or in schools behind the broad covers of geography books.
the king of the dime novelists was harlan f halsey who made a fortune by dashing off about 650 novels often one in a day.
general lewis wallace lawyer soldier and author was a colorful gure.
having fought with distinction in the civil war he sought to combat the prevailing wave of darwinian skepticism with his novel ben hur a tale of the christ 1880.
a phenomenal success the book sold an estimated 2 million copies in many languages including arabic and chinese and later appeared on stage and screen.
it was the uncle toms cabin of the anti darwinists who found in it support for the holy scriptures.
an even more popular writer was horatio alger a puritan reared new eng lander who in 1866 forsook the pulpit for the pen.
holy horatio wrote more than a hundred volumes of juvenile ction that sold over 100 million copies.
his stock formula was that a poor boy through a combination of virtue honesty hard work and bravery could achieve success wealth and honor a kind of survival of the purest especially nonsmokers nondrinkers nonswearers and nonliars.
although accusations of sexual impropriety haunted alger throughout his life he implanted in his readers moral lessons and the conviction that there is always room at the top especially if one is lucky enough to save the life of the bosss daughter and marry her.
in poetry walt whitman was one of the few luminaries of yesteryear who remained active.
although shattered in health by ser vice as a civil war nurse he brought out successive and puried revisions of his hardy perennial leaves of grass.
the assassination of lincoln inspired him to write two of the most moving poems in american literature o captain.
my captain and when lilacs last in the dooryard bloomd the curious gure of emily dickinson one of americas most gifted lyric poets did not emerge until 1886 when she died and her poems were discovered.
a massachusetts recluse she wrote over a thousand short lyrics on scraps of paper.
only two were published dur emily dickinson 1830 1886 a great american poet she pursued intense intellectual relationships with several literary and cultural gures including the abolitionist thomas wentworth higginson.
ing her lifetime and those without her consent.
as she wrote how dreary to be somebody.
how public like a frog to tell your name the livelong june to an admiring bog.
literary landmarks in novel writing the romantic sentimentality of a youthful era was giving way to a rugged realism that reected more faithfully the materialism of an industrial society.
american authors now turned increasingly to the coarse human comedy and drama of the world around them to nd their subjects.
two missouri born authors with deep connections to the south brought altogether new voices to the latenineteenth century literary scene.
the daring feminist author kate chopin 1851 1904 wrote candidly about literary realism adultery suicide and womens ambitions in the awakening 1899.
largely ignored in her own day chopin was rediscovered by later readers who cited her work as suggestive of the feminist yearnings that stirred beneath the surface of respectability in the gilded age.
mustachioed mark twain 1835 1910 had leapt to fame with the celebrated jumping frog of calaveras county 1867 and the innocents abroad 1869.
he teamed up with charles dudley warner in 1873 to write the gilded age.
an acid satire on post civil war politicians and speculators the book gave a name to an era.
with his scanty formal schooling in frontier missouri twain typied a new breed of american authors in revolt against the elegant re nements of the old new england school of writing.
christened samuel langhorne clemens he had served for a time as a mississippi riverboat pilot and later took his pen name mark twain from the boatmans cry that meant two fathoms after a brief stint in the armed forces twain journeyed westward to cal i fornia a trip he described with a mixture of truth and tall tales in roughing it 1872.
many other books owed from twains busy pen.
the adventures of tom sawyer 1876 preceded the adventures of huckleberry finn 1884 an american masterpiece that deed twains own de nition of a classic as a book which people praise and dont read his later years were soured by bankruptcy growing out of unwise investments and he was forced to take to the lecture platform and amuse what he called the damned human race a great tribute was paid to his self tutored genius and to american letters when eng lands oxford university awarded him an honorary degree in 1907.
journalist humorist satirist and foe of social injustice he made his most enduring contribution in capturing frontier realism and humor in the authentic american dialect.
another author who wrote out of the west and achieved at least temporary fame and fortune was bret harte 1836 1902.
a foppishly dressed new yorker harte struck it rich in cal i fornia with gold rush stories in 1935 ernest hemingway 1899 1961 wrote all modern american literature comes from one book by mark twain called huckleberry finn.
all american writing comes from that.
there was nothing before.
there has been nothing as good since.
mark twain 1835 1910 born samuel langhorne clemens he was not only americas most popular author but also a renowned platform lecturer.
this photograph was taken at his house at quarry farm near elmira new york where he wrote major portions of both the adventures of tom sawyer and the adventures of huckleberry finn.
especially the luck of roaring camp and the outcasts of poker flat catapulted suddenly into notoriety by those stories he never again matched their excellence or their popularity.
he lived out his nal years in london as little more than a hack writer.
william dean howells 1837 1920 a printers son from ohio could boast of little schoolhouse education but his busy pen carried him high into the literary circles of the east.
in 1871 he became the editor in chief of the prestigious boston based atlantic monthly and was subsequently presented with honorary degrees from six universities including oxford.
he wrote about chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 ordinary people and about contemporary and sometimes controversial social themes.
a modern instance 1882 deals with the once taboo subject of divorce.
the rise of silas lapham 1885 describes the trials of a newly rich paint manufacturer caught up in the caste system of brahmin boston.
a hazard of new fortunes 1890 portrays the reformers strikers and socialists in gilded age new york.
stephen crane 1871 1900 the fourteenth son of a methodist minister also wrote about the seamy underside of life in urban industrial america.
his maggie a girl of the streets 1893 a brutal tale about a poor prostitute driven to suicide was too grim to nd a publisher.
crane had to have it printed privately.
he rose quickly to prominence with the red badge of courage 1895 the stirring story of a bloodied young civil war recruit fresh sh under re.
crane himself had never seen a battle and wrote entirely from printed civil war records.
he died of tuberculosis in 1900 when only twenty nine.
not all authors came from humble stock.
the gifted henry adams 1838 1918 son of charles francis adams grandson of john quincy adams and greatgrandson of john adams turned unrivaled family connections into a prolic career as a historian novelist and critic.
in his nine volume history of the united states during the administrations of jefferson and madison 1889 1891 adams defended his patrician heritage from posthumous attack.
alarmed by modern trends adams penned a paean to the bygone beauty and spiritual unity of the high middle ages in montsaint michel and chartres 1905.
similar anxieties about modernity resurfaced in his best known work the education of henry adams 1907 an autobiographical account of his own failure to come to grips with the chaotic forces of twentieth century life.
henry james 1843 1916 brother of harvard philosopher william james was a new yorker who turned from law to literature.
taking as his dominant theme the confrontation of innocent americans with subtle europeans james penned a remarkable number of brilliant novels including daisy miller 1879 the portrait of a lady 1881 and the wings of the dove 1902.
his book the bostonians 1886 was one of the rst novels about the rising feminist movement.
james frequently made women his central characters exploring their inner reactions to complex situations with a deftness that marked him as a master of psychological realism long resident in eng land he became a british subject shortly before his death.
candid portrayals of contemporary life and social problems were the literary order of the day by the turn jack london 1876 1916 the socialist who hated strikebreakers known as scabs said no man has a right to scab so long as there is a pool of water to drown his carcass in or a rope long enough to hang his body with.
judas iscariot was a gentleman compared with a scab.
for betraying his master he had character enough to hang himself.
a scab has not.
of the century.
jack london 1876 1916 famous as a nature writer in such books as the call of the wild 1903 turned to depicting a possible fascistic revolution in the iron heel 1907.
frank norris 1870 1902 like london a cal i fornian wrote the octopus 1901 an earthy saga of the stranglehold in which railroad and corrupt politicians held cal i fornia wheat ranchers.
a sequel the pit 1903 dealt with the making and breaking of speculators on the chicago wheat exchange.
two black writers paul laurence dunbar 1872 1906 and charles w chesnutt 1858 1932 brought another kind of realism to late nineteenth century literature.
dunbar through poetry particularly his acclaimed lyrics of lowly life 1896 and chesnutt through ction short stories in the atlantic monthly and the conjure women 1899 embraced the use of black dialect and folklore previously shunned by black authors to capture the spontaneity and richness of southern black culture.
conspicuous among the new social novelists rising in the literary rmament was theodore dreiser 1871 1945 a homely gangling writer from indiana.
he burst upon the literary scene in 1900 with sister carrie a graphically realistic narrative of a poor working girl in chicago and new york.
she becomes one mans mistress then elopes with another and nally strikes out on her own to make a career on the stage.
the ctional carries disregard for prevailing moral standards so offended dreisers publisher that the book was soon withdrawn from circulation though it later reemerged as an acclaimed american classic.
the new morality victoria woodhull who was real esh and blood also shook the pillars of conventional morality when she publicly proclaimed her belief in free love in 1871.
changes in moral standards victoria woodhull 1838 1927 pleads for woman suffrage before the house judiciary committee 1871 a colorful and charismatic gure woodhull became the rst woman to run for the presidency in 1872 as the candidate of the equal rights party.
elizabeth cady stanton is seated directly behind her at the extreme left sits susan b anthony.
woodhull was a beautiful and eloquent divorce sometime stockbroker and tireless feminist propagandist.
together with her sister tennessee cla in she published a far out periodical woodhull and clains weekly.
the sisters again shocked respectable society in 1872 when their journal struck a blow for the new morality by charging that henry ward beecher the most famous preacher of his day had for years been carrying on an adulterous affair.
pure minded americans sternly resisted these affronts to their moral principles.
their foremost champion was a portly crusader anthony comstock who made lifelong war on the immoral armed after 1873 with a federal statute the notorious comstock law this self appointed defender of sexual purity boasted that he had conscated no fewer than 202 679 obscene pictures and photos 4 185 boxes of pills powders etc used by abortionists and 26 obscene pictures framed on walls of saloons his proud claim was that he had driven at least fteen people to suicide.
the antics of the woodhull sisters and comstock exposed to daylight the battle in late nineteenthcentury america over sexual attitudes and the place of women.
switchboards and typewriters in the booming cities became increasingly the tools of womens independence.
young workingwomen headed to dance halls and nightclubs when the day was done enjoying a new sense of freedom in the cities.
this new morality began to be reected in soaring divorce rates the spreading practice of birth control and increasingly frank discussion of sexual topics.
by 1913 said one popular magazine the chimes had struck sex oclock in america families and women in the city the new urban environment was hard on families.
paradoxically the crowded cities were emotionally isolating places.
urban families had to go it alone separated from clan kin and village.
as families increasingly became the virtually exclusive arena for intimate companionship and for emotional and psychological satisfaction they were subjected to unprecedented stress.
many families cracked under the strain.
the urban era launched the era of divorce.
from the late nineteenth century dates the beginning of the divorce revolution that transformed the united states social landscape in the twentieth century see table 25 2.
urban life also dictated changes in work habits and even in family size.
not only fathers but mothers and even children as young as ten years old often worked and usually in widely scattered locations.
on the farm having many children meant having more hands to help with hoeing and harvesting but in the city more children meant more mouths to feed more crowding in sardine tin tenements and more human baggage to carry in the uphill struggle for social mobility.
not surprisingly birthrates were still dropping and family size continued to shrink as the nineteenth century chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 table 25 2 marriages and divorces 1890 2006 year marriages divorces ratio of divorces to marriages 570 000 709 000 948 166 1 274 476 1 126 856 1 595 879 1 667 231 1 523 381 2 159 000 2 390 000 2 443 000 2 160 000 33 461 55 751 83 045 170 505 195 961 264 000 385 144 393 000 708 000 1 189 000 1 182 000 na 1 17 1 12 1 11 1 7 1 5 1 6 1 4 3 1 3 8 1 3 1 2 1 2 na divorce data have not been collected by the federal government since 1998.
sources statistical abstract of the united states relevant years national center for health statistics national vital statistics report relevant years.
lengthened.
marriages were being delayed and more couples learned the techniques of birth control.
the decline in family size in fact affected rural americans as well as urban dwellers and old stock natives as well as new immigrants.
women were growing more independent in the urban environment and in 1898 they heard the voice of a major feminist prophet charlotte perkins gilman.
in that year the freethinking and original minded gilman published women and economics a classic of feminist literature.
a distant relative of harriet beecher stowe and catharine beecher gilman displayed the restless temperament and reforming zeal characteristic of the remarkable beecher clan.
strikingly handsome she shunned traditional feminine frills and instead devoted herself to a vigorous regimen of physical exercise and philosophical meditation.
in her masterwork of 1898 gilman called on women to abandon their dependent status and contribute to the larger life of the community through productive involvement in the economy.
rejecting all claims that biology gave women a fundamentally different character from men she argued that our highly specialized motherhood is not so advantageous as believed she advocated centralized nurseries and cooperative kitchens to facilitate womens participation in the work force anticipating by more than half a century the day care centers and convenience food ser vices of a later day.
fiery feminists also continued to insist on the ballot.
they had been demanding the vote since before the civil war but many high minded female reformers had temporarily shelved the cause of women to battle for the rights of blacks.
in 1890 militant suffragists formed the national american woman suffrage asso in 1906 progressive reformer jane addams 1860 1935 argued that granting women the vote would improve the social and political condition of american cities city housekeeping has failed partly because women the traditional housekeepers have not been consulted as to its multiform activities.
the men have been carelessly indifferent to much of the civic housekeeping as they have been indifferent to the details of the household.
city government demands the help of minds accustomed to detail and a variety of work to a sense of obligation to the health and welfare of young children and to a responsibility for the cleanliness and comfort of other people.
feminist stirrings wa mt or id nv ca me nd sd wy az mi ia il co ks ok nm ny wi ne ut vt mn ri pa oh wv ky nj ct de va md nc tn sc ar ms tx in mo nh ma al ga la fl ak hi full voting rights for women with effective date women voting in presidential elections women voting in primaries no voting by women map 25 2 woman suffrage before the nineteenth amendment dates show when a state or territory adopted woman suffrage.
note the concentration of woman suffrage states in the west.
interactive map woman suffrage by evelyn rumsey cary after a century of struggle women nally won a constitutionally guaranteed right to vote in 1920 ciation nawsa.
its founders included aging pioneers like elizabeth cady stanton who had helped organize the rst womens rights convention in 1848 and her long time comrade susan b anthony the radical quaker spit re who had courted jail by trying to cast a ballot in the 1872 presidential election.
by 1900 a new generation of women had taken command of the suffrage battle.
their most effective leader was carrie chapman catt a pragmatic and businesslike reformer of relentless dedication.
signicantly under catt the suffragists de emphasized the argument that women deserved the vote as a matter of right because they were in all respects the equals of men.
instead catt stressed the desirability of giving women the vote if they were to continue to discharge their traditional duties as homemakers and mothers in the in creasingly public world of the city.
women had special responsibility for the health of the family and the education of children the argument ran.
on the farm women could discharge these responsibilities in the separate sphere of the isolated homestead.
but in the city they needed a voice on boards of public health police commissions and school boards.
by thus linking the ballot to a traditional de nition of womens role suffragists registered encouraging gains as the new century opened despite continuing showers of rotten eggs and the jeers of male critics who insisted that women were made for loving not for voting.
women were increasingly permitted to vote in local elections particularly on issues related to the schools.
wyoming territory later called the equality state granted the rst unrestricted suffrage to women in 1869.
with this important breach in the dike made many states followed wyomings example see map 25 2.
paralleling these triumphs most of the states by 1890 had passed laws to permit wives to own or control their property after marriage.
city life also fostered the growth of a spate of womens orga ni zations including the general federation of womens clubs which counted some 200 000 members in 1900.
meanwhile in 1893 new zealand became the rst chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 prohibiting alcohol and promoting reform alarming gains by demon rum spurred the temperance reformers to redoubled zeal.
especially obnoxious to them was the shutter doored corner saloon appropriately called the poor mans club the barroom helped keep both him and his family poor.
liquor consumption had increased during the nerve racking days of the civil war and immigrant groups accustomed to alcohol in the old country were hostile to restraints.
whiskey loving foreigners in boston would rudely hiss temperance lecturers.
many tipplers charged with some accuracy that temperance reform amounted to a middle class assault on working class lifestyles.
the national prohibition party orga nized in 1869 polled a sprinkling of votes in some of the ensuing presidential elections.
among the favorite songs of these sober souls were ill marry no man if he drinks vote down the vile trafc and the drunkards doom typical was this now all young men a warning take and shun the poisoned bowl twill lead you down to hells dark gate and ruin your own soul.
wells 1862 1931 in 1892 wells spearheaded a protest against the heinous lynching of three respected black businessmen in memphis.
faced with threats on her life wells ed from the south persevering with her tenacious antilynching campaign from the north and from england see below or p 626.
nation to grant women equal suffrage rights further inspiring american reformers.
the reborn suffrage movement and other womens orga ni zations largely excluded black women from their ranks.
fearful that an integrated campaign would compromise its efforts to get the vote the national american woman suffrage association limited membership to whites.
black women however created their own associations.
journalist and teacher ida b.
wells inspired black women to mount a nationwide antilynching crusade.
she also helped launch the black womens club movement which culminated in the establishment of the national association of colored women in 1896.
militant women entered the alcoholic arena notably when the womans christian temperance union wctu was orga nized in 1874.
the white ribbon was its symbol of purity the saintly frances e willard also a champion of planned parenthood was its leading spirit.
less saintly was the muscular and mentally deranged kansas cyclone carrie a.
nation whose rst husband had died of alcoholism.
with her hatchet she boldly smashed saloon bottles and bars and her hatchetations brought considerable disrepute to the prohibition movement because of the violence of her one woman crusade.
but rum was now on the run.
the potent anti saloon league was formed in 1893 with its members singing the saloon must go and vote for cold water boys female supporters sang the lips that touch liquor must never touch mine statewide prohibition which had made surprising gains in maine and elsewhere before the civil war was sweeping new states into the dry column.
the great triumph but only a temporary one came in 1919 when the national prohibition amendment eighteenth was attached to the constitution.
the prohibition crusade doused for the cause minnesota 1878 these umbrella toting temperance crusaders stood their ground despite the water poured on them by the indignant wife of the billiard hall owner.
artistic triumphs carrie nation advertised as a lecturer nation took her antidrink crusade to several universities including harvard and yale which she denounced as hellholes predictably the students greeted her with wild burlesque.
all nations welcome but carrie became a standard saying in saloons throughout the land.
banners of other social crusaders were aloft.
the american society for the prevention of cruelty to animals aspca was created in 1866 after its founder had witnessed brutality to horses in russia.
the american red cross was launched in 1881 with the dynamic and diminutive ve foot tall clara barton the angel of civil war battleelds at the helm.
john adams had anticipated that his generations preoccupation with nation building would allow art to ourish in the future but the results long proved unspectacular.
portrait painting continued to appeal as it had since the colonial era but many of americas nest painters made their living abroad.
james whistler 1834 1903 did much of his work including the celebrated portrait of his mother in eng land.
this eccentric and quarrelsome massachusetts yankee had earlier been dropped from west point after failing chemistry.
had silicon been a gas he later jested i would have been a major general another gifted portrait painter likewise self exiled in eng land was john singer sargent 1856 1925.
his attering but somewhat supercial likenesses of the british nobility were highly prized.
mary cassatt an american in exile in paris painted sensitive portrayals of women and children that earned her a place in the pantheon of the french impressionist painters whose work revolutionized the european art world after their 1874 debut.
other brush wielders no less talented brightened the artistic horizon.
self taught george inness 1825 chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 1894 who looked like a fanatic with his long hair and piercing gaze became americas leading landscapist.
thomas eakins 1844 1916 attained a high degree of realism in his paintings a quality not appreciated by portrait sitters who wanted their moles overlooked.
boston born winslow homer 1836 1910 who as a youth had secretly drawn sketches in school was perhaps the greatest painter of the group.
earthily american and largely resistant to foreign inuences he revealed rugged realism and boldness of conception.
his canvases of the sea and of sherfolk were masterly and probably no american artist has excelled him in portraying the awesome power of the ocean.
probably the most gifted sculptor yet produced by america was augustus saint gaudens 1848 1907.
born in ireland of an irish mother and a french father he became an adopted american.
among his most moving works is the robert gould shaw memorial erected in boston in 1897.
it depicts colonel shaw a young white boston brahmin ofcer leading his black troops into battle in the civil war.
music too was gaining popularity.
america of the 1880s and 1890s was assembling high quality symphony orchestras notably in boston and chicago.
the famed metropolitan opera house of new york was erected in 1883.
in its fabled diamond horseshoe the newly rich often un worlds columbian exposition chicago 1893 lagoons helped make the expositions main buildings dubbed the white city shimmer as the city beautiful in stark contrast to the blocks of dull gray buildings that dominated the real chicago.
der the pretense of enjoying the imported singers would aunt their jewels gowns and furs.
while symphonies and operas were devoted to bringing european music to elite american audiences new strains of homegrown american music were sprouting in the south.
black folk traditions like spirituals and ragged music were evolving into the blues ragtime and jazz which would transform american popular music in the twentieth century.
a marvelous discovery was the reproduction of music by mechanical means.
the phonograph though a squeakily imperfect instrument when invented by the deaf edison had by 1900 reached over 150 000 homes.
americans were rapidly being dosed with canned music as the sitting room piano increasingly gathered dust.
a new generation of architects and planners looked to europe to reshape american urban space with the city beautiful movement.
they wanted the new american city not just to look beautiful but also to convey a condent sense of harmony order and monumentality.
to achieve these effects they copied european styles of beaux arts classicism and planning ideas from the master builder of paris baron georges eugne haussmann who in the 1860s had recast the city of light with grand boulevards parks and public build arts and entertainment hamlin garland 1860 1940 the well known novelist and writer of short stories was immensely impressed by the cultural value of chicagos columbian exposition.
he wrote to his aged parents on their dakota farm sell the cook stove if necessary and come.
you must see this fair.
aiming to assert americas prominence among the greatest urban cultures of the western world architects constructed grandiose urban landmarks such as new yorks grand central terminal.
city planners such as daniel burnham redesigned chicago and washington d c in the belief they could make them perfect progressive cities inspiring civic virtue in their inhabitants.
burnhams rst major project which came to symbolize the city beautiful movement was his design for the great worlds columbian exposition held in chicago in 1893.
his imposing landscape of pavilions and fountains honored the four hundredth anniversary of columbuss rst voyage.
this so called dream of loveliness which was visited by 27 million people did much to raise american artistic standards and promote city planning although many fairgoers proved more interested in the contortions of a hootchy kootchy dancer named little egypt the business of amusement fun and frolic were not neglected by the workaday american.
the pursuit of happiness heralded in the declaration of independence had by centurys end become a frenzied scramble.
people sought their pleasures ercely as they had overrun their continent and built their cities ercely.
and now they had more time to play.
buffalo bills wild west show ca.
1907 by the late 1800s the wild west was already passing into the realm of myth and popular entertainment.
famed frontiersman william f buffalo bill cody 1846 1917 made his fortune showing off his tame cowboys and indians to enthusiastic urban audiences in europe as well as the united states.
buffalo bills wild west an extravaganza featuring skilled horsemen from around the globe including turks south american gauchos arabs and cossacks was even more motley than the real one.
chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 varied diversions beckoned.
the legitimate stage still ourished as appreciative audiences responded to the lure of the footlights.
vaudeville with its coarse jokes and graceful acrobats continued to be immensely popular during the 1880s and 1890s as were minstrel shows in the south now performed by black singers and dancers rather than by whites wearing blackface as in the north before the civil war.
the circus high tented and multiringed nally emerged full blown.
phineas t barnum the master showman who had early discovered that the public likes to be humbugged joined hands with james a bailey in 1881 to stage the greatest show on earth colorful wild west shows rst performed in 1883 were even more distinctively american.
headed by the knightly goateed and free drinking william f buffalo bill cody the troupe included warwhooping indians live buffalo and deadeye marksmen.
among them was the girlish annie oakley.
rie in hand she could at thirty paces perforate a tossedup card half a dozen times before it uttered to the ground hence the term annie oakley for a punched ticket and later for a free pass.
now ringling bros and barnum bailey circus.
baseball already widely played before the civil war was clearly emerging as the national pastime if not a national mania.
a league of professional players was formed in the 1870s and in 1888 an all star baseball team toured the world using the pyramids as a backstop while in egypt.
basketball was invented in 1891 by james naismith a ymca instructor in springeld massachusetts.
designed as an active indoor sport that could be played during the winter months it spread rapidly and enjoyed enormous popularity in the next century.
a gladiatorial trend toward spectator sports rather than participative sports was exemplied by football.
this rugged game with its dangerous ying wedge had become popular well before 1889 when yale man walter c camp chose his rst all american team.
the yale princeton game of 1893 drew fty thousand cheering fans while foreigners jeered that the nation was getting sports on the brain even pugilism with its long background of bareknuckle brutality gained a new and gloved respectability in 1892.
agile gentleman jim corbett a scientic boxer wrestled the world championship from the aging and alcoholic john l sullivan the fabulous boston strong boy two crazes swept the country in the closing decades of the century.
first croquet became all the rage cyclists on the monterey peninsula california 1888 men and women alike took to the roads on the newfangled two wheelers bicycling especially appealed to young women eager to escape nineteenth century strictures against female exercise and bodily exposure.
chronology though condemned by moralists of the naughty nineties because it exposed feminine ankles and promoted irtation.
second the low framed safety bicycle came to replace the high seated model.
by 1893 a million bicycles were in use and thousands of young women jokesters remarked were turning to this new spinning wheel one that offered freedom not tedium the land of the skyscraper was plainly becoming more standardized owing largely to the new industrialization.
although race and ethnicity assigned urban americans to distinctive neighborhoods and workplaces to an increasing degree they shared a common popular culture playing reading shopping and talking alike.
as the century drew to a close the explosion of cities paradoxically made americans more diverse and more similar at the same time.
chronology charles darwin publishes on the origin of species mark twain publishes the adventures of huckleberry finn morrill act provides public land for higher education louis sullivan builds rst skyscraper in chicago linotype invented worlds rst subway system opens in london statue of liberty erected in new york harbor american society for the prevention of cruelty to animals aspca created american protective association apa formed hatch act supplements morrill act wyoming territory grants women right to vote edward bellamy publishes looking backward american all star baseball team tours world woodhull and clains weekly published jane addams founds hull house in chicago metaphysical club meets in cambridge massachusetts national american woman suffrage association nawsa formed basketball invented lillian wald opens henry street settlement in new york anti saloon league formed worlds columbian exposition held in chicago new zealand grants women right to vote library of congress opens charlotte perkins gilman publishes women and economics kate chopin publishes the awakening theodore dreiser publishes sister carrie henry adams privately publishes the education of henry adams national association for the advancement of colored people naacp founded comstock law womans christian temperance union wctu orga nized chautauqua education movement launched impressionist artists debut in paris johns hopkins university graduate school established henry george publishes progress and poverty dumbbell tenement introduced mary baker eddy establishes christian science salvation army begins work in america booker t washington becomes head of tuskegee institute american red cross founded barnum and bailey rst join to stage greatest show on earth first immigration restriction laws passed brooklyn bridge completed metropolitan opera house built in new york chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 key terms new immigrants 600 settlement houses 607 liberal protestants 610 tuskegee institute 613 land grant colleges 614 pragmatism 616 yellow journalism 617 people to know national american woman suffrage association nawsa 624 womans christian temperance union wctu 626 worlds columbian exposition 629 jane addams charles darwin booker t washington w e b.
du bois joseph pulitzer william randolph hearst john dewey horatio alger mark twain carrie chapman catt to learn more john bodnar the transplanted a history of immigrants in urban america 1985 irving howe world of our fathers 1976 kenneth t jackson crabgrass frontier the suburbanization of america 1985 david levering lewis w e b.
du bois biography of a race 1868 1919 1993 w e b.
du bois the fight for equality and the american century 1919 1963 2000 kathy peiss cheap amusements working women and leisure in turn of the century new york 1986 jacob riis how the other half lives 1890 daniel rodgers atlantic crossings social politics in a progressive age 1998 roy rosenzweig and elizabeth blackmar the park and the people a history of central park 1992 carroll smith rosenberg disorderly conduct visions of gender in victorian america 1985 ronald takaki strangers from a different shore a history of asian americans 1989 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 up to our own day american history has been in a large degree the history of the colonization of the great west.
the existence of an area of free land its continuous recession and the advance of american settlement westward explain american development.
the white man who possesses this whole vast country from sea to sea who roams over it at pleasure and lives where he likes cannot know the cramp we feel in this little spot with the undying remembrance of the fact which you know as well as we that every foot of what you proudly call america not very long ago belonged to the red man.
w hen the civil war crashed to a close the frontier line was still wavering westward.
a long fringe of settlement bulging outward here and there ran roughly north through central texas and on to the canadian border.
between this jagged line and the settled areas on the pacic slope there were virtually no white people.
the few exceptions were the islands of mormons in utah occasional trading posts and gold camps and several scattered spanish mexican settlements throughout the southwest.
sprawling in expanse the great west was a rough square that mea sured about a thousand miles on each this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 harriet beecher stowe 1811 1896 daguerreotype by southworth and hawes stowe was a remarkable woman whose pen helped to change the course of history.
the book that made this great war lincolns celebrated remark to author harriet beecher stowe reected the enormous emotional impact of her impassioned novel.
eyes so youre the little woman who wrote the book that made this great war the truth is that uncle toms cabin did help start the civil war and win it.
the south condemned that vile wretch in petticoats when it learned that hundreds of thousands of fellow americans were reading and believing her unfair indictment.
mrs stowe had never witnessed slavery at rst hand in the deep south but she had seen it briey during a visit to kentucky and she had lived for many years in ohio a center of underground railroad activity.
uncle tom endearing and enduring left a profound impression on the north.
uncounted thousands of readers swore that henceforth they would have nothing to do with the enforcement of the fugitive slave law.
the tale was devoured by millions of impressionable youths in the 1850s some of whom later became the boys in blue who volunteered to ght the civil war through to its grim nale.
the memory of a beaten and dying uncle tom helped sustain them in their determination to wipe out the plague of slavery.
the novel was immensely popular abroad especially in britain and france.
countless readers wept over the kindly tom and the angelic eva while deploring the brutal simon legree.
when the guns in america in the closing scenes of harriet beecher stowes novel uncle toms brutal master simon legree orders the 1 200 slave savagely beaten to death by two fellow slaves.
through tears and blood tom exclaims no.
my soul ant yours masr.
you havent bought it ye cant buy it.
its been bought and paid for by one that is able to keep it no matter no matter you cant harm me i cant said legree with a sneer well see well see.
here sambo quimbo give this dog such a breakin in as he wont get over this month examining the evidence harriet beecher stowe uncle toms cabin s works of ction novels pose tricky problems to historians whose principal objective is to get the factual record straight.
works of the imagination are notoriously unreliable as descriptions of reality and only rarely is it known with any degree of certainty what a reader might have felt when confronting a particular ctional passage or theme.
yet a novel like harriet beecher stowes uncle toms cabin had such an unarguably large impact on the american and worldwide debate over slavery that historians have inevitably looked to it for evidence of the mid nineteenth century ideas and attitudes to which stowe appealed.
the passage quoted here is especially rich in such evidence and even offers an explanation for the logic of the novels title.
stowe cleverly aimed to mobilize not simply her readers sense of injustice but also their sentiments on behalf of the antislavery cause.
why is the cabin described here so central to stowes novel.
what sentimental values does the cabin represent.
what is the nature of the threat to those values.
what does it say about a nally began to boom the common people of eng land sensed that the triumph of the north would spell the end of the black curse.
the governments in london and paris seriously considered intervening in behalf of the south but they were sobered by the realization that many of their own people aroused by the tom mania might not support them.
another trouble brewing book appeared in 1857 ve years after the debut of uncle tom.
titled the impending crisis of the south it was written by hinton r helper a nonaristocratic white from north carolina.
hating both slavery and blacks he attempted to prove by an array of statistics that indirectly the nonslave nineteenth century american culture that stowes appeal to sentiment succeeded so much more dramatically in exciting antislavery passions than did the factual and moral arguments of many other mostly male abolitionists.
holding whites were the ones who suffered most from the millstone of slavery.
unable to secure a publisher in the south he nally managed to nd one in the north.
helpers inuence was negligible among the poorer whites to whom he addressed his message.
yet the souths planter elite certainly took note of helpers audacity which fueled their fears that the nonslaveholding majority might abandon them.
the impending crisis of the south with its dirty allusions was banned in the south and fed to the ames at book burning parties.
in the north untold thousands of copies many in condensed form were distributed as campaign literature by the republicans.
southerners were further chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 100w utah terr.
topeka new mexico territory r pottawatomie creek may 24 1856 800 mi.
texas indian territory as ns kansas r city shawnee mission lawrence may 21 1856 osage 800 km.
missouri leavenworth uri r.
lecompton kansas territory 0 10 20 km.
o 40n nebraska territory s mis n 95w ka 105w oswatomie aug 31 1856 marais des cygnes may 19 1858 attacks by free state forces attacks by proslavery forces present day kansas map 19 1 bleeding kansas 1854 1860 enter every election district in kansas.
and vote at the point of a bowie knife or revolver one proslavery agitator exhorted a missouri crowd.
proslavery missouri senator david atchison declared that there are 1 100 men coming over from platte county to vote and if that aint enough we can send 5 000 enough to kill every goddamned abolitionist in the territory embittered when they learned that their northern brethren were spreading these wicked lies thus did southerners reacting much as they did to uncle toms cabin become increasingly unwilling to sleep under the same federal roof with their hostile yankee bedfellows.
the north south contest for kansas the rolling plains of kansas had meanwhile been providing an example of the worst possible workings of popular sovereignty although admittedly under abnormal conditions.
newcomers who ventured into kansas were a motley lot.
most of the northerners were just ordinary westward moving pioneers in search of richer lands beyond the sunset.
but a small part of the inow was nanced by groups of northern abolitionists or freesoilers.
the most famous of these antislavery orga ni zations was the new eng land emigrant aid company which sent about two thousand people to the troubled area to forestall the south and also to make a prot.
shouting ho for kansas many of them carried the deadly new breech loading sharps ries nicknamed beechers bibles after the reverend henry ward beecher harriet beecher stowes brother who had helped raise money for their purchase.
many of the kansas bound pioneers sang john greenleaf whittiers marching song 1854 interactive map we cross the prairie as of old the pilgrims crossed the sea to make the west as they the east the homestead of the free.
southern spokesmen now more than ordinarily touchy raised furious cries of betrayal.
they had supported the kansas nebraska scheme of senator douglas with the unspoken understanding that kansas would become slave and nebraska free.
the northern nebrascals allegedly by foul means were now apparently out to abolitionize both kansas and nebraska.
a few southern hotheads quick to respond in kind attempted to assist small groups of well armed slaveowners to kansas.
some carried banners proclaiming let yankees tremble abolitionists fall our motto is give southern rights to all but planting blacks on kansas soil was a losing game.
slaves were valuable and volatile property and foolish indeed were owners who would take them where bullets were ying and where the soil might be voted free under popular sovereignty.
the census of 1860 found only 2 slaves among 107 000 souls in all kansas territory and only 15 in nebraska.
there was much truth in the charge that the whole quarrel over slavery in the territories revolved around an imaginary negro in an impossible place crisis conditions in kansas rapidly worsened see map 19 1.
when the day came in 1855 to elect members the contest for kansas of the rst territorial legislature proslavery border rufans poured in from missouri to vote early and often.
the slavery supporters triumphed and then set up their own puppet government at shawnee mission.
the free soilers unable to stomach this fraudulent conspiracy established an extralegal regime of their own in topeka.
the confused kansans thus had their choice between two governments one based on fraud the other on illegality.
tension mounted as settlers also feuded over con icting land claims.
the breaking point came in 1856 when a gang of proslavery raiders alleging provocation shot up and burned part of the free soil town of lawrence.
this outrage was but the prelude to a bloodier tragedy.
to themselves the proslaveryites approved the constitution with slavery late in 1857.
the scene next shifted to washington.
president pierce had been succeeded by the no less pliable james buchanan who was also strongly under southern inuence.
blind to sharp divisions within his own democratic party buchanan threw the weight of his administration behind the notorious lecompton constitution.
but senator douglas who had championed kansas in convulsion the fanatical gure of john brown now stalked upon the kansas battleeld.
spare gray bearded and ironwilled he was obsessively dedicated to the abolitionist cause.
the power of his glittering gray eyes was such so he claimed that his stare could force a dog or cat to slink out of a room.
becoming involved in dubious dealings including horse stealing he moved to kansas from ohio with part of his large family.
brooding over the recent attack on lawrence old brown of osawatomie led a band of his followers to pottawatomie creek in may 1856.
there they literally hacked to pieces ve surprised men presumed to be proslaveryites.
this terrorist butchery besmirched the free soil cause and brought vicious retaliation from the proslavery forces.
civil war in kansas thus erupted in 1856 and continued intermittently until it merged with the largescale civil war of 1861 1865.
altogether the kansas con ict destroyed millions of dollars worth of property paralyzed agriculture in certain areas and cost scores of lives.
yet by 1857 kansas had enough people chiey freesoilers to apply for statehood on a popular sovereignty basis.
the proslavery forces then in the saddle devised a tricky document known as the lecompton constitution.
the people were not allowed to vote for or against the constitution as a whole but for the constitution either with slavery or with no slavery if they voted against slavery one of the remaining provisions of the constitution would protect the owners of slaves already in kansas.
so whatever the outcome there would still be black bondage in kansas.
many freesoilers infuriated by this ploy boycotted the polls.
left john brown 1800 1859 this daguerreotype of the militant abolitionist brown tells a tale of two men the sitter and the photographer.
it was taken in 1847 when brown was running a wool brokerage house in springeld massachusetts and working closely with other new england abolitionists including frederick douglass.
brown made his way to the hartford studio of free black photographer augustus washington who was the son of an asian woman and a former black slave and well known in abolitionist circles.
six years later washington would close his successful studio and take his family to liberia convinced that american blacks would do better in their own country in africa than as free men in the united states see pp.
chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 true popular sovereignty would have none of this semipopular fraudulency.
deliberately tossing away his strong support in the south for the presidency he fought courageously for fair play and democratic principles.
the outcome was a compromise that in effect submitted the entire lecompton constitution to a popular vote.
the free soil voters thereupon thronged to the polls and snowed it under.
kansas remained a territory until 1861 when the southern secessionists left congress.
president buchanan by antagonizing the numerous douglas democrats in the north hopelessly divided the once powerful democratic party.
until then it had been the only remaining national party for the whigs were dead and the republicans were sectional.
with the disruption of the democrats came the snapping of one of the last important strands in the rope that was barely binding the union together.
bully brooks and his bludgeon bleeding kansas also spattered blood on the oor of the senate in 1856.
senator charles sumner of massachusetts a tall and imposing gure was a leading abolitionist one of the few prominent in political life.
highly educated but cold humorless intolerant and preston brooks caning charles sumner 1856 cartoonist john magee of philadelphia depicted brookss beating of sumner in the senate as a display of southern ruthlessness in defending slavery ironically captioned southern chivalry egotistical he had made himself one of the most disliked men in the senate.
brooding over the turbulent miscarriage of popular sovereignty he delivered a blistering speech titled the crime against kansas sparing few epithets he condemned the proslavery men as hirelings picked from the drunken spew and vomit of an uneasy civilization he also referred insultingly to south carolina and to its white haired senator andrew butler one of the best liked members of the senate.
hot tempered congressman preston s brooks of south carolina now took vengeance into his own hands.
ordinarily gracious and gallant he resented the insults to his state and to its senator a distant cousin.
his code of honor called for a duel but in the south one fought only with ones social equals.
and had not the coarse language of the yankee who probably would reject a challenge dropped him to a lower order.
to brooks the only alternative was to chastise the senator as one would beat an unruly dog.
on may 22 1856 he approached sumner then sitting at his senate desk and pounded the orator with an eleven ounce cane until it broke.
the victim fell bleeding and unconscious to the oor while several nearby senators refrained from interfering.
sumner had been provocatively insulting but this counteroutrage put brooks in the wrong.
the house of representatives could not muster enough votes to expel the south carolinian but he resigned and was the sumner brooks clash and the campaign of 1856 triumphantly reelected.
southern admirers deluged brooks with canes some of them gold headed to replace the one that had been broken.
the injuries to sumners head and ner vous system were serious.
he was forced to leave his seat for three and a half years and go to europe for treatment that was both painful and costly.
meanwhile massachusetts deantly reelected him leaving his seat eloquently empty.
bleeding sumner was thus joined with bleeding kansas as a political issue.
the free soil north was mightily aroused against the uncouth and cowardly bully brooks.
copies of sumners abusive speech otherwise doomed to obscurity were sold by the tens of thousands.
every blow that struck the senator doubtless made thousands of republican votes.
the south although not unanimous in approving brooks was angered not only because sumner had made such an intemperate speech but because it had been so extravagantly applauded in the north.
the sumner brooks clash and the ensuing reactions revealed how dangerously inamed passions were becoming north and south.
it was ominous that the cultured sumner should have used the language of a barroom bully and that the gentlemanly brooks should have employed the tactics and tools of a thug.
emotion was displacing thought.
the blows rained on sumners head were broadly speaking among the rst blows of the civil war.
regarding the brooks assault on sumner the illinois state journal one of the more moderate antislavery journals declared brooks and his southern allies have deliberately adopted the monstrous creed that any man who dares to utter sentiments which they deem wrong or unjust shall be brutally assailed.
one of the milder southern responses came from the petersburg virginia intelligencer although mr brooks ought to have selected some other spot for the altercation than the senate chamber if he had broken every bone in sumners carcass it would have been a just retribution upon this slanderer of the south and her individual citizens.
old buck versus the pathnder with bullets whining in kansas the democrats met in cincinnati to nominate their presidential standardbearer of 1856.
they shied away from both the weakkneed president pierce and the dynamic douglas.
each was too indelibly tainted by the kansas nebraska act.
the delegates nally chose james buchanan pronounced by many buck anan who was muscular white haired and tall six feet with a short neck and a protruding chin.
because of an eye defect he carried his head cocked to one side.
a well to do pennsylvania lawyer he had been serving as minister to london during the recent kansas nebraska uproar.
he was therefore kansas less and hence relatively enemyless.
but in a crisis that called for giants old buck buchanan was mediocre irresolute and confused.
delegates of the fast growing republican party met in philadelphia with bubbling enthusiasm.
higher law seward was their most conspicuous leader and he probably would have arranged to win the nomination had he been condent that this was a republican year the nal choice was captain john c frmont the so called path nder of the west a dashing but erratic explorer soldier surveyor who was supposed to nd the path to the white house.
the black bearded and ashy young adventurer was virtually without political experience but like buchanan he was not tarred with the kansas brush.
the republican platform came out vigorously against the extension of slavery into the territories while the democrats declared no less emphatically for popular sovereignty.
an ugly dose of antiforeignism was injected into the campaign even though slavery extension loomed largest.
the recent inux of immigrants from ireland and germany had alarmed nativists as many oldstock protestants were called.
they orga nized the american party also known as the know nothing party because of its secretiveness and in 1856 nominated the lackluster ex president millard fillmore.
antiforeign and anti catholic these superpatriots adopted the slogan americans must rule america remnants of the dying whig party likewise endorsed fillmore and they and the know nothings threatened to cut into republican strength.
republicans fell in behind frmont with the zeal of crusaders.
shouting we follow the path nder and we are buck hunting they orga nized glee clubs which sang to the tune of the marseillaise chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 a know nothing party mob baltimore ca.
1856 1860 these armed rufans were campaigning in baltimore for their ultranationalistic anti immigrant anti catholic candidate.
arise arise ye brave.
and let our war cry be free speech free press free soil free men fr mont and victory.
and free love sneered the buchanan supporters buchaneers.
mudslinging bespattered both candidates.
old fogy buchanan was assailed because he was a bachelor the ance of his youth had died after a lovers quarrel.
frmont was reviled because of his illegitimate spiritual overtones developed in the frmont campaign especially over slavery.
the independent a prominent religious journal saw in frmonts nomination the good hand of god as election day neared it declared fellow christians.
remember it is for christ for the nation and for the world that you vote at this election.
vote as you pray.
pray as you vote.
birth for his young mother had left her elderly husband a virginia planter to run away with a french adventurer.
in due season she gave birth to john in savannah georgia further to shame the south.
more harmful to frmont was the allegation which alienated many bigoted know nothings and other nativists that he was a roman catholic.
the electoral fruits of 1856 a bland buchanan although polling less than a majority of the popular vote won handily see map 19 2.
his tally in the electoral college was 174 to 114 for frmont with fillmore garnering 8.
the popular vote was 1 832 955 for buchanan to 1 339 932 for frmont and 871 731 for fillmore.
why did the rousing republicans go down to defeat.
frmont lost much ground because of grave doubts as to his honesty capacity and sound judgment.
perhaps more damaging were the violent threats of the southern re eaters that the election of a sectional black republican would be a declaration of war on them forcing them to secede.
many northerners anxious to save both the union and their protable the dred scott decision washington territory oregon territory nebraska territory utah territory ca new mexico territory me vt 5 nh ma ny 5 13 ri pa nj ct 4 7 6 minnesota territory wi ia il kansas territory mi in mo indian terr.
va ky nc tn ar la tx oh ms al ga de md sc fl candidate party electoral vote popular vote buchanan democrat 59 1 832 955 45 3 frmont republican 38 1 339 932 33 1 3 871 731 21 6 fillmore american territories map 19 2 presidential election of 1856 electoral vote by state the fateful split of 1860 was foreshadowed.
the regional polarization in 1856 shown here was to be even sharper four years later as illustrated by maps 19 3 and 19 4 later in this chapter.
interactive map business connections with the south were thus intimidated into voting for buchanan.
innate conservatism triumphed assisted by so called southern bullyism.
it was probably fortunate for the union that secession and civil war did not come in 1856 following a republican victory.
frmont an ill balanced and second rate gure was no abraham lincoln.
and in 1856 the north was more willing to let the south depart in peace than in 1860.
dramatic events from 1856 to 1860 were to arouse hundreds of thousands of stillapathetic northerners to a ghting pitch.
yet the republicans in 1856 could rightfully claim a victorious defeat the new party a mere two yearold toddler had made an astonishing showing against the well oiled democratic machine.
whittier exulted then sound again the bugles call the muster roll anew if months have well nigh won the eld what may not four years do.
the election of 1856 cast a long shadow forward and politicians north and south peered anxiously toward 1860.
the dred scott bombshell the dred scott v stanford decision handed down by the supreme court on march 6 1857 abruptly ended the two day presidential honeymoon of the unlucky bachelor james buchanan.
this pronouncement was one of the opening paper gun blasts of the civil war.
basically the case was simple.
dred scott a black slave had lived with his master for ve years in illinois and wisconsin territory.
backed by interested abolitionists he sued for freedom on the basis of his long residence on free soil.
the supreme court proceeded to twist a simple legal case into a complex political issue.
it ruled not surprisingly that dred scott was a black slave and not a citizen and hence could not sue in federal courts.
the tribunal could then have thrown out the case on these technical grounds alone.
but a majority decided to go further under the leadership of emaciated chief justice roger b taney from the slave state of maryland.
a sweeping judgment on the larger issue of slavery in the territories seemed desirable particularly to forestall arguments by two free soil justices who were preparing dissenting opinions.
the prosouthern majority evidently hoped in this way to lay the odious question to rest.
taneys thunderclap rocked the free soilers back on their heels.
a majority of the court decreed that because a slave was private property he or she could be taken into any territory and legally held there in slavery.
the reasoning was that the fifth amendment clearly forbade congress to deprive people of their property without due process of law.
the court to be consistent went further.
the missouri compromise banning slavery north of 36 30 had been repealed three years earlier by the kansas nebraska act.
but its spirit was still venerated in the north.
now the court ruled that the compromise of 1820 had been unconstitutional all along congress had no power to ban slavery from the territories regardless even of what the territorial legislatures themselves might want.
southerners were delighted with this unexpected victory.
champions of popular sovereignty were aghast including senator douglas and a host of northern democrats.
another lethal wedge was thus driven between this part of the ruling denying blacks their citizenship seriously menaced the precarious position of the souths quarter million free blacks.
chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 the decision of chief justice roger b taney 1777 1864 in the case of dred scott referred to the status of slaves when the constitution was adopted they had for more than a century before been regarded as beings of an inferior order and altogether unt to associate with the white race either in social or political relations and so far inferior that they had no rights which the white man was bound to respect.
this opinion was at that time xed and universal in the civilized portion of the white race.
taneys statement accurately described historical attitudes but it deeply offended antislaveryites when applied to conditions in 1857.
dred scott with his wife and daughters 1857 this slaves long legal battle for his freedom culminating in the supreme courts dred scott decision in 1857 helped to ignite the civil war.
widespread publicity about the fate of scott and his family strengthened antislavery sentiment in the north.
articles like this one in frank leslies illustrated newspaper appealed to the same sentimental regard for the idealized family that harriet beecher stowe so artfully mobilized in uncle toms cabin see examining the evidence harriet beecher stowe uncle toms cabin p 439.
the northern and southern wings of the once united democratic party.
foes of slavery extension especially the republicans were infuriated by the dred scott setback.
their chief rallying cry had been the banishing of bondage from the territories.
they now insisted that the ruling of the court was merely an opinion not a decision and no more binding than the views of a southern debating society republican deance of the exalted tribunal was intensied by an awareness that a majority of its members were southerners and by the conviction that it had debased itself sullied the ermine by wallowing in the gutter of politics.
southerners in turn were inamed by all this deance.
they began to wonder anew how much longer they could remain joined to a section that refused to honor the supreme court to say nothing of the constitutional compact that had established it.
the financial crash of 1857 bitterness caused by the dred scott decision was deepened by hard times which dampened a period of feverish prosperity.
then the panic of 1857 burst about buchanans harassed head.
the storm was not so bad economically as the panic of 1837 but psychologically it was probably the worst of the nineteenth century.
what caused the crash.
inpouring cal i fornia gold played its part by helping to inate the currency.
the demands of the crimean war in russia 1853 1856 had overstimulated the growing of grain while frenzied speculation in land and railroads had further ripped the economic fabric.
when the collapse came over ve thousand businesses failed within a year.
unemployment accompanied by hunger meetings in urban areas was widespread.
bread or death stated one desperate slogan.
the north including its grain growers was hardest hit.
the south enjoying favorable cotton prices abroad the panic of 1857 south.
in 1860 after years of debate congress nally passed a homestead act one that made public lands available at a nominal sum of twenty ve cents an acre.
but the homestead act was stabbed to death by the veto pen of president buchanan near whose elbow sat leading southern sympathizers.
the panic of 1857 also created a clamor for higher tariff rates.
several months before the crash congress embarrassed by a large treasury surplus had enacted the tariff of 1857.
the new law responding to pressures from the south reduced duties to about 20 percent on dutiable goods the lowest point since the war of 1812.
hardly had the revised rates been placed on the books when nancial misery descended like a black pall.
northern manufacturers many of them republicans noisily blamed their misfortunes on the low tariff.
as the surplus melted away in the treasury industrialists in the north pointed to the need for higher duties.
but what really concerned them was their desire for increased protection.
thus the panic of 1857 gave the republicans two sure re economic issues for the election of 1860 protection for the unprotected and farms for the farmless.
panic on wall street 1857 the panic of 1857 further burdened president buchanan already reeling from the armed clashes in kansas and the controversy over the dred scott decision.
rode out the storm with ying colors.
panic conditions seemed further proof that cotton was king and that its economic kingdom was stronger than that of the north.
this fatal delusion helped drive the overcondent southerners closer to a shooting showdown.
financial distress in the north especially in agriculture gave a new vigor to the demand for free farms of 160 acres from the public domain.
for several decades interested groups had been urging the federal government to abandon its ancient policy of selling the land for revenue.
instead the argument ran acreage should be given outright to the sturdy pioneers as a reward for risking health and life to develop it.
a scheme to make outright gifts of homesteads encountered two pronged opposition.
eastern industrialists had long been unfriendly to free land some of them feared that their underpaid workers would be drained off to the west.
the south was even more bitterly opposed partly because gang labor slavery could not ourish on a mere 160 acres.
free farms would merely ll up the territories more rapidly with freesoilers and further tip the political balance against the an illinois rail splitter emerges the illinois senatorial election of 1858 now claimed the national spotlight.
senator stephen a douglass term was about to expire and the republicans decided to run against him a rustic springeld lawyer one abraham lincoln.
the republican candidate 6 feet 4 inches in height and 180 pounds in weight presented an awkward but arresting gure.
lincolns legs arms and neck were abnormally long his head was crowned by coarse black and unruly hair and his face was sad sunken and weather beaten.
lincoln was no silver spoon child of the elite.
born in 1809 in a kentucky log cabin to impoverished parents he attended a frontier school for not more than a year being an avid reader he was mainly self educated.
all his life he said git thar and heered although narrow chested and somewhat stoop shouldered he shone in his frontier community as a wrestler and weight lifter and spent some time among other pioneering pursuits as a splitter of logs for fence rails.
a superb teller of earthy and amusing stories he would oddly enough plunge into protracted periods of melancholy.
lincolns private and professional lives were not especially noteworthy.
he married above himself chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 in 1832 when abraham lincoln 1809 1865 became a candidate for the illinois legislature he delivered a speech at a political gathering i presume you all know who i am.
i am humble abraham lincoln.
i have been solicited by many friends to become a candidate for the legislature.
my whiggish politics are short and sweet like the old womans dance.
i am in favor of a national bank.
i am in favor of the internalimprovement system and a high protective tariff.
these are my sentiments and political principles.
if elected i shall be thankful if not it will be all the same.
he was elected two years later.
mounting the republican bandwagon he emerged as one of the foremost politicians and orators of the northwest.
at the philadelphia convention of 1856 where john c frmont was nominated lincoln actually received 110 votes for the vice presidential nomination.
abraham lincoln a most uncommon common man this daguerreotype of lincoln was done by mathew b brady a distinguished photographer of the era.
socially into the inuential todd family of kentucky and the temperamental outbursts of his high strung wife known by her enemies as the she wolf helped to school him in patience and forbearance.
after reading a little law he gradually emerged as one of the dozen or so better known trial lawyers in illinois although still accustomed to carrying important papers in his stovepipe hat.
he was widely referred to as honest abe partly because he would refuse cases that he had to suspend his conscience to defend.
the rise of lincoln as a political gure was less than rocketlike.
after making his mark in the illinois legislature as a whig politician of the logrolling variety he served one undistinguished term in congress 1847 1849.
until 1854 when he was forty ve years of age he had done nothing to establish a claim to statesmanship.
but the passage of the kansas nebraska act in that year lighted within him unexpected res.
after the great debate lincoln versus douglas lincoln as republican nominee for the senate seat boldly challenged douglas to a series of joint debates.
this was a rash act because the stumpy senator was probably the nations most devastating debater.
douglas promptly accepted lincolns challenge and seven meetings the famed lincoln douglas debates were arranged from august to october 1858.
at rst glance the two contestants seemed illmatched.
the well groomed and polished douglas with his bearlike gure and bullhorn voice presented a striking contrast to the lanky lincoln with his baggy clothes and unshined shoes.
moreover old abe as he was called in both affection and derision had a piercing high pitched voice and was often ill at ease when he began to speak.
but as he threw himself into an argument he seemed to grow in height while his glowing eyes lighted up a rugged face.
he relied on logic rather than on table thumping.
the most famous debate came at freeport illinois where lincoln nearly impaled his opponent on the the lincoln douglas debates lincoln and douglas debate 1858 thousands attended each of the seven lincoln douglas debates.
douglas is shown here sitting to lincolns right in the debate at charleston illinois in september.
on one occasion lincoln quipped that douglass logic would prove that a horse chestnut was a chestnut horse.
horns of a dilemma.
suppose he queried the people of a territory should vote slavery down.
the supreme court in the dred scott decision had decreed that they could not.
who would prevail the court or the people.
legend to the contrary douglas and some southerners had already publicly answered the freeport question.
the little giant therefore did not hesitate to meet the issue head on honestly and consistently.
his reply to lincoln became known as the freeport doctrine.
no matter how the supreme court ruled douglas argued slavery would stay down if the people voted it down.
laws to protect slavery would have to be passed by the territorial legislatures.
these would not be forthcoming in the absence of popular approval and black bondage would soon disappear.
douglas in truth had american history on his side.
where public opinion does not support the federal government as in the case of jeffersons embargo see pp.
240 242 the law is almost impossible to enforce.
the upshot was that douglas defeated lincoln for the senate seat.
the little giants loyalty to popular sovereignty which still had a powerful appeal in illi nois probably was decisive.
senators were then chosen by state legislatures and in the general election that followed the debates more pro douglas members were elected than pro lincoln members.
yet thanks to inequitable apportionment the districts carried by douglas supporters represented a smaller population than those carried by lincoln supporters.
honest abe thus won a clear moral victory.
lincoln possibly was playing for larger stakes than just the senatorship.
although defeated he had shambled into the national limelight in company with the most prominent northern politicians.
newspapers in the east published detailed accounts of the debates and lincoln began to emerge as a potential republican nominee for president.
but douglas in winning illinois hurt his own chances of winning the presidency while further splitting his splintering party.
after his opposition to the lecompton constitution for kansas and his further deance of the supreme court at freeport southern democrats were determined to break up the party and the union rather than accept him.
the lincoln douglas debate platform thus chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 lincoln expressed his views on the relation of the black and white races in 1858 in his rst debate with stephen a douglas i as well as judge douglas am in favor of the race to which i belong having the superior position.
i have never said anything to the contrary but i hold that notwithstanding all this there is no reason in the world why the negro is not entitled to all the natural rights enumerated in the declaration of independence the right to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
i hold that he is as much entitled to those rights as the white man.
i agree with judge douglas he is not my equal in many respects certainly not in color perhaps not in moral or intellectual endowment.
but in the right to eat the bread without leave of anybody else which his own hand earns he is my equal and the equal of judge douglas and the equal of every living man.
proved to be one of the preliminary battleelds of the civil war.
john brown murderer or martyr.
the gaunt grim gure of john brown of bleeding kansas infamy now once again took the stage.
after studying the tactics of the black rebels toussaint louverture see p 234 and nat turner see p 384 he hatched a daring scheme to invade the south secretly with a handful of followers call upon the slaves to rise furnish them with arms and establish a kind of black free state as a sanctuary.
brown secured several thousand dollars for rearms from northern abolitionists and nally arrived in hilly western virginia with some twenty men including several blacks.
at scenic harpers ferry he seized the federal arsenal in october 1859 incidentally kill ing seven innocent people including a free black and injuring ten or so more.
but the slaves largely ignorant of browns strike failed to rise and the wounded brown and the remnants of his tiny band were quickly captured by u s marines under the command of lieutenant colonel robert e lee.
upon hearing of john browns execution escaped slave and abolitionist harriet tubman ca.
1820 1913 paid him the highest tribute for his self sacrice ive been studying and studying upon it and its clar to me it wasnt john brown that died on that gallows.
when i think how he gave up his life for our people and how he never inched but was so brave to the end its clar to me it wasnt mortal man it was god in him.
not all opponents of slavery however shared tubmans reverence for brown.
republican presidential candidate abraham lincoln dismissed brown as deluded the brown affair in its philosophy corresponds with the many attempts related in history at the assassination of kings and emperors.
an enthusiast broods over the oppression of a people till he fancies himself commissioned by heaven to liberate them.
he ventures the attempt which ends in little else than his own execution.
ironically within two years lee would become the preeminent general in the confederate army.
old brown was convicted of murder and trea son after a hasty but legal trial.
his presumed insan ity was supported by afdavits from seventeen friends and relatives who were trying to save his neck.
actually thirteen of his near relations were regarded as insane including his mother and grandmother.
governor wise of virginia would have been wiser so his critics say if he had only clapped the culprit into a lunatic asylum.
but brown gods angry man was given every opportunity to pose and to enjoy martyrdom.
though perhaps of unsound mind he was clever enough to see that he was worth much more to the abolitionist cause dangling from a rope than in any other way.
his demeanor during the trial was dignied and courageous his last words this is a beautiful country were to become legendary and he marched up the scaffold steps without inching.
his conduct was so exemplary his devotion to freedom so inexible that he took on an exalted character however deplorable his previous record may have been.
so the hangmans trap was john brown s raid last moments of john brown by thomas hovenden sentenced to be hanged john brown wrote to his brother i am quite cheerful in view of my approaching end being fully persuaded that i am worth inconceivably more to hang than for any other purpose.
i count it all joy.
i have fought the good ght and have as i trust nished my course this painting of brown going to his execution may have been inspired by the journalist horace greeley who was not present but wrote that a black woman with a little child stood by the door.
he stopped for a moment and stooping kissed the child that scene never took place as brown was escorted from the jail only by a detachment of soldiers.
but this painting has become famous as a kind of allegorical expression of the pathos of browns martyrdom for the abolitionist cause.
sprung and brown plunged not into oblivion but into world fame.
a memorable marching song of the impending civil war ran john browns body lies a mouldring in the grave his soul is marching on.
the effects of harpers ferry were inammatory.
in the eyes of the south already embittered osawatomie brown was a wholesale murderer and an apostle of treason.
many southerners asked how they could possibly remain in the union while a murderous gang of abolitionists was nancing armed bands to brown them.
moderate northerners including republican leaders openly deplored this mad exploit.
but the south naturally concluded that the violent abolitionist view was shared by the entire north dominated by brown loving republicans.
abolitionists and other ardent free soilers were infuriated by browns execution.
many of them were ignorant of his bloody past and his even more bloody purposes and they were outraged because the virginians had hanged so earnest a reformer who was working for so righteous a cause.
on the day of his execution free soil centers in the north tolled bells red guns lowered ags and held rallies.
some spoke of saint john brown and the serene ralph waldo emerson compared the new martyr hero with jesus.
the gallows became a cross.
e c stedman wrote and old brown osawatomie brown may trouble you more than ever when youve nailed his cofn down.
the ghost of the martyred brown would not be laid to rest.
the disruption of the democrats beyond question the presidential election of 1860 was the most fateful in american history.
on it hung the issue of peace or civil war.
deeply divided the democrats met in charleston south carolina with douglas the leading candidate of the northern wing of the party.
but the southern chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 re eaters regarded him as a traitor as a result of his unpopular stand on the lecompton constitution and the freeport doctrine.
after a bitter wrangle over the platform the delegates from most of the cotton states walked out.
when the remainder could not scrape together the necessary two thirds vote for douglas the entire body dissolved.
the rst tragic secession was the secession of southerners from the democratic national convention.
departure became habit forming.
the democrats tried again in baltimore.
this time the douglas democrats chiey from the north were rmly in the saddle.
many of the cotton state delegates again took a walk and the rest of the convention enthusiastically nominated their hero.
the platform came out squarely for popular sovereignty and as a sop to the south against obstruction of the fugitive slave law by the states.
angered southern democrats promptly orga nized a rival convention in baltimore in which many of the northern states were unrepresented.
they selected as their leader the stern jawed vice president john c breckinridge a man of moderate views from the border state of kentucky.
the platform favored the extension of slavery into the territories and the annexation of slave populated cuba.
lincoln hits a home run in 1860 currier ives the producer of popular inexpensive colored prints portrayed lincolns victory over from left to right john bell stephen douglas and john c breckinridge as a baseball game.
baseball developed in new york in the 1840s and by 1860 the national association of baseball players boasted fty clubs several playing regular schedules and charging admission.
this cartoon is thought to be the rst time baseball was used as a metaphor for politics.
note that lincoln is beardless.
by february 1861 when he left springeld illinois by train for the white house he was fully bearded having followed the advice of an eleven year old girl from westeld new york who urged him to grow whiskers because you would look a great deal better for your face is so thin a middle of the road group fearing for the union hastily orga nized the constitutional union party sneered at as the do nothing or old gentlemans party.
it consisted mainly of former whigs and knownothings a veritable gathering of graybeards desperately anxious to elect a compromise candidate they met in baltimore and nominated for the presidency john bell of tennessee.
they went into battle ringing hand bells for bell and waving handbills for the union the constitution and the enforcement of the laws a rail splitter splits the union elated republicans scenting victory in the breeze as their opponents split hopelessly gathered in chicago in a huge boxlike wooden structure called the wigwam.
william h seward was by far the best known of the contenders.
but his radical utterances including his irrepressible con ict speech at rochester in 1858 had ruined his prospects.
his numerous enemies seward had referred to an irrepressible con ict between slavery and freedom though not necessarily a bloody one.
the election of lincoln table 19 1 election of 1860 popular vote percentage of popular vote lincoln 1 865 593 39 79 douglas breckinridge bell 1 382 713 848 356 592 906 29 40 18 20 12 61 candidate coined the slogan success rather than seward lincoln the favorite son of illinois was de nitely a mr.
second best but he was a stronger candidate because he had made fewer enemies.
overtaking seward on the third ballot he was nominated amid scenes of the wildest excitement.
the republican platform had a seductive appeal for just about every important nonsouthern group for the free soilers nonextension of slavery for the northern manufacturers a protective tariff for the immigrants no abridgment of rights for the northwest a pacic railroad for the west internal improvements at federal expense and for the farmers free homesteads from the public domain.
alluring slogans included vote yourselves a farm and land for the landless southern secessionists promptly served notice that the election of the baboon lincoln the abolitionist rail splitter would split the union.
in fact honest abe though hating slavery was no outright abolitionist.
as late as february 1865 he was inclined to favor cash compensation to the owners of freed slaves.
but for the time being he saw t perhaps mistakenly to issue no statements to quiet southern fears.
he had already put himself on record and fresh statements might stir up fresh antagonisms.
as the election campaign ground noisily forward lincoln enthusiasts staged roaring rallies and parades complete with pitch dripping torches and oilskin capes.
they extolled high old abe the woodchopper of the west and the little giant killer while groaning dismally for poor little doug enthusiastic little giants and little dougs retorted with we want a statesman not a rail splitter as president douglas himself waged a vigorous speaking campaign even in the south and threatened to put the noose with his own hands around the neck of the rst secessionist.
the returns breathlessly awaited proclaimed a sweeping victory for lincoln see table 19 1.
electoral vote 180 every vote of the free states except for 3 of new jerseys 7 votes 12 only missouri and 3 of new jerseys 7 votes 72 all the cotton states 39 virginia kentucky tennessee the electoral upheaval of 1860 awkward abe lincoln had run a curious race.
to a greater degree than any other holder of the nations highest ofce except john quincy adams he was a minority president.
sixty percent of the voters preferred some other candidate.
he was also a sectional president for in ten southern states where he was not allowed on the ballot he polled no popular votes.
the election of 1860 was virtually two elections one in the north the other in the south see map 19 3.
south carolinians rejoiced over lincolns victory they now had their excuse to secede.
in winning the north the rail splitter had split off the south.
douglas though scraping together only twelve electoral votes made an impressive showing.
boldly breaking with tradition he campaigned energetically for himself.
presidential candidates customarily maintained a dignied silence.
he drew important strength from all sections and ranked a fairly close second in the popular vote column.
in fact the douglas democrats and the breckinridge democrats together amassed 365 476 more votes than did lincoln.
a myth persists that if the democrats had only united behind douglas they would have triumphed.
yet the cold gures tell a different story.
even if the little giant had received all the electoral votes cast for all three of lincolns opponents the rail splitter would have won 169 to 134 instead of 180 to 123.
lincoln still would have carried the populous states of the north and the northwest.
on the other hand if the democrats had not broken up they could have entered the campaign with higher enthusiasm and better orga ni zation and might have won.
signicantly the verdict of the ballot box did not indicate a strong sentiment for secession see map chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 19 4.
breckinridge while favoring the extension of slavery was no disunionist.
although the candidate of the re eaters he polled fewer votes in the slave states than the combined strength of his opponents douglas and bell.
he even failed to carry his own kentucky.
yet the south despite its electoral defeat was not bad off.
it still had a ve to four majority on the supreme court.
although the republicans had elected lincoln they controlled neither the senate nor the house of representatives.
the federal government could not touch slavery in those states where it existed map 19 3 presidential election of 1860 electoral vote by state top and popular vote by county bottom it is a surprising fact that lincoln often rated among the greatest presidents ranks near the bottom in percentage of popular votes.
in all the eleven states that seceded he received only a scattering of one states votes about 1 5 percent in virginia.
the vote by county for lincoln was virtually all cast in the north.
the northern democrat douglas was also nearly shut out in the south which divided its votes between breckinridge and bell.
note that only citizens of states could vote inhabitants of territories could not.
interactive map washington territory unorg.
or nebraska territory mn wi ia utah territory kansas territory ca indian terr.
new mexico territory tx il mi oh in mo ky tn ar la ms al ga me vt 5 nh ma ny 5 13 ri ct 4 pa nj r 4 nd 3 de va md nc sc fl candidate party lincoln republican douglas northern democrat breckinridge southern democrat bell constitutional union electoral vote popular vote 59 4 1 865 593 39 8 3 9 1 382 713 29 5 23 8 848 356 18 1 12 9 592 906 12 6 n h vt r 5 r 5 me.
r 8 territories no returns washington terr.
oregon r 3 nebraska terr.
minn r 4 wisc.
r 5 mich r 6 pa r 27 iowa r 4 ill r 11 utah terr.
calif r 4 kansas terr.
new mexico terr.
indian terr.
r 13 ohio r 23 va cu 15 ky cu 12 n c sd 10 tenn cu 12 s c sd 8 ark.
sd 7 texas sd 4 n y r 35 ala sd 9 ga sd 10 la.
sd 6 fla sd 3 mass.
r 13 r i r 4 conn n j r 6 r 4 nd 3 del.
sd 8 secession against secession for secession conventions divided no returns available map 19 4 southern opposition to secession 1860 1861 showing vote by county this county vote shows the opposition of the antiplanter antislavery mountain whites in the appalachian region.
there was also considerable resistance to secession in texas where governor sam houston who led the unionists was deposed by secessionists.
virginia tennessee south carolina arkansas te x as north carolina miss.
alabama louisiana georgia florida interactive map except by a constitutional amendment and such an amendment could be defeated by one fourth of the states.
the fteen slave states numbered nearly onehalf of the total a fact not fully appreciated by southern rebrands.
the secessionist exodus but a tragic chain reaction of secession now began to erupt.
south carolina which had threatened to go out if the sectional lincoln came in was as good as its word.
four days after the election of the illinois baboon by insulting majorities its legislature voted unanimously to call a special convention.
meeting at charleston in december 1860 the convention unanimously voted to secede.
during the next six weeks six other states of the lower south though somewhat less united followed the leader over the precipice alabama mississippi florida georgia louisiana and texas.
four more were to join them later bringing the total to eleven.
with the eyes of destiny upon them the seven seceders formally meeting at montgomery alabama in february 1861 created a government known as the confederate states of america.
as their president they chose jefferson davis a dignied and austere recent member of the u s senate from mississippi.
he was a west pointer and a former cabinet member with wide military and administrative experience but he suffered from chronic ill health as well as from a frustrated ambition to be a napoleonic strategist.
the crisis already critical enough was deepened by the lame duck interlude.
lincoln although elected president in november 1860 could not take ofce until four months later on march 4 1861.
during this period of protracted uncertainty when he was still a private citizen in illinois seven of the eleven deserting states pulled out of the union.
president buchanan the aging incumbent has been blamed for not holding the seceders in the union by sheer force for wringing his hands instead of secessionist necks.
never a vigorous man and habitually conser vative he was now nearly seventy and although devoted to the union he was surrounded by prosouthern advisers.
as an able lawyer wedded to the constitution he did not believe that the southern states could legally secede.
yet he could nd no authority in the constitution for stopping them with guns.
oh for one hour of jackson cried the advocates of strong arm tactics.
but old buck buchanan was not old hickory and he was faced with a far more the lame duck period was shortened to ten weeks in 1933 by the twentieth amendment see the appendix.
chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 the state of south carolina leader of the secessionist movement justied its retreat from the union in its declaration of independence of december 1860 we afrm that the ends for which this federal government was instituted have been defeated and the government itself has been made destructive of them by the action of the non slaveholding states.
for twenty ve years this agitation has been steadily increasing until it has now secured to its aid the power of the common government.
observing the forms of the constitution a sectional party has found within that article establishing the executive department the means of subverting the constitution itself.
complex and serious problem.
one important reason why he did not resort to force was that the tiny standing army of some fteen thousand men then widely scattered was urgently needed to control the indians in the west.
public opinion in the north at that time was far from willing to unsheathe the sword.
fighting would merely shatter all prospects of adjustment and until the guns began to boom there was still a icker three days after lincolns election horace greeleys inuential new york tribune november 9 1860 declared if the cotton states shall decide that they can do better out of the union than in it we insist on letting them go in peace.
the right to secede may be a revolutionary one but it exists nevertheless.
whenever a considerable section of our union shall deliberately resolve to go out we shall resist all coercive measures designed to keep it in.
we hope never to live in a republic whereof one section is pinned to the residue by bayonets.
after the secession movement got well under way greeleys tribune changed its tune.
jefferson davis 1808 1889 president of the confederacy faced with grave difculties he was probably as able a man for the position as the confederacy could have chosen.
ironically davis and lincoln had both sprung from the same kentucky soil.
the davis family had moved south from kentucky the lincoln family north.
ing hope of reconciliation rather than a contested divorce.
the weakness lay not so much in buchanan as in the constitution and in the union itself.
ironically when lincoln became president in march he essentially continued buchanans wait and see policy.
the collapse of compromise impending bloodshed spurred nal and frantic attempts at compromise in the american tradition.
the most promising of these efforts was sponsored by senator john jordan crittenden of kentucky on whose shoulders had fallen the mantle of a fellow kentuckian henry clay.
the proposed crittenden amendments to the constitution were designed to appease the south.
slavery the failed crittenden compromise in the territories was to be prohibited north of 36 30 but south of that line it was to be given federal protection in all territories existing or hereafter to be acquired such as cuba.
future states north or south of 36 30 could come into the union with or without slavery as they should choose.
in short the slavery supporters were to be guaranteed full rights in the southern territories as long as they were territories regardless of the wishes of the majority under popular sovereignty.
federal protection in a territory south of 36 30 might conceivably though improbably turn the entire area permanently to slavery.
lincoln atly rejected the crittenden scheme which offered some slight prospect of success and all hope of compromise evaporated.
for this refusal he must bear a heavy responsibility.
yet he had been elected on a platform that opposed the extension of one reason why the crittenden compromise failed in december 1860 was the prevalence of an attitude reected in a private letter of senator james henry hammond 1807 1864 of south carolina on april 19 i rmly believe that the slave holding south is now the controlling power of the world that no other power would face us in hostility.
cotton rice tobacco and naval stores command the world and we have sense to know it and are sufciently teutonic to carry it out successfully.
the north without us would be a motherless calf bleating about and die of mange and starvation.
the eagles nest 1861 the american eagle jealously guards her nest of states and bids deance to the rebels.
chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 slavery and he felt that as a matter of principle he could not afford to yield even though gains for slavery in the territories might be only temporary.
larger gains might come later in cuba and mexico.
crittendens proposal said lincoln would amount to a perpetual covenant of war against every people tribe and state owning a foot of land between here and tierra del fuego as for the supposedly spineless old fogy buchanan how could he have prevented the civil war by starting a civil war.
no one has yet come up with a satisfactory answer.
if he had used force on south carolina in december 1860 the ghting almost certainly would have erupted three months sooner than it did and under less favorable circumstances for the union.
the north would have appeared as the heavy handed aggressor.
and the crucial border states so vital to the union probably would have been driven into the arms of their wayward sisters farewell to union secessionists who parted company with their sister states left for a number of avowed reasons mostly relating in some way to slavery.
they were alarmed by the inexorable tipping of the political balance against them the despotic majority of numbers the crime of the north observed james russell lowell was the census returns.
southerners were also dismayed by the triumph of the new sectional republican party which james russell lowell 1819 1891 the northern poet and essayist wrote in the atlantic monthly shortly after the secessionist movement began the fault of the free states in the eyes of the south is not one that can be atoned for by any yielding of special points here and there.
their offense is that they are free and that their habits and prepossessions are those of freedom.
their crime is the census of 1860.
their increase in numbers wealth and power is a standing aggression.
it would not be enough to please the southern states that we should stop asking them to abolish slavery what they demand of us is nothing less than that we should abolish the spirit of the age.
our very thoughts are a menace.
seemed to threaten their rights as a slaveholding minority.
they were weary of free soil criticism abolitionist nagging and northern interference ranging from the underground railroad to john browns raid.
all we ask is to be let alone declared confederate president jefferson davis in an early message to his congress.
many southerners supported secession because they felt sure that their departure would be unopposed despite yankee yawp to the contrary.
they were condent that the clodhopping and codshing yankee would not or could not ght.
they believed that northern manufacturers and bankers so heavily dependent on southern cotton and markets would not dare to cut their own economic throats with their own unionist swords.
but should war come the immense debt owed to northern creditors by the south happy thought could be promptly repudiated as it later was.
southern leaders regarded secession as a golden opportunity to cast aside their generations of vassalage to the north.
an independent dixieland could develop its own banking and shipping and trade directly with europe.
the low tariff of 1857 passed largely by southern votes was not in itself menacing.
but who could tell when the greedy republicans would win control of congress and drive through their own oppressive protective tariff.
for decades this fundamental friction had pitted the north with its manufacturing plants against the south with its agricultural exports.
worldwide impulses of nationalism then stirring in italy germany poland and elsewhere were fermenting in the south.
this huge area with its distinctive culture was not so much a section as a subnation.
it could not view with complacency the possibility of being lorded over then or later by what it regarded as a hostile nation of northerners.
the principles of self determination of the declaration of independence seemed to many southern regarding the civil war the london times november 7 1861 editorialized the contest is really for empire on the side of the north and for independence on that of the south and in this respect we recognize an exact analogy between the north and the government of george iii and the south and the thirteen revolted provinces.
chronology ers to apply perfectly to them.
few if any of the seceders felt that they were doing anything wrong or immoral.
the thirteen original states had voluntarily entered the union and now seven ultimately eleven southern states were voluntarily withdrawing from it.
historical parallels ran even deeper.
in 1776 thirteen american colonies led by the rebel george washington had seceded from the british empire by throwing off the yoke of king george iii.
in 1860 1861 eleven american states led by the rebel jefferson davis were seceding from the union by throwing off the yoke of king abraham lincoln.
with that burden gone the south was condent that it could work out its own peculiar destiny more quietly happily and prosperously.
chronology harriet beecher stowe publishes uncle toms cabin 1853 crimean war in russia kansas nebraska act republican party forms buchanan defeats frmont and fillmore for presidency sumner beaten by brooks in senate chamber browns pottawatomie massacre 1856 civil war in bleeding kansas dred scott decision lecompton constitution rejected key terms uncle toms cabin 437 the impending crisis of the south 439 new eng land emigrant aid company 440 lecompton constitution 441 bleeding kansas 442 dred scott v stanford 445 panic of 1857 446 tariff of 1857 447 panic of 1857 tariff of 1857 hinton r helper publishes the impending crisis of the south lincoln douglas debates brown raids harpers ferry lincoln wins four way race for presidency south carolina secedes from union crittenden compromise fails seven seceding states form confederate states of america people to know lincoln douglas debates 448 freeport question 449 freeport doctrine 449 harpers ferry 450 constitutional union party 452 confederate states of america 455 crittenden amendments 456 harriet beecher stowe henry ward beecher james buchanan charles sumner preston s brooks dred scott roger b taney stephen a douglas abraham lincoln john brown john c breckinridge john jordan crittenden chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 the civil war repressible or irrepressible.
f ew topics have generated as much controversy among american historians as the causes of the civil war.
looming over the entire debate is the stark fact the united states was the only slaveowning society that had to ght a war to rid itself of slavery.
the very names employed to describe the con ict notably civil war or war between the states or even war for southern independence reveal much about the various authors points of view.
interpretations of the great con ict have naturally differed according to section and have been charged with both emotional and moral fervor.
yet despite long and keen interest in the origins of the con ict the causes of the civil war remain as passionately debated today as they were a century ago.
the so called nationalist school of the late nineteenth century typied in the work of historian james ford rhodes claimed that slavery caused the civil war.
defending the necessity and inevitability of the war these northern oriented historians credited the con ict with ending slavery and preserving the union.
but in the early twentieth century progressive historians led by charles and mary beard presented a more skeptical interpretation.
the beards argued that the war was not fought over slavery per se but rather was a deeply rooted economic struggle between an industrial north and an agricultural south.
anointing the civil war the second american revolution the beards claimed that the war precipitated vast changes in american class relations and shifted the political balance of power by magnifying the inuence of business magnates and industrialists while destroying the plantation aristocracy of the south.
shaken by the disappointing results of world war i a new wave of historians argued that the civil war too had actually been a big mistake.
rejecting the nationalist interpretation that the clash was inevitable james g randall and avery craven asserted that the war had been a repressible con ict neither slavery nor the economic differences between north and south were sufcient causes for war.
instead craven and others attributed the bloody confrontation to the breakdown of political institutions the passion of overzealous reformers and the ineptitude of a blundering generation of political leaders.
following the second world war however a neonationalist view regained authority echoing the earlier views of rhodes in depicting the civil war as an unavoidable con ict between two societies one slave and one free.
for allan nevins and david m potter irreconcilable differences in morality politics culture social values and economies increasingly eroded the ties between the sections and inexorably set the united states on the road to civil war.
eric foner and eugene genovese emphasized each sections nearly paranoid fear that the survival of its distinctive way of life was threatened by the expansion of the other section.
in free soil free labor free men 1970 foner emphasized that most northerners detested slavery not because it enslaved blacks but because its existence and particularly its rapid extension threatened the position of free white laborers.
this free labor ideology increasingly became the foundation stone upon which the north claimed its superiority over the south.
eugene genovese has argued that the south felt similarly endangered.
convinced that the southern labor system was more humane than the northern factory system southerners saw northern designs to destroy their way of life lurking at every turn and every territorial battle.
some historians have placed party politics at the center of their explanations for the war.
for them no event was more consequential than the breakdown of the jacksonian party system.
when the slavery issue tore apart both the democratic and the whig parties the last ligaments binding the nation together were snapped and the war inevitably came.
more recently historians of the ethnocultural school especially michael holt have acknowledged the signicance of the collapse of the established parties but have offered a different analysis of how that breakdown led to war.
they have noted that the two great national parties before the 1850s focused attention on issues such as the tariff banking and internal improvements thereby muting sectional differences to learn more over slavery.
according to this argument the erosion of the traditional party system was due not to growing differences over slavery but to a temporary consensus between the two parties in the 1850s on almost all national issues other than slavery.
in this peculiar political at mosphere the slavery issue rose to the fore encouraging the emergence of republicans in the north and secessionists in the south.
in the absence of regular national two party con ict over economic issues purely regional parties like the republicans coalesced.
they identied their opponents not simply as competitors for power but as threats to their way of life even to the life of the republic itself.
to learn more frederick j.
blue charles sumner and the conscience of the north 1994 nicole etcheson bleeding kansas contested liberty in the civil war era 2004 paul finkelman ed and his soul goes marching on responses to john brown and the harpers ferry raid 1995 joan hedrick harriet beecher stowe a life 1994 ward m mcafee ed the slaveholding republic 2001 stephen b oates to purge this land with blood 1970 kenneth m stampp america in 1857 a nation on the brink 1990 harriet beecher stowe uncle toms cabin 1852 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at girding for war the north and the south 1861 1865 i consider the central idea pervading this struggle is the necessity that is upon us of proving that popular government is not an absurdity.
we must settle this question now whether in a free government the minority have the right to break up the government whenever they choose.
if we fail it will go far to prove the incapability of the people to govern themselves.
a braham lincoln solemnly took the presidential oath of ofce on march 4 1861 after having slipped into washington at night partially disguised to thwart assassins.
he thus became president not of the united states of america but of the dis united states of america.
seven had already departed eight more teetered on the edge.
the girders of the un nished capitol dome loomed nakedly in the background as if to symbolize the imperfect state of the union.
before the nation was restored and the slaves freed at last the american people would endure four years of anguish and bloodshed and lincoln would face tortuous trials of leadership such as have been visited upon few presidents.
the menace of secession lincolns inaugural address was rm yet conciliatory there would be no conict unless the south provoked it.
secession the president declared was wholly impractical because physically speaking we cannot separate here lincoln put his nger on a profound geographical truth.
the north and south were siamese twins bound inseparably together.
if they had been divided by the pyrenees or the danube river a sectional divorce might have been more feasible.
but the appalachian mountains and the mighty mississippi river both ran the wrong way.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the attack on fort sumter secretary of state william h seward 1801 1872 entertained the dangerous idea that if the north picked a ght with one or more european nations the south would once more rally around the ag.
on april fools day 1861 he submitted to lincoln a memorandum i would demand explanations from spain and france categorically at once.
i would seek explanations from great britain and russia.
and if satisfactory explanations are not received from spain and france.
would convene congress and declare war against them.
lincoln quietly but rmly quashed sewards scheme.
uncontested secession would create new controversies.
what share of the national debt should the south be forced to take with it.
what portion of the jointly held federal territories if any should the confederate states be allotted areas so largely won with southern blood.
how would the fugitive slave issue be resolved.
the underground railroad would certainly redouble its activity and it would have to transport its passengers only across the ohio river not all the way to canada.
was it conceivable that all such problems could have been solved without ugly armed clashes.
a united united states had hitherto been the paramount republic in the western hemisphere.
if this powerful democracy should break into two hostile parts the european nations would be delighted.
they could gleefully transplant to america their ancient concept of the balance of power.
playing the no lessancient game of divide and conquer they could incite one snarling fragment of the dis united states against the other.
the colonies of the european powers in the new world notably those of britain would thus be made safer against the rapacious yankees.
and european imperialists with no unied republic to stand across their path could more easily defy the monroe doctrine and seize territory in the americas.
south carolina assails fort sumter the issue of the divided union came to a head over the matter of federal forts in the south.
as the seceding states left they seized the united states arsenals mints and other public property within their borders.
when lincoln took ofce only two signicant forts in the south still ew the stars and stripes.
the more important of the pair was square walled fort sumter in charleston harbor with fewer than a hundred men.
ominously the choices presented to lincoln by fort sumter were all bad.
this stronghold had provisions that would last only a few weeks until the middle of april 1861.
if no supplies were forthcoming its commander would have to surrender without ring a shot.
lincoln quite understandably did not feel that such a weak kneed course squared with his obligation to protect federal property.
but if he sent reinforcements the south carolinians would undoubtedly ght back they could not tolerate a federal fort blocking the mouth of their most important atlantic seaport.
after agonizing indecision lincoln adopted a middle of the road solution.
he notied the south carolin ians that an expedition would be sent to provision the garrison though not to reinforce it.
he promised no effort to throw in men arms and ammunition but to southern eyes provision still spelled reinforcement a union naval force was next started on its way to fort sumter a move that the south regarded as an act of aggression.
on april 12 1861 the cannon of the carolinians opened re on the fort while crowds in charleston applauded and waved handkerchiefs.
after a thirty four hour bombardment which took no lives the dazed garrison surrendered.
the shelling of the fort electried the north which at once responded with cries of remember fort sumter and save the union hitherto countless northerners had been saying that if the southern states wanted to go they should not be pinned to the rest of the nation with bayonets.
wayward sisters depart in peace was a common sentiment expressed even by the commander of the army war hero general wineld scott now so feeble at seventy ve that he had to be boosted onto his horse.
but the assault on fort sumter provoked the north to a ghting pitch the fort was lost but the union was saved.
lincoln had turned a tactical defeat into a calculated victory.
southerners had wantonly red upon the glorious stars and stripes and honor demanded an armed response.
lincoln promptly april 15 issued a call to the states for seventy ve thousand militiamen and volunteers sprang to the colors in such enthusiastic numbers that many were turned away a mistake that was not often repeated.
on april 19 and 27 the president proclaimed a leaky blockade of southern seaports.
chapter 18 renewing the sectional struggle 1848 1854 gold.
gold they began tearing frantically at the yellow graveled streams and hills.
a fortunate few of the bearded miners struck it rich at the diggings but the luckless many who netted blisters instead of nuggets probably would have been money well ahead if they had stayed at home unaffected by gold fever which was often followed by more deadly fevers.
the most reliable prots were made by those who mined the miners notably by charging outrageous rates for laundry and other personal ser vices.
some soiled clothing was even sent as far away as the hawaiian islands for washing.
many of the forty niners who opped in cal i fornia kept chasing their dream of gold in even more distant places notably australia in 1851.
40n nor t negro bar french corral r yuba rough and ready r you bet dutch flat r.
r bear damascus coloma sutter s mill placerville hangtown a texas hill sutter s michigan r bar ft n es m r su ne jsus k e lu m maria o m e v a co d r ver a s rawhide cala slaus r i n sta.
tuolumne r angels camp sonora 38n chinese camp n.
ui aq jo r.
sa n r e s n g r a 122w dr rce me a san francisco n pac i f i c ocean lake tahoe n california sacramento utah territory gods country er i ca n m en to pyramid lake 50 mi.
k for m sacra clear lake 50 km.
r a e r s i h californy gold tobacco chewing president taylor with his stumpy legs rough features heavy jaw black hair ruddy complexion and squinty gray eyes was a military square peg in a political round hole.
he would have been spared much turmoil if he could have continued to sit on the slavery lid.
but the discovery of gold on the american river near sutters mill cal i fornia early in 1848 blew the cover off see map 18 1.
a horde of adventurers poured into the valleys of cal i fornia.
singing o susannah and shouting gold.
t a s c o newly acquired western territories with african americans.
it also contained a large element of conscience whigs heavily inuenced by the abolitionist crusade who condemned slavery on moral grounds.
the freesoilers trotted out wizened former president van buren and marched into the fray shouting free soil free speech free labor and free men these freedoms provided the bedrock on which the free soilers built their party.
they condemned slavery not so much for enslaving blacks but for destroying the chances of free white workers to rise up from wage earning dependence to the esteemed status of self employment.
they argued that only with free soil in the west could a traditional american commitment to upward mobility continue to ourish.
if forced to compete with slave labor more costly wage labor would inevitably wither away and with it the chance for the american worker to own property.
as the rst widely inclusive party orga nized around the issue of slavery and con ned to a single section the free soil party foreshadowed the emergence of the republican party six years later.
with the slavery issue ofcially shoved under the rug by the two major parties the politicians on both sides opened re on personalities.
the amateurish taylor had to be carefully watched lest his indiscreet pen puncture the reputation won by his sword.
his admirers puffed him up as a gallant knight and a napoleon and sloganized his remark allegedly uttered during the battle of buena vista general taylor never surrenders taylors wartime popularity pulled him through.
he harvested 1 360 967 popular and 163 electoral votes as compared with casss 1 222 342 popular and 127 electoral votes.
free soiler van buren although winning no state polled 291 263 ballots and apparently diverted enough democratic strength from cass in the crucial state of new york to throw the election to taylor.
feather r m a os arip mormon bar 120w extent of gold mining region 1849 gold mine map 18 1 california gold rush country miners from all over the world swarmed over the rivers that drained the western slope of californias sierra nevada.
their nationalities and religions their languages and their ways of life are recorded in the colorful place names they left behind.
interactive map the california gold rush placer miners in california cheap but effective placer mining consisted of literally washing the gold out of surface deposits.
no deep excavation was required.
this crew of male and female miners in california in 1852 was using a long tom sluice that washed relatively large quantities of ore.
the california gold rush attracted tens of thousands of people to the future golden state almost overnight completely overwhelming the one horse territorial government.
a distressingly high proportion of the newcomers were lawless men accompanied or followed by virtueless women.
a contemporary song ran oh what was your name in the states.
was it thompson or johnson or bates.
did you murder your wife and y for your life.
say what was your name in the states.
a married woman wrote from the california goldelds to her sister in new england in 1853 i tell you the woman are in great demand in this country no matter whether they are married or not you need not think strange if you see me coming home with some good looking man some of these times with a pocket full of rocks.
it is all the go here for ladys to leave there husbands two out of three do it there is a rst rate chance for a single woman she can have her choice of thousands i wish mother was here she could marry a rich man and not have to lift her hand to do her work.
an outburst of crime inevitably resulted from the presence of so many miscreants and outcasts.
robbery claim jumping and murder were commonplace and such violence was only partly discouraged by rough vigilante justice.
in san francisco from 1848 to 1856 there were scores of lawless kill ings but only three semilegal hangings.
a majority of cal i fornians as decent and lawabiding citizens needing protection grappled earnestly with the problem of erecting an adequate state government.
privately encouraged by president taylor they drafted a constitution in 1849 that excluded slavery and then boldly applied to congress for admission.
cal ifornia would thus bypass the usual territorial stage thwarting southern congressmen seeking to block free soil.
southern politicians alarmed by the cal i fornians impertinent stroke for freedom arose in violent opposition.
would cal i fornia prove to be the golden straw that broke the back of the union.
the idea that many neer do wells went west is found in the journals january 1849 of ralph waldo emerson 1803 1882 if a man is going to california he announces it with some hesitation because it is a confession that he has failed at home.
chapter 18 renewing the sectional struggle 1848 1854 sectional balance and the underground railroad the south of 1850 was relatively well off.
it then enjoyed as it had from the beginning more than its share of the nations leadership.
it had seated in the white house the war hero zachary taylor a virginia born slaveowning planter from louisiana.
it boasted a majority in the cabinet and on the supreme court.
if outnumbered in the house the south had equality in the senate where it could at least neutralize northern maneuvers.
its cotton elds were expanding and cotton prices were protably high.
few sane people north or south believed that slavery was seriously threatened where it already existed below the mason dixon line.
the fteen slave states could easily veto any proposed constitutional amendment.
yet the south was deeply worried as it had been for several decades by the ever tipping political balance.
there were then fteen slave states and fteen free states.
the admission of cal i fornia would destroy the delicate equilibrium in the senate perhaps forever.
potential slave territory under the american ag was run ning short if it had not in fact disappeared.
agitation had already developed in the territories of new mexico and utah for admission as nonslave states.
the fate of cal i fornia might well establish a precedent for the rest of the mexican cession territory an area purchased largely with southern blood.
texas nursed an additional grievance of its own.
it claimed a huge area east of the rio grande and north to the forty second parallel embracing in part about half the territory of present day new mexico see map 18 2.
the federal government was proposing to detach this prize while hot blooded texans were threatening to descend upon santa fe and seize what they regarded as rightfully theirs.
the explosive quarrel foreshadowed shooting.
many southerners were also angered by the nagging agitation in the north for the abolition of slavery in the district of columbia.
they looked with alarm on the prospect of a ten mile square oasis of free soil thrust between slaveholding maryland and slaveholding virginia.
even more disagreeable to the south was the loss of runaway slaves many of whom were assisted north by the underground railroad.
this virtual freedom train a stop on the underground railroad sliding shelves in the wall of the reverend alexander dobbins home in gettysburg pennsylvania concealed a crawl space large enough to hide several escaping slaves.
the underground railroad consisted of an informal chain of stations antislavery homes through which scores of passengers runaway slaves were spirited by conductors usually white and black abolitionists from the slave states to the free soil sanctuary of canada.
the most amazing of these conductors was an illiterate runaway slave from maryland fearless harriet tubman.
during nineteen forays into the south she rescued more than three hundred slaves including her aged parents and deservedly earned the title moses lively imaginations later exaggerated the reach of the underground railroad and its stationmasters but its importance was undisputed.
by 1850 southerners were demanding a new and more stringent fugitive slave law.
the old one passed by congress in 1793 had proved inadequate to cope with runaways especially since unfriendly state authorities failed to provide needed cooperation.
unlike cattle thieves the abolitionists who ran the underground railroad did not gain personally from their lawlessness.
but to the slaveowners the loss was infuriating whatever the motives.
the moral judgments of the abolitionists seemed in some ways more galling than outright theft.
they reected not only a 100w 110w 42n wyoming 40n colorado kansas 90w santa fe oklahoma n new mexico texas 30n 200 km.
disputed area present day state boundaries gul f of m exi c o map 18 2 texas and the disputed area before the compromise of 1850 harriet tubman on left with some of the slaves she helped to free john brown called her general tubman for her effective work in helping slaves escape to canada on the underground railroad.
during the civil war she served as a union spy behind confederate lines.
herself illiterate she worked after the war to bring education to the freed slaves in north carolina.
interactive map chapter 18 renewing the sectional struggle 1848 1854 holier than thou attitude but a refusal to obey the laws solemnly passed by congress.
estimates indicate that the south in 1850 was losing perhaps 1 000 runaways a year out of its total of some 4 million slaves.
in fact more blacks probably gained their freedom by self purchase or voluntary emancipation than ever escaped.
but the principle weighed heavily with the slavemasters.
they rested their argument on the constitution which protected slavery and on the laws of congress which provided for slave catching.
although the loss of property is felt said a southern senator the loss of honor is felt still more twilight of the senatorial giants southern fears were such that congress was confronted with catastrophe in 1850.
free soil cal i fornia was banging on the door for admission.
fire eaters in the south were voicing ominous threats of secession.
in october 1849 southerners had announced their intention to convene the following year in nashville tennessee to consider withdrawing from the union.
the failure of congress to act could easily mean the failure of the united states as a country.
the crisis brought into the congressional forum the most distinguished assemblage of statesmen since the constitutional convention of 1787 the old guard of the dying generation and the young gladiators of the new.
that immortal trio clay calhoun and webster appeared together for the last time on the public stage.
henry clay now seventy three years of age played a crucial role.
the great compromiser had come to the senate from kentucky to reprise the role he had played twice before in the missouri and nullication crises.
the once glamorous statesman though disillusioned enfeebled and racked by a cruel cough was still eloquent conciliatory and captivating.
he proposed and skillfully defended a series of compromises.
he was ably seconded by thirty seven year old senator stephen a douglas of illinois the little giant ve feet four inches whose role was less spectacular but even more important.
clay urged with all his persuasiveness that the north and south both make concessions and that the north partially yield by enacting a more feasible fugitive slave law.
senator john c calhoun the great nullier then sixty eight and dying of tuberculosis championed the south in his last formal speech.
too weak to deliver it himself he sat bundled up in the senate chamber his eyes glowing within a stern face while a younger colleague read his fateful words.
i have senators believed from the rst that the agitation on the subject of slavery would if not prevented by some timely and effective mea sure end in disunion although approving the purpose of clays proposed concessions calhoun rejected them as not providing adequate safeguards for southern rights.
his impassioned plea was to leave slavery alone return runaway slaves give the south its rights as a minority and restore the political balance.
he had in view as was later revealed an utterly unworkable scheme of electing two presidents one from the north and one from the south each wielding a veto.
calhoun died in 1850 before the debate was over murmuring the sad words the south.
god knows what will become of her appreciative fellow citizens in charleston erected to his memory an imposing monument which bore the inscription truth justice and the constitution calhoun had labored to preserve the union and had taken his stand on the constitution but his proposals in their behalf almost undid both.
daniel webster next took the senate spotlight to uphold clays compromise measures in his last great speech a three hour effort.
now sixty eight years old and suffering from a liver complaint aggravated by high living he had lost some of the re in his magnicent voice.
speaking deliberately and before overowing galleries he urged all reasonable concessions to the south including a new fugitive slave law with teeth.
as for slavery in the territories asked webster why legislate on the subject.
to do so was an act of sacrilege for almighty god had already passed the wilmot proviso.
the good lord had decreed through climate topography and geography that a plantation economy and hence a slave economy could not protably exist in the mexican cession territory.
webster sanely concluded that compromise concession and sweet reasonableness would provide the only solutions.
let us not be pygmies he pleaded in a case that calls for men if mea sured by its immediate effects websters famed seventh of march speech of 1850 was his nest.
it helped turn the tide in the north toward compromise.
the clamor for printed copies became so great that webster mailed out more than 100 000 remarking that 200 000 would not satisfy the demand.
his tre webster was wrong here within one hundred years california had become one of the great cotton producing states of the union.
the compromise of 1850 ralph waldo emerson the philosopher and moderate abolitionist was outraged by websters support of concessions to the south in the fugitive slave act.
in february 1851 he wrote in his journal i opened a paper to day in which he webster pounds on the old strings of liberty in a letter to the washington birthday feasters at new york.
liberty pho.
let mr webster for decencys sake shut his lips once and forever on this word.
the word liberty in the mouth of mr webster sounds like the word love in the mouth of a courtesan.
mendous effort visibly strengthened union sentiment.
it was especially pleasing to the banking and commercial centers of the north which stood to lose millions of dollars by secession.
one prominent washington banker canceled two notes of websters totaling 5 000 and sent him a personal check for 1 000 and a message of congratulations.
but the free soilers and abolitionists who had assumed webster was one of them upbraided him as a traitor worthy of bracketing with benedict arnold.
the poet john greenleaf whittier lamented so fallen.
the light withdrawn which once he wore.
the glory from his gray hairs gone for evermore.
these reproaches were most unfair.
webster had long regarded slavery as evil but disunion as worse.
deadlock and danger on capitol hill the stormy congressional debate of 1850 was not nished for the young guard from the north were yet to have their say.
this was the group of newer leaders who unlike the aging old guard had not grown up with the union.
they were more interested in purging and purifying it than in patching and preserving it.
william h seward the wiry and husky throated freshman senator from new york was the able spokesman for many of the younger northern radicals.
a strong antislaveryite he came out unequivocally against concession.
he seemed not to realize that com promise had brought the union together and that when the sections could no longer compromise they would have to part company.
seward argued earnestly that christian legislators must obey gods moral law as well as mans mundane law.
he therefore appealed with reference to excluding slavery in the territories to an even higher law than the constitution.
this alarming phrase wrenched from its context may have cost him the presidential nomination and the presidency in 1860.
as the great debate in congress ran its heated course deadlock seemed certain.
blunt old president taylor who had allegedly fallen under the inuence of men like higher law seward seemed bent on vetoing any compromise passed by congress.
his military ire was aroused by the threats of texas to seize santa fe.
he appeared to be doggedly determined to jacksonize the dissenters if need be by leading an army against the texans in person and hanging all damned traitors if troops had begun to march the south probably would have rallied to the defense of texas and the civil war might have erupted in 1850.
breaking the congressional logjam at the height of the controversy in 1850 president taylor unknowingly helped the cause of concession by dying suddenly probably of an acute intestinal disorder.
portly round faced vice president millard fillmore a colorless and conciliatory new york lawyer politician took over the reins.
as presiding ofcer of the senate he had been impressed with the arguments for conciliation and he gladly signed the series of compromise mea sures that passed congress after seven long months of stormy debate.
the balancing of interests in the compromise of 1850 was delicate in the extreme see table 18 1.
the struggle to get these mea sures accepted by the country was hardly less heated than in congress.
in the northern states union savers like senators clay webster and douglas orated on behalf of the compromise.
the ailing clay himself delivered more than seventy speeches as a powerful sentiment for acceptance gradually crystallized in the north.
it was strengthened by a growing spirit of goodwill which sprang partly from a feeling of relief and partly from an upsurge of prosperity enriched by cal i fornia gold.
but the re eaters of the south were still violently opposed to concessions.
one extreme south carolina chapter 18 renewing the sectional struggle 1848 1854 table 18 1 compromise of 1850 concessions to the north concessions to the south cal i fornia admitted as a free state the remainder of the mexican cession area to be formed into the territories of new mexico and utah without restriction on slavery hence open to popular sovereignty texas to receive 10 million from the federal government as compensation a more stringent fugitive slave law going beyond that of 1793 territory disputed by texas and new mexico to be surrendered to new mexico abolition of the slave trade but not slavery in the district of columbia newspaper avowed that it loathed the union and hated the north as much as it did hell itself.
a movement in the south to boycott northern goods gained some headway but in the end the southern unionists assisted by the warm glow of prosperity prevailed.
in june 1850 the assemblage of southern extremists met in nashville ironically near the burial place of andrew jackson.
the delegates not only took a strong position in favor of slavery but condemned the compromise mea sures then being hammered out in con henry clay proposing the compromise of 1850 this engraving captures one of the most dramatic moments in the history of the united states senate.
vice president millard fillmore presides while on the oor sit several of the senatorial giants of the era including daniel webster stephen a douglas and john c calhoun.
meeting again in november after the bills had passed the convention proved to be a dud.
by that time southern opinion had reluctantly accepted the verdict of congress.
like the calm after a storm a second era of good feelings dawned.
disquieting talk of secession subsided.
peace loving people both north and south were determined that the compromises should be a nality and that the explosive issue of slavery should be buried.
but this placid period proved all too brief.
the fugitive slave law was a modest sum.
the immense area in dispute had been torn from the side of slaveholding texas and was almost certain to be free.
the south had halted the drive toward abolition in the district of columbia at least temporarily by permitting the outlawing of the slave trade in the federal district.
but even this move was an entering wedge toward complete emancipation in the nations capital.
most alarming of all the drastic new fugitive slave law of 1850 the bloodhound bill stirred up a storm of opposition in the north.
the eeing slaves could not testify in their own behalf and they were denied a jury trial.
these harsh practices some citizens feared threatened to create dangerous precedents for white americans.
the federal commissioner who handled the case of a fugitive would receive ve dollars if the runaway were freed and ten dollars if not an arrangement that strongly resembled a bribe.
freedomloving northerners who aided the slave to escape were balancing the compromise scales who got the better deal in the compromise of 1850.
the answer is clearly the north see map 18 3.
cal ifornia as a free state tipped the senate balance permanently against the south.
the territories of new mexico and utah were open to slavery on the basis of popular sovereignty.
but the iron law of nature the highest law of all had loaded the dice in favor of free soil.
southerners urgently needed more slave territory to restore the sacred balance if they could not carve new states out of the recent conquests from mexico where else might they get them.
the caribbean was one answer.
even the apparent gains of the south rang hollow.
disgruntled texas was to be paid 10 million toward discharging its indebtedness but in the long run this map 18 3 slavery after the compromise of 1850 regarding the fugitive slave law provisions of the compromise of 1850 ralph waldo emerson declared in may 1851 at concord massachusetts the act of congress.
is a law which every one of you will break on the earliest occasion a law which no man can obey or abet the obeying without loss of self respect and forfeiture of the name of gentleman privately he wrote in his journal this lthy enactment was made in the nineteenth century by people who could read and write.
i will not obey it by god 120w 110w 100w 90w interactive map 80w 70w british north america canada pennsylvania ohio indiana illinois virginia missouri kentucky north carolina tennessee indian south territory arkansas carolina georgia 6 miss.
5 alabama texas louisiana florida i c p a c i f iowa utah territory california e a o c new mexico territory n 30n free state or territory 141 representatives 32 senators slave state or territory 90 representatives 30 senators territory open to slavery gadsden purchase gu lf o f m exic o mexico 400 km.
number of representatives 400 mi.
r i conn 2 new jersey del.
n o c e a n michigan vt 3 n h new york at l a n t i c wisconsin unorganized territory 40n maine minnesota territory oregon territory chapter 18 renewing the sectional struggle 1848 1854 protesting the fugitive slave law 1850 the cartoonist makes bitter sport of the hated law and heaps scorn on daniel webster on his hands and knees at the right who voted for the law as part of the compromise of 1850.
the outspoken abolitionist william lloyd garrison is depicted much more favorably on the left.
liable to heavy nes and jail sentences.
they might even be ordered to join the slave catchers and this possibility rubbed salt into old sores.
so abhorrent was this man stealing law that it touched off an explosive chain reaction in the north.
many shocked moderates hitherto passive were driven into the swelling ranks of the antislaveryites.
when a runaway slave from virginia was captured in boston in 1854 he had to be removed from the city under heavy federal guard through streets lined with sullen yankees and shadowed by black draped buildings festooned with ags ying upside down.
one prominent bostonian who witnessed this grim spectacle wrote that we went to bed one night old fashioned conser vative compromise union whigs and waked up stark mad abolitionists the underground railroad stepped up its timetable and infuriated northern mobs rescued slaves from their pursuers.
massachusetts in a move toward nullication suggestive of south carolina in 1832 made it a penal offense for any state ofcial to enforce the new federal statute.
other states passed personal liberty laws which denied local jails to federal ofcials and otherwise hampered enforcement.
the abolitionists rent the heavens with their protests against the manstealing statute.
a meeting presided over by william lloyd garrison in 1851 declared we execrate it we spit upon it we trample it under our feet beyond question the fugitive slave law was an appalling blunder on the part of the south.
no single irritant of the 1850s was more persistently galling to both sides and none did more to awaken in the north a spirit of antagonism against the south.
the southerners in turn were embittered because the northerners would not in good faith execute the law the one real and immediate southern gain from the great compromise.
slave catchers with some success redoubled their efforts.
should the shooting showdown have come in 1850.
from the standpoint of the secessionists yes from the standpoint of the unionists no.
time was ghting for the north.
with every passing decade this huge section was forging further ahead in population and wealth in crops factories foundries ships and railroads.
delay also added immensely to the moral strength of the north to its will to ght for the union.
in 1850 countless thousands of northern moderates were unwilling to pin the south to the rest of the nation with the election of 1852 defeat and doom for the whigs meeting in baltimore the democratic nominating convention of 1852 startled the nation.
hopelessly deadlocked it nally stampeded to the second dark horse candidate in american history an unrenowned lawyerpolitician franklin pierce from the hills of new hampshire.
the whigs tried to jeer him back into obscurity with the cry who is frank pierce democrats replied the young hickory of the granite hills pierce was a weak and indecisive gure.
youngish handsome militarily erect smiling and convivial he had served without real distinction in the mexican war.
as a result of a painful groin injury that caused him to fall off a horse he was known as the fainting general though scandalmongers pointed to a fondness for alcohol.
but he was enemyless because he had been inconspicuous and as a prosouthern northerner he was acceptable to the slavery wing of the democratic party.
his platform revived the democrats commitment to territorial expansion as pursued by president polk and emphatically endorsed the compromise of 1850 fugitive slave law and all.
the whigs also convening in baltimore missed a splendid opportunity to capitalize on their record in statecraft.
able to boast of a praiseworthy achievement in the compromise of 1850 they might logically have nominated president fillmore or senator webster both of whom were associated with it.
but having won in the past only with military heroes they turned map 18 4 the legal status of slavery from the revolution to the civil war 120w 110w 100w 90w 80w n ea oc open to slavery by act of annexation to n m terr.
pennsylvania 1780 1850 arkansas o south carolina georgia la.
florida free state by admission to union free state by gradual abolition g ul f of m ex i c o free territory by act of congress slave state by admission to union territory open to slavery by act of congress 1803 date of abolition by state constitution ti c north carolina alabama texas mexico r i 1784 conn 1842 n j 1784 1804 1848 1846 del.
virginia tennessee miss.
1780 n indian territory unorganized new york 1799 1827 la public land n h 1783 t new mexico territory open to slavery by compromise of 1850 maine 1780 vt 1777 a f ic pac i unorganized terr.
minnesota free by territory oregon nebraska missouri free by 1859 territory compromise missouri free by free by compromise oregon act 1848 free by missouri compromise oregon act wisconsin 1848 open to slavery michigan by kansas nebraska iowa 1846 1837 act 1854 free by missouri ohio compromise utah territory illinois indiana 1803 open to slavery by 1818 1816 compromise of 1850 free by northwest ordinance kansas territory free by missouri compromise 1820 free by act california annexing texas 1845 open to slavery by kansas nebraska act 1854 free by territorial constitution 1859 1850 missouri kentucky 30n 70w british north america canada washington territory 40n interactive map 400 km.
ce an bayonets.
but the inammatory events of the 1850s did much to bolster the yankee will to resist secession whatever the cost.
this one feverish decade gave the north time to accumulate the material and moral strength that provided the margin of victory.
thus the compromise of 1850 from one point of view won the civil war for the union see map 18 4.
n chapter 18 renewing the sectional struggle 1848 1854 to another old fuss and feathers wineld scott perhaps the ablest american general of his generation.
although he was a huge and impressive gure his manner bordered on haughtiness.
his personality not only repelled the masses but eclipsed his genuinely statesmanlike achievements.
the whig platform praised the compromise of 1850 as a lasting arrangement though less enthusiastically than the democrats.
with slavery and sectionalism to some extent softpedaled the campaign again degenerated into a dull and childish attack on personalities.
democrats ridiculed scotts pomposity whigs charged that pierce was the hero of many a well fought bottle democrats cried exultantly we polked em in 44 well pierce em in 52 luckily for the democrats the whig party was hopelessly split.
antislavery whigs of the north swallowed scott as their nominee but deplored his platform which endorsed the hated fugitive slave law.
the current phrase ran we accept the candidate but spit on the platform southern whigs who doubted scotts loyalty to the compromise of 1850 and especially the fugitive slave law accepted the platform but spat on the candidate.
more than ve thousand georgia whigs nality men voted in vain for webster although he had died nearly two weeks before the election.
general scott victorious on the battleeld met defeat at the ballot box.
his friends remarked whimsically that he was not used to running actually he was stabbed in the back by his fellow whigs notably in the south.
in addition free soil party candidate john p hale senator from new hampshire siphoned off northern whig votes that might have gone to scott.
hale walked away with a respectable 5 percent of the popular vote.
the pliant pierce won in a landslide 254 electoral votes to 42 although the popular count was closer 1 601 117 to 1 385 453.
the election of 1852 was fraught with frightening signicance though it may have seemed tame at the time.
it marked the effective end of the disorga nized whig party and within a few years its complete death.
the whigs demise augured the eclipse of national parties and the worrisome rise of purely sectional political alignments.
the whigs were governed at times by the crassest opportunism and they won only two presidential elections 1840 1848 in their colorful career both with war heroes.
they nally choked to death trying to swallow the distasteful fugitive slave law.
but their great contribution and a noteworthy one indeed was to help uphold the ideal of the union through their electoral strength in the south and through the eloquence of leaders like henry clay and daniel webster.
both of these statesmen by unhappy coincidence died during the 1852 campaign.
but the good they had done lived after them and contributed powerfully to the eventual preservation of a united united states.
expansionist stirrings south of the border the intoxicating victory in the mexican war coupled with the discovery of gold in cal i fornia just nine days before the wars end reinvigorated the spirit of manifest destiny.
the rush to the sierra nevada goldelds aroused particular concerns about the fate of central america.
since the days of balboa this narrow neck of land had stimulated dreams of a continuous atlanticto pacic transportation route that would effectively sever the two american continents see map 18 5.
whoever controlled that route would hold imperial sway over all maritime nations especially the united states.
increasing british encroachment into the area including the british seizure of the port of san juan del norte renamed greytown on nicaraguas mosquito coast drove the governments of both the united states and new granada later colombia to conclude an important treaty in 1848.
it guaranteed the american right of transit across the isthmus in return for washingtons pledge to maintain the perfect neutrality of the route so that the free transit of trafc might not be interrupted the agreement later provided a g leaf of legal cover for theodore roosevelts assertion of american control of the panama canal zone in 1903.
it also led to the construction of the rst transcontinental railroad.
completed in 1855 at a cost of thousands of lives lost to pestilence and accident it ran forty eight miles from coast to coast through the green hell of the panamanian jungle.
a full blown confrontation with britain was avoided by the clayton bulwer treaty in 1850 which stipulated that neither america nor britain would fortify or seek exclusive control over any future isthmian waterway later rescinded by the haypauncefote treaty of 1901 see p 691.
southern slavocrats cast especially covetous eyes southward in the 1850s.
they lusted for new slave territory after the compromise of 1850 seemingly closed most of the mexican cession to the peculiar institution in 1856 a texan proposed a toast that was drunk with gusto to the southern republic bounded on the caribbean diplomacy tropic of cancer cuba spain gulf of mexico 20n caribbean sea mexico british honduras isthmus of tehuantepec guatemala jamaica gr.
n british agents and traders influence natives honduras mosquito coast salvador pac i f ic oc ean proposed canal route then a land and water route 10n 100w greytown future panama canal costa rica 400 km.
nicaragua 400 mi.
colombia new granada 90w 80w map 18 5 central america ca.
1850 showing british possessions and proposed canal routes until president theodore roosevelt swung into action with his big stick in 1903 a nicaraguan canal closer to the united states was generally judged more desirable than a canal across panama.
interactive map north by the mason and dixon line and on the south by the isthmus of tehuantepec southern mexico including cuba and all other lands on our southern shore nicaragua beckoned beguilingly.
a brazen american adventurer william walker tried repeatedly to grab control of this central american country.
he had earlier tried and failed to seize baja cal i fornia from mexico and turn it into a slave state.
backed by an armed force recruited largely in the south he installed himself as president in july 1856 and promptly legalized slavery.
one southern newspaper proclaimed to the planter aristocracy that walker the gray eyed man of destiny now offers nicaragua to you and your slaves at a time when you have not a friend on the face of the earth but a coalition of central american nations formed an alliance to overthrow him.
president pierce withdrew diplomatic recognition and the grayeyed mans destiny was to crumple before a honduran ring squad in 1860.
sugar rich cuba lying just off the nations southern doorstep was also an enticing prospect for annexation.
this remnant of spains once mighty new world empire already held a large population of enslaved blacks and it might be carved into several states re storing the political balance in the senate.
president polk had considered offering spain 100 million for cuba but the proud spaniards replied that they would sooner see the island sunk into the sea than in the hands of the hated yankees.
rebuffed as buyers some southern adventurers now undertook to shake the tree of manifest destiny.
during 1850 1851 two libustering from the spanish libustero meaning freebooter or pirate expeditions each numbering several hundred armed men descended upon cuba.
both feeble efforts were repelled and the last one ended in tragedy when the leader and fty followers some of them from the best families of the south were summarily shot or strangled.
so outraged were the southerners that an angry mob sacked spains consulate in new orleans.
spanish ofcials in cuba rashly forced a showdown in 1854 when they seized the american steamer black warrior on a technicality.
now was the time for president pierce dominated as he was by the south to provoke a war with spain and seize cuba.
the major powers of europe eng land france and russia were about to become bogged down in the crimean war and hence were unable to aid spain.
chapter 18 renewing the sectional struggle 1848 1854 the rst platform of the newly born antislavery republican party in 1856 lashed out at the ostend manifesto with its transparent suggestion that cuba be seized.
the plank read resolved that the highwaymans plea that might makes right embodied in the ostend circular was in every respect unworthy of american diplomacy and would bring shame and dishonor upon any government or people that gave it their sanction.
an incredible cloak and dagger episode followed.
the secretary of state instructed the american ministers in spain eng land and france to prepare condential recommendations for the acquisition of cuba.
meeting initially at ostend belgium the three envoys drew up a top secret dispatch soon known as the ostend manifesto.
this startling document urged that the administration offer 120 million for cuba.
if spain refused and if its continued ownership endangered american interests the united states would be justied in wresting the island from the spanish.
the secret ostend manifesto quickly leaked out.
northern free soilers already angered by the fugitive slave law and other gains for slavery rose up in wrath against the manifesto of brigands the shackled black hands of harriet beecher stowes uncle tom whose plight had already stung the conscience of the north now held the south back.
the red faced pierce administration hurriedly dropped its reckless schemes for cuba.
the slavery issue thus checked territorial expansion in the 1850s.
the allure of asia the acquisition of cal i fornia and oregon had made the united states a pacic power or would be power.
how could americans now tap more deeply the supposedly rich markets of asia.
rivalry with the british lion once again played a role.
britain had recently humbled china in the opium war fought to secure the right of british traders to peddle opium in the celestial kingdom.
at the wars conclusion in 1842 britain gained free access to ve so called treaty ports as well as outright control of the island of hong kong where it remained for another century and a half.
prodded by boston merchants fearful of seeing britain horn in on their lucrative trade with china president tyler thereupon dispatched caleb cushing a dashing massachusetts lawyer scholar to secure comparable concessions for the united states.
cushings four warships arrived at macao in southern china in early 1844 bearing gifts that included a weathervane and a pair of six shooters.
impressed by cushings charm and largesse and also eager for a counterweight to the meddlesome british silk gowned chinese diplomats signed the treaty of wanghia the rst formal diplomatic agreement between the united states and china on july 3 1844.
cushing was interested in commerce not colonies and he secured some vital rights and privileges from the chinese.
most favored nation status afforded the united states any and all trading terms accorded to other powers.
extraterritoriality provided for trying americans accused of crimes in china before american ofcials not in chinese courts.
cushing was prompted to seek this particular immunity by the memory of a seaman on a u s vessel who had been strangled to death by chinese authorities for what was apparently the accidental drowning of a chinese woman.
american trade with china ourished thanks to cushings treaty though it never reached the proportions his backers had dreamed of.
more immediately important was the opportunity it opened for american missionaries thousands of whom soon ooded prayerfully through the treaty ports to convert the heathen chinese fatefully america had now aligned itself with the western powers that chronically menaced chinas cultural integrity.
all of them would one day reap a bitter harvest of resentment.
success in china soon inspired a still more consequential mission to pry open the bamboo gates of japan.
after some disagreeable experiences with the european world japan at about the same time jamestown was settled withdrew into an almost airtight cocoon of isolationism and remained there for more than two centuries.
the long ruling warrior dynasty known as the tokugawa shogunate was so protective of japans insularity that it prohibited shipwrecked foreign sailors from leaving and refused to readmit japa nese sailors who had been washed up on foreign shores.
meanwhile industrial and democratic revolutions were convulsing the western world while japan remained placidly secluded.
by 1853 japan was ready to emerge from its self imposed quarantine.
in 1852 president millard fillmore dispatched to japan a eet of warships commanded by commodore americans in asia commodore matthew perry in japan 1853 among perrys gifts to the japanese was a miniature railway complete with engine cars and track which made a vivid impression on the japanese artist who created this work.
matthew c perry.
the brother of the hero of the battle of lake erie in 1813 perry prepared diligently for his mission voraciously reading about japan querying whalers about pacic ocean currents and collecting specimens of american technology with which to impress the japa nese.
his four awesome smoke belching black ships steamed into edo later tokyo bay on july 8 1853 inciting near panic among the shocked japa nese.
after tense negotiations during which perry threatened to blast his way ashore if necessary perry stepped onto the beach preceded by two conspicuously tall african american ag bearers.
from elaborately carved gold trimmed boxes perry produced silk bound letters requesting free trade and friendly relations.
he handed them to the wary japa nese delegation and then tactfully withdrew promising to return the following year to receive the japa nese reply.
true to his word perry returned in february 1854 with an even larger force of seven men of war.
once again he combined bluster and grace plying the japanese with gifts including a miniature steam locomotive and 350 feet of track.
with this display of pomp and bravado he persuaded the japa nese to sign the landmark treaty of kanagawa on march 31 1854.
it provided for proper treatment of shipwrecked sailors american coaling rights in japan and the establishment of consular relations.
perry had inserted only a commercial toe in the door but he had cracked japans two century shell of isolation wide open.
within little more than a decade the meiji restoration would end the era of the shogunate and propel the land of the rising sun headlong into the modern world and an eventual epochal military clash with the united states.
pacic railroad promoters and the gadsden purchase acute transportation problems were another legacy of the mexican war.
the newly acquired prizes of cal ifornia and oregon might just as well have been islands some eight thousand miles west of the nations capital.
the sea routes to and from the isthmus of panama to say nothing of those around south america were too long.
covered wagon travel past bleaching animal bones was possible but slow and dangerous.
a popular song recalled they swam the wide rivers and crossed the tall peaks and camped on the prairie for weeks upon weeks.
starvation and cholera and hard work and slaughter they reached california spite of hell and high water.
chapter 18 renewing the sectional struggle 1848 1854 120w 110w 100w.
colorado r california new mexico territory pac los angeles gil a r c ifi tucson texas el paso se f a o houston z n e future route of the southern pacific railroad 1882 mexico d an gr n gadsden purchase 1853 o ri rte ea co oc 30n 300 km.
gu lf o f m exic o 300 mi.
map 18 6 the gadsden purchase 1853 interactive map feasible land transportation was imperative or the newly won possessions on the pacic coast might break away.
camels were even proposed as the answer.
several score of these temperamental beasts ships of the desert were imported from the near east but mule driv ing americans did not adjust to them.
a transcontinental railroad was clearly the only real solution to the problem.
railroad promoters both north and south had projected many drawing board routes to the pacic coast.
but the estimated cost in all cases was so great that for many years there could obviously be only one line.
should its terminus be in the north or in the south.
the favored section would reap rich rewards in wealth population and inuence.
the south losing the economic race with the north was eager to extend a railroad through adjacent southwestern territory all the way to cal i fornia.
another chunk of mexico now seemed desirable because the campaigns of the recent war had shown that the best railway route ran slightly south of the mexican border.
secretary of war jefferson davis a mississippian arranged to have james gadsden a prominent south carolina railroad man appointed minister to mexico.
finding santa anna in power for the sixth and last time and as usual in need of money gadsden made gratifying headway.
he negotiated a treaty in 1853 which ceded to the united states the gadsden purchase for 10 million see map 18 6.
the transaction aroused much criticism among northerners who objected to paying a huge sum for a cactusstrewn desert nearly the size of gadsdens south carolina.
undeterred the senate approved the pact in the process shortsightedly eliminating a window on the sea of cortez.
no doubt the gadsden purchase enabled the south to claim the coveted railroad with even greater insistence.
a southern track would be easier to build because the mountains were less high and because the route unlike the proposed northern lines would not pass through unorga nized territory.
texas was already a state at this point and new mexico with the gadsden purchase added was a formally organized territory with federal troops available to provide protection against marauding tribes of indians.
any northern or central railroad line would have to be thrust through the unorga nized territory of nebraska where the buffalo and indians roamed.
northern railroad boosters quickly replied that if orga nized territory were the test then nebraska should be orga nized.
such a move was not premature because thousands of land hungry pioneers were already poised on the nebraska border.
but all schemes proposed in congress for organizing the territory were greeted with apathy or hostility by many southerners.
why should the south help create new free soil states and thus cut its own throat by facilitating a northern railroad.
the kansas nebraska act ries kansas and nebraska see map 18 7.
their status regarding slavery would be settled by popular sovereignty a democratic concept to which douglas and his western constituents were deeply attached.
kansas which lay due west of slaveholding missouri would presumably choose to become a slave state.
but nebraska lying west of free soil iowa would presumably become a free state.
douglass kansas nebraska scheme atly contradicted the missouri compromise of 1820 which had forbidden slavery in the proposed nebraska territory north of the sacred 36 30 line.
the only way to open the region to popular sovereignty was to repeal the ancient compact outright.
this bold step douglas was now prepared to take even at the risk of shattering the uneasy truce patched together by the compromise of 1850.
many southerners who had not conceived of kansas as slave soil rose to the bait.
here was a chance to gain one more slave state.
the pliable president pierce under the thumb of southern advisers threw his full weight behind the kansas nebraska bill.
douglass kansasnebraska scheme at this point in 1854 senator stephen a douglas of illinois delivered a counterstroke to offset the gadsden thrust for southern expansion westward.
a squat bullnecked and heavy chested gure the little giant radiated the energy and breezy optimism of the selfmade man.
an ardent booster for the west he longed to break the north south deadlock over westward expansion and stretch a line of settlements across the continent.
he had also invested heavily in chicago real estate and in railway stock and was eager to have the windy city become the eastern terminus of the proposed pacic railroad.
he would thus endear himself to the voters of illinois benet his section and enrich his own purse.
a veritable steam engine in breeches douglas threw himself behind a legislative scheme that would enlist the support of a reluctant south.
the proposed territory of nebraska would be sliced into two territo 110w in 100w g n to oregon territory terr.
pac i f ic was h minnesota territory o c ean nebraska territory mich iowa ogden omaha utah territory n kansas territory california free state or territory slave state or territory opened to slavery by principle of popular sovereignty compromise of 1850 opened to slavery by principle of popular sovereignty kansas nebraska act 1854 future union pacific railroad 1869 ky tenn ark.
missouri compromise line 3630 texas 40n mo.
indian territory n mex.
30n 400 mi.
map 18 7 kansas and nebraska 1854 the future union pacic railroad completed in 1869 is shown.
note the missouri compromise line of 36 30 1820.
interactive map chapter 18 renewing the sectional struggle 1848 1854 douglas hatches a slavery problem note the already hatched missouri compromise squatter sovereignty and filibuster in cuba and the about to hatch free kansas and dred scott decision.
so bitter was the outcry against douglas at the time of the kansasnebraska controversy that he claimed with exaggeration that he could have traveled from boston to chicago at night by the light from his burning efgies.
but the missouri compromise then thirty four years old could not be brushed aside lightly.
whatever congress passes it can repeal but by this time the north had come to regard the sectional pact as almost as sacred as the constitution itself.
free soil members of congress struck back with a vengeance.
they met their match in the violently gesticulating douglas who was the ablest rough and tumble debater of his generation.
employing twisted logic and oratorical reworks he rammed the bill through congress with strong support from many southerners.
so heated were political passions that bloodshed was barely averted.
some members carried a concealed revolver or a bowie knife or both.
douglass motives in prodding anew the snarling dog of slavery have long puzzled historians.
his personal interests have already been mentioned.
in addition his foes accused him of angling for the presidency in 1856.
yet his admirers have argued plausibly in his defense that if he had not championed the ill omened bill someone else would have.
the truth seems to be that douglas acted somewhat impulsively and recklessly.
his heart did not bleed over the issue of slavery and he declared repeatedly that he did not care whether it was voted up or down in the territories.
what he failed to perceive was that hundreds of thousands of his fellow citizens in the north did feel deeply on this moral issue.
they regarded the repeal of the missouri compromise as an intolerable breach of faith and they would henceforth resist to the last trench all future southern demands for slave territory.
as abraham lincoln said the north wanted to give to pioneers in the west a clean bed with no snakes in it genuine leaders like skillful chess players must foresee the possible effects of their moves.
douglas predicted a hell of a storm but he grossly underestimated its proportions.
his critics in the north branding him a judas and a traitor greeted his name with frenzied boos hisses and three groans for doug but he still enjoyed a high degree of popularity among his following in the democratic party especially in illinois a stronghold of popular sovereignty.
congress legislates a civil war the kansas nebraska act a curtain raiser to a terrible drama was one of the most momentous measures ever to pass congress.
by one way of reckoning it greased the slippery slope to civil war.
antislavery northerners were angered by what they condemned as an act of bad faith by the nebrascals and their nebrascality all future compromise with the south would be immeasurably more difcult and without compromise there was bound to be con ict.
henceforth the fugitive slave law of 1850 previously enforced in the north only halfheartedly was a dead letter.
the kansas nebraska act wrecked two compromises that of 1820 which it repealed specically and that of 1850 which northern opinion repealed indirectly.
emerson wrote the fugitive slave law did much to unglue the eyes of men and now the nebraska bill leaves us staring northern abolitionists and southern re eaters alike saw less and less they could live with.
the growing legion of antislaveryites gained numerous recruits who resented the grasping move by the slavocracy for kansas.
the southerners chronology massachusetts senator charles sumner 1811 1874 described the kansas nebraska bill as at once the worst and the best bill on which congress ever acted it was the worst because it represented a victory for the slave power in the short run.
but it was the best he said prophetically because it annuls all past compromises with slavery and makes all future compromises impossible.
thus it puts freedom and slavery face to face and bids them grapple.
who can doubt the result.
in turn became inamed when the free soilers tried to control kansas contrary to the presumed deal the proud democrats a party now over half a century old were shattered by the kansas nebraska act.
they did elect a president in 1856 but he was the last one they were to boost into the white house for twenty eight long years.
undoubtedly the most durable offspring of the kansas nebraska blunder was the new republican party.
it sprang up spontaneously in the middle west notably in wisconsin and michigan as a mighty moral protest against the gains of slavery.
gathering together dissatised elements it soon included disgruntled whigs among them abraham lincoln democrats free soilers know nothings and other foes of the kansas nebraska act.
the hodgepodge party spread eastward with the swiftness of a prairie re and with the zeal of a religious crusade.
unheard of and unheralded at the beginning of 1854 when the nativist knownothings instead seemed to be the rising party of the north it elected a republican speaker of the house of representatives within two years.
never really a thirdparty movement its wide wingspan gave it ight overnight as the second major political party and a purely sectional one at that.
at long last the dreaded sectional rift had appeared.
the new republican party would not be allowed south of the mason dixon line.
countless southerners subscribed wholeheartedly to the sentiment that it was a nigger stealing stinking putrid abolition party the union was in dire peril.
chronology caleb cushing signs treaty of wanghia with china british seize port of san juan del norte in nicaragua treaty of guadalupe hidalgo ends mexican war taylor defeats cass and van buren for presidency cal i fornia gold rush fillmore assumes presidency after taylors death compromise of 1850 including fugitive slave law clayton bulwer treaty with britain australian gold rush pierce defeats scott for presidency gadsden purchase from mexico commodore perry opens japan ostend manifesto proposes seizure of cuba kansas nebraska act repeals missouri compromise of 1820 republican party orga nized william walker becomes president of nicaragua and legalizes slavery meiji restoration in japan chapter 18 renewing the sectional struggle 1848 1854 key terms popular sovereignty 417 free soil party 417 california gold rush 417 underground railroad 420 seventh of march speech 422 compromise of 1850 423 fugitive slave law 425 people to know clayton bulwer treaty 428 ostend manifesto 430 opium war 430 wanghia treaty of 430 kanagawa treaty of 431 gadsden purchase 432 kansas nebraska act 434 lewis cass zachary taylor harriet tubman millard fillmore franklin pierce william walker caleb cushing matthew c perry to learn more william j cooper liberty and slavery southern politics to 1860 1983 david h donald jean h baker and michael f holt the civil war and reconstruction rev.
ed 2001 kenneth s greenberg masters and statesmen the political culture of american slavery 1985 bruce levine half slave and half free the roots of the civil war 1992 james m mcpherson battle cry of freedom the civil war era 1988 david m potter the impending crisis 1848 1861 1976 richard h sewell a house divided sectionalism and civil war 1848 1860 1988 robert trennert alternative to extinction federal indian policy and the beginnings of the reservation system 1846 1851 1975 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 a house divided against itself cannot stand.
i believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free.
t he slavery question continued to churn the cauldron of controversy throughout the 1850s.
as moral temperatures rose prospects for a peaceful political solution to the slavery issue simply evaporated.
kansas territory erupted in violence between proslavery and antislavery factions in 1855.
two years later the supreme courts incendiary dred scott decision extended formal protection to slavery in all the territories of the west.
attitudes on both sides progressively hardened.
when in 1860 the newly formed republican party nominated for president abraham lincoln an outspoken opponent of the further expansion of slavery the stage was set for all out civil war.
stowe and helper literary incendiaries sectional tensions were further strained in 1852 and later by an inky phenomenon.
harriet beecher stowe a wisp of a woman and the mother of a half dozen chil dren published her heartrending novel uncle toms cabin.
dismayed by the passage of the fugitive slave law she was determined to awaken the north to the wickedness of slavery by laying bare its terrible inhumanity especially the cruel splitting of families.
her wildly popular book relied on powerful imagery and touching pathos.
god wrote it she explained in later years a reminder that the deeper sources of her antislavery sentiments lay in the evangelical religious crusades of the second great awakening.
the success of the novel at home and abroad was sensational.
several hundred thousand copies were published in the rst year and the totals soon ran into the millions as the tale was translated into more than a score of languages.
it was also put on the stage in tom shows for lengthy runs.
no other novel in american history perhaps in all history can be compared with it as a political force.
to millions of people it made slavery appear almost as evil as it really was.
when mrs stowe was introduced to president lincoln in 1862 he reportedly remarked with twinkling this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 spurted up to 192 556 miles or more than that for all of europe combined and much of the new trackage ran west of the mississippi see figure 24 1.
transcontinental railroad building was so costly and risky as to require government subsidies as it had in many other industrializing nations.
everywhere the construction of railway systems promised greater national unity and economic growth.
the extension of rails into thinly populated regions was unprotable until the areas could be built up and private promoters continent and country total world 595 767 total north and south america united states 317 925 259 687 canada 21 624 brazil 9 300 mexico 8 600 argentina 8 255 other americas 10 459 total europe 220 261 germany 41 793 france 36 348 great britain 32 088 russia 30 140 austria hungary 26 501 italy 13 063 spain 9 860 sweden 7 910 other europe 22 558 total asia 31 024 british empire 25 488 japan 1 460 china 200 other asia 3 876 total australia 17 922 total africa 8 635 algeria and tunis 3 094 cape colony 2 873 egypt 1 541 other africa 1 127 50 000 100 000 150 000 200 000 250 000 300 000 350 000 600 000 railroad track built in kilometers 1889 figure 24 1 railroads worldwide 1889 another calculation of railway track per 10 000 inhabitants in 1904 revealed that the united states was still far out in front with 26 4 miles of track compared to 15 2 miles for the second place country sweden.
much farther behind were the major western european nations of france 7 3 germany 6 1 and great britain and ireland 5 4.
source slason thompson railway statistics of the united states of america for the year ending june 30 1906 compared with the ofcial reports of 1905 and recent statistics of foreign railways 1907.
source henry poor poors manual of the railroads of the united states for 1891 1891.
the railroad age were unwilling to suffer heavy initial losses.
congress impressed by arguments pleading military and postal needs began to advance liberal loans to two favored cross continent companies in 1862 and added enormous donations of acreage paralleling the tracks.
all told washington rewarded the railroads with 155 504 994 acres and the western states contributed 49 million more a total area larger than texas see map 24 1.
grasping railroads tied up even more land than this for a number of years.
land grants to railroads were made in broad belts along the proposed route.
within these belts the railroads were allowed to choose alternate mile square sections in checkerboard fashion.
but until they determined the precise location of their tracks and decided which sections were the choicest selections the railroads withheld all the land from other users.
president grover cleveland put an end to this foot dragging practice in 1887 and threw open to settlement the still unclaimed public portions of the land grant areas.
noisy criticism especially in later years was leveled at the giveaway of so valuable a birthright to greedy corporations.
but the government did receive benecial returns including long term preferential rates for postal ser vice and military trafc.
granting land was also a cheap way to subsidize a muchdesired transportation system because it avoided new taxes for direct cash grants.
the railroads could turn the land into gold by using it as collateral for loans from private bankers or later by selling it.
this they often did at an average price of 3 an acre.
critics were also prone to overlook the fact that the land did not have even that relatively modest value until the railroads had ribboned it with steel.
frontier villages touched by the magic wand of the iron rail became ourishing cities those that were map 24 1 federal land grants to railroads the heavy red lines indicate areas within which the railroads might be given specic parcels of land.
as shown in the inset land was reserved in belts of various widths on either side of a railroads right of way.
until the railroad selected the individual mile square sections it chose to possess all such sections within the belt were withdrawn from eligibility for settlement.
the time zones were introduced in 1883 see p 572 and their boundaries have since been adjusted.
interactive map central time c a n a d i a n pa c i f i c r r mont.
canada minn n dak.
n o r t h e r n pa c i f i c r r m wyoming pa cif ic r r nevada calif pac i f ic ocean salt lake city utah terr.
uth ariz terr.
e r n pa c i fic r r 120w atlant ic pa c i f i c r r so neb.
pe sa a nt l e ind.
ill fe r r kans.
ka indian terr.
pe st louis nn s y lva mo.
r nia r h n mex.
el paso ne w tenn l io ntar r yo kc n er ra ilw pa pittsburgh va ay s c savannah ala 30n one square mile granted to railroad new orleans m exico fla gulf of mexico 100w primary federal land grants to railroads 400 km.
90w 80w n at l a n t i c ocean la.
right of way 100 yards wide boston mass.
r i conn 40n new york n j philadelphia 70w del.
washington d c n c texas one square mile held by government or sold n h r ral r ent ga miss.
pattern of land grants n y w va ky ark.
rie ohio iowa kansas city o hamilton chicago c rr denver colo n t o los angeles u n i o n pa c i f i atchiso c san francisco al entr toronto l michigan s dak.
i l on r hu wis idaho montral ottawa.
ch oregon 60w qubec pe l su rior duluth 50n ut seattle wash eastern time so tacoma mountain time pacific time vancouver 400 mi.
chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 bypassed often withered away and became ghost towns little wonder that communities fought one another for the privilege of playing host to the railroads.
ambitious towns customarily held out monetary and other attractions to the builders who sometimes blackmailed them into contributing more generously.
spanning the continent with rails deadlock in the 1850s over the proposed transcontinental railroad was broken when the south seceded leaving the eld to the north.
in 1862 the year after the guns rst spoke at fort sumter congress made provision for starting the long awaited line.
one weighty argument for action was the urgency of bolstering the union already disrupted by binding the pacic coast especially gold rich cal i fornia more securely to the rest of the republic.
the union pacic railroad note the word union was thus commissioned by congress to thrust westward from omaha nebraska.
for each mile of track constructed the company was granted 20 square miles of land alternating in 640 acre sections on either side of the track.
for each mile the builders were also to receive a generous federal loan ranging from 16 000 on snow sheds on the central pacic railroad in the sierra nevada mountains by joseph h becker ca.
1869 formidable obstacles of climate and terrain confronted the builders of the central pacic railroad in the mountainous heights of california.
note the chinese laborers in the foreground.
the at prairie land to 48 000 for mountainous country.
the laying of rails began in earnest after the civil war ended in 1865 and with juicy loans and land grants available the groundhog promoters made all possible haste.
insiders of the crdit mobilier construction company reaped fabulous prots.
they slyly pocketed 73 million for some 50 million worth of breakneck construction spending small change to bribe congressmen to look the other way.
sweaty construction gangs containing many irish paddies patricks who had fought in the union armies worked at a frantic pace.
on one record breaking day a sledge and shovel army of some ve thousand men laid ten miles of track.
a favorite song went like this then drill my paddies drill drill my heroes drill drill all day no sugar in your tay tea workin on the u p.
when hostile indians attacked in futile efforts to protect what once rightfully had been their land the laborers would drop their picks and seize their ries.
scores of people railroad workers and indians lost their lives as the rails stretched ever westward.
at rails end workers tried their best to nd relaxation and conviviality in railroads span the nation promoting the union pacic railroad 1869 their tented towns known as hells on wheels often teeming with as many as ten thousand men and a sprinkling of painted prostitutes and performers.
rail laying at the cal i fornia end was undertaken by the central pacic railroad.
this line pushed boldly eastward from boomtown sacramento over and through the towering snow clogged sierra nevada.
four farseeing men the so called big four were the chief nancial backers of the enterprise.
the quartet included the heavyset enterprising ex governor leland stanford of cal i fornia who had useful political connections and the burly energetic collis p huntington an adept lobbyist.
the big four cleverly operated through two construction companies and although they walked away with tens of millions in prots they kept their hands relatively clean by not becoming involved in the bribing of congressmen.
the central pacic which was granted the same princely subsidies as the union pacic had the same incentive to haste.
some ten thousand chinese laborers sweating from dawn to dusk under their basket hats proved to be cheap efcient and expendable hundreds lost their lives in premature explosions and other mishaps.
the towering sierra nevada presented a formidable barrier and the nerves of the big four were strained when their workers could chip only a few inches a day tunneling through solid rock while the union pacic was sledgehammering westward across the open plains.
a wedding of the rails was nally consummated near ogden utah in 1869 as two locomotives facing on a single track half a world behind each back gently kissed cowcatchers.
the colorful ceremony included the breaking of champagne bottles and the driv ing of a last ceremonial golden spike with ex governor stanford clumsily wielding a silver maul.
in all the union pacic built 1 086 miles the central pacic 689 miles.
completion of the transcontinental line a magnicent engineering feat for that day was one of americas most impressive peacetime undertakings.
it welded the west coast more rmly to the union and facilitated a ourishing trade with asia.
it penetrated the arid barrier of the deserts paving the way for the phenomenal growth of the great west.
americans compared this electrifying achievement with the declaration of independence and the emancipation of the slaves jubilant philadelphians again rang the cracked bell of independence hall.
binding the country with railroad ties with the westward trail now blazed four other transcontinental lines were completed before the centurys end.
none of them secured monetary loans from the federal government as did the union pacic and the central pacic.
but all of them except the great northern received generous grants of land.
the northern pacic railroad stretching from lake superior to puget sound reached its terminus in 1883.
the atchison topeka and santa fe stretching through the southwestern deserts to cal i fornia was completed in 1884.
the southern pacic ribboned from new orleans to san francisco and was consolidated in the same year.
the last spike of the last of the ve transcontinental railroads of the nineteenth century was hammered home in 1893.
the great northern which ran from chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 the union pacic and the central pacic link at promontory point utah may 10 1869 railroad nanciers dignitaries spectators and chinese central pacic and irish union pacic work gangs witnessed the historic joining that created the nations rst transcontinental railroad.
after the two locomotives chugged within a few feet of each other central pacic chief and former california governor leland stanford tapped a golden spike into a prepared hole on the last tie with a silver plated maul.
the golden spike was whisked away to be preserved for posterity at the stanford university museum but the iron one that replaced it was hardly ordinary.
it was wired to a union pacic telegraph line while a copper plate on the maul was connected to a central pacic wire.
when they touched they closed a telegraphic circuit that sent the news to cities all over the country.
duluth to seattle north of the northern pacic was the creation of a far visioned canadian american james j hill a bearlike man who was probably the greatest railroad builder of all.
his enterprise was so soundly orga nized that it rode through later nancial storms with ying colors.
yet the romance of the rails was not without its sordid side.
pioneer builders were often guilty of gross overoptimism.
avidly seeking land bounties and pushing into areas that lacked enough potential population to support a railroad they sometimes laid down rails that led from nowhere to nothing when prosperity failed to smile upon their coming they went into bankruptcy carrying down with them the savings of trusting investors.
many of the large railroads in the post civil war decades passed through seemingly endless bankruptcies mergers or reorga ni zations.
in 1892 james baird weaver 1833 1912 nominee of the populists wrote regarding the railroad magnates in their delirium of greed the managers of our transportation systems disregard both private right and the public welfare.
today they will combine and bankrupt their weak rivals and by the expenditure of a triing sum possess themselves of properties which cost the outlay of millions.
tomorrow they will capitalize their booty for ve times the cost issue their bonds and proceed to levy tariffs upon the people to pay dividends upon the fraud.
railroad revolutions railroad consolidation and mechanization the success of the western lines was facilitated by welding together and expanding the older eastern networks notably the new york central.
the genius in this enterprise was commodore cornelius vanderbilt burly boisterous white whiskered.
having made his millions in steamboating he daringly turned in his late sixties to a new career in railroading.
though illeducated ungrammatical coarse and ruthless he was clear visioned.
offering superior railway ser vice at lower rates he amassed a fortune of 100 million.
his name is perhaps best remembered through his contribution of 1 million to the founding of vanderbilt university in tennessee.
two signicant new improvements proved a boon to the railroads.
one was the steel rail which vanderbilt helped popularize when he replaced the old iron tracks of the new york central with the tougher metal.
traveling first class this sumptuously appointed pullman palace car offered its prosperous passengers the comforts of home while they were far away from it.
steel was safer and more economical because it could bear a heavier load.
a standard gauge of track width likewise came into wide use during the postwar years thus eliminating the expense and inconvenience of numerous changes from one line to another.
other re nements played a vital role in railroading.
the westinghouse air brake generally adopted in the 1870s was a marvelous contribution to efciency and safety.
the pullman palace cars advertised as gorgeous traveling hotels were introduced on a considerable scale in the 1860s.
alarmists condemned them as wheeled torture chambers and potential funeral pyres for the wooden cars were equipped with swaying kerosene lamps.
appalling accidents continued to be almost daily tragedies despite safety devices like the telegraph talking wires double tracking and later the block signal.
revolution by railways the metallic ngers of the railroads intimately touched countless phases of american life.
for the rst time a sprawling nation became united in a physical sense bound with ribs of iron and steel.
the railroads emerged as the nations biggest business employing more people than any other industry and gobbling up nearly 20 percent of investment dollars from foreign and domestic investors alike.
more than any other single factor the railroad network spurred the amazing economic growth of the post civil war years.
by stitching north america together from ocean to ocean the puf ng locomotives opened up the west with its wealth of resources.
trains hauled raw materials to factories and sped them back as nished goods for sale across the continent making the united states the largest integrated national market in the world.
the forging of the rails themselves generated the largest single source of orders for the adolescent steel industry.
the screeching iron horse especially stimulated mining and agriculture in the west.
it took farmers out to their land carried the fruits of their toil to market and brought them their manufactured necessities.
clusters of farm settlements paralleled the railroads just as earlier they had followed the rivers.
railways were a boon for cities and played a leading role in the great cityward movement of the last decades of the century.
the iron monsters could carry food to enormous concentrations of people and at the same time ensure them a livelihood by providing both raw materials and markets.
chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 railroad companies also stimulated the mighty stream of immigration.
seeking settlers to whom their land grants might be sold at a prot they advertised seductively in europe and sometimes offered to transport the newcomers free to their farms.
the land also felt the impact of the railroad especially the broad ecologically fragile midsection of the continent that thomas jefferson had purchased from france in 1803.
settlers following the railroads plowed up the tallgrass prairies of iowa illinois kansas and nebraska and planted well drained rectangular cornelds.
on the shortgrass prairies of the high plains in the dakotas and montana range fed cattle rapidly displaced the buffalo which were hunted to nearextinction.
the white pine forests of michigan wisconsin and minnesota disappeared into lumber that was rushed by rail to prairie farmers who used it to build houses and fences.
time itself was bent to the railroads needs.
until the 1880s every town in the united states had its own local time dictated by the suns position.
when it was noon in chicago it was 11 50 a m in st louis and 12 18 p m in detroit.
for railroad operators worried about keeping schedules and avoiding wrecks this patchwork of local times was a nightmare.
thus on november 18 1883 the major rail lines decreed that the continent would henceforth be divided into four time zones most communities quickly adopted railroad standard time.
finally the railroad more than any other single factor was the maker of millionaires.
a raw new aristocracy consisting of lords of the rail replaced the old southern lords of the lash the multiwebbed lines became the playthings of wall street and colossal wealth was amassed by stock speculators and railroad wreckers.
wrongdoing in railroading corruption lurks nearby when fabulous fortunes can materialize overnight.
the eecings administered by the railroad construction companies such as the crdit mobilier were but the rst of the bunco games that the railroad promoters learned to play.
methods soon became more re ned as fast ngered nanciers executed multimillion dollar maneuvers beneath the noses of a bedazzled public.
jay gould was the most adept of these ringmasters of rapacity.
for nearly thirty years he boomed and busted the stocks of the erie the kansas william h vanderbilt robber baron this 1885 cartoon takes aim at vanderbilts notorious comment the public be damned pacic the union pacic and the texas and pacic in an incredible circus of speculative skullduggery.
one of the favorite devices of the moguls of manipulation was stock watering the term originally referred to the practice of making cattle thirsty by feeding them salt and then having them bloat themselves with water before they were weighed in for sale.
using a variation of this technique railroad stock promoters grossly inated their claims about a given lines assets and protability and sold stocks and bonds far in excess of the railroads actual value.
promoters prots were often the tail that wagged the iron horse itself.
railroad managers were forced to charge extortionate rates and wage ruthless competitive battles in order to pay off the exaggerated nancial obligations with which they were saddled.
the public interest was frequently trampled underfoot as the railroad titans waged their brutal wars.
crusty old cornelius vanderbilt when told that the law stood in his way reportedly exclaimed law.
what do i care about the law.
haint i got the power on another occasion he supposedly threatened some associates i wont sue you for the law is too slow.
ill ruin you his son william h vanderbilt when asked in 1883 about the discontinuance of a fast mail train reportedly snorted the public be damned reforms in railroading while abusing the public the railroaders blandly bought and sold people in public life.
they bribed judges and legislatures employed arm twisting lobbyists and elected their own creatures to high ofce.
they showered free passes on journalists and politicians in profusion.
one railroad man noted in 1885 that in the west no man who has money or ofcial position or inuence thinks he ought to pay anything for riding on a railroad railroad kings were for a time virtual industrial monarchs.
as manipulators of a huge natural monopoly they exercised more direct control over the lives of more people than did the president of the united states and their terms were not limited to four years.
they increasingly shunned the crude bloodletting of cutthroat competition and began to cooperate with one another to rule the railroad dominion.
sorely pressed to show at least some returns on their bloated investments they entered into defensive alliances to protect precious prots.
the earliest form of combination was the pool an agreement to divide the business in a given area and share the prots.
other rail barons granted secret rebates or kickbacks to powerful shippers in return for steady and assured trafc.
often they slashed their rates on competing lines but they more than made up the difference on noncompeting ones where they might actually charge more for a short haul than for a long one.
as a result small farmers usually paid the highest rates while large customers got the best deals.
government bridles the iron horse it was neither healthy nor politically acceptable that so many people should be at the mercy of so few.
impoverished farmers especially in the midwest began to wonder if the nation had not escaped from the slavery power only to fall into the hands of the money power as represented by the railroad plutocracy.
but the american people usually quick to respond to political injustice were slow to combat economic injustice.
dedicated to free enterprise and to the principle that competition is the soul of trade they cherished a traditionally keen pride in progress.
they remembered that jeffersons ideals were hostile to government interference with business.
above all there shimmered the american dream the hope that in a catch as catch can economic system anyone might become a millionaire.
the depression of the 1870s goaded the farmers into protesting against being railroaded into bankruptcy.
under pressure from organized agrarian groups like the grange patrons of husbandry many midwestern legislatures tried to regulate the railroad monopoly.
the scattered state efforts screeched to a halt in 1886.
the supreme court in the famed wabash st louis pacic railroad company v illinois case decreed that individual states had no power to regulate interstate commerce.
if the mechanical monster were to be corralled the federal government would have to do the job.
stiff necked president cleveland did not look kindly on effective regulation.
but congress ignored his grumbling indifference and passed the epochal interstate commerce act in 1887.
it prohibited rebates and pools and required the railroads to publish their rates openly.
it also forbade unfair discrimination against shippers and outlawed charging more for a short haul than for a long one over the same line.
most important it set up the interstate commerce commission icc to administer and enforce the new legislation.
despite acclaim the interstate commerce act emphatically did not represent a popular victory over corporate wealth.
one of the leading corporation lawyers of the day richard olney shrewdly noted that the new commission can be made of great use to the railroads.
it satises the popular clamor for a government supervision of railroads at the same time that such supervision is almost entirely nominal.
the part of wisdom is not to destroy the commission but to utilize it what the new legislation did do was to provide an orderly forum where competing business interests could resolve their con icts in peaceable ways.
the country could now avoid ruinous rate wars among the railroads and outraged con scatory attacks on the lines by pitchfork prodded state legislatures.
this was a modest accomplishment but by no means an unimportant one.
the interstate commerce act tended to stabilize not revolutionize the existing business system.
yet the act still ranks as a red letter law.
it was the rst large scale attempt by washington to regulate business in the interest of society at large.
it heralded the arrival of a series of independent regulatory commissions in the next century which would irrevocably commit the government to the daunting task of monitoring and guiding the private economy.
it chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 foreshadowed the doom of freewheeling buccaneering business practices and served full notice that there was a public interest in private enterprise that the government was bound to protect.
miracles of mechanization postwar industrial expansion partly a result of the railroad network rapidly began to assume mammoth proportions.
when lincoln was elected in 1860 the republic ranked only fourth among the manufacturing nations of the world.
by 1894 it had bounded into rst place.
why the sudden upsurge.
liquid capital previously scarce was now becoming abundant.
the word millionaire had not been coined until the 1840s and in 1861 only a handful of individuals were eligible for this class.
but the civil war partly through proteering created immense fortunes and these accumulations could now be combined with borrowings from foreign capitalists.
investors from abroad loaned more money to the united states in the postwar period than any country had previously received.
unlike in other countries in america they mostly put the money into private hands not public coffers.
investors primarily from britain but also from france germany the netherlands and switzerland sometimes owned all or part of an american business.
other times they simply lent their money to the thousands of european companies set up to manage investment in u s industry.
either way europeans were usually content to let americans run the business until hard times hit and they demanded more say over company operations or government economic policies.
innovations in transportation fueled growth too by bringing the nations amazingly abundant natural resources particularly coal oil and iron to the factory door.
a shipping system through the great lakes carried the rich iron deposits in the mesabi range of minnesota to chicago and cleveland for re ning.
this priceless bonanza where mountains of red rusted ore could be scooped up by steam shovels ultimately became a cornerstone of a vast steel empire.
copper bauxite and zinc made similar journeys from mine to manufacture.
the sheer size of the american market encouraged innovators to invent mass production methods.
with cheap transportation crisscrossing the nation and an ever larger population able and eager to consume any one who could make an appealing new product available for a good price in large quantities and gure out how to market it thrived.
industrialists continued to re ne the pre civil war american system of using specialized machinery to make interchangeable parts culminating in 1913 with henry fords fully developed moving assembly line for his model t see pp.
256 257 and 782 783.
the captains of industry had a major incentive to invent machines they made it possible to replace expensive skilled labor with unskilled workers now cheap and plentiful as a result of massive immigration.
steel the keystone industry was built largely on the sweat of low priced immigrant labor from eastern and southern europe working in two 12 hour shifts seven days a week.
just as industry served as a hothouse of invention brilliant ideas gave rise to whole new lines of business.
between 1860 and 1890 some 440 000 patents were issued.
business operations were facilitated by machines such as the cash register the stock ticker and the typewriter literary piano while the refrigerator car the electric dynamo and the electric railway speeded urbanization.
one of the most ingenious inventions was the telephone introduced by alexander graham bell in 1876.
america was suddenly turned into a nation of telephoniacs as a gigantic communications network was built on his invention.
the social impact of the telephone further expanded when it lured number please women away from the stove to the switchboard.
telephone boys were at rst employed as operators but their profanity shocked patrons.
the most versatile inventor of all was thomas alva edison 1847 1931 who as a boy had been considered so dull witted that he was taken out of school.
his regarding the exploitation of immigrant labor ralph waldo emerson 1803 1882 wrote in 1860 the german and irish millions like the negro have a great deal of guano in their destiny.
they are ferried over the atlantic and carted over america to ditch and to drudge to make corn cheap and then to lie down prematurely to make a spot of green grass on the prairie.
the rise of the trusts thomas alva edison in his lab 1888 edison was dubbed the wizard of menlo park new jersey where he lived and established the rst major industrial research laboratory.
edison was not only an ingenious inventor he also gured out how to apply the principles of mass production to his inventions.
phonographs telephones telegraphs incandescent electric lighting uoroscopes kinetoscopes and many more technological wonders spread throughout the world following their development in edisons lab.
severe deafness enabled him to concentrate without distraction.
edison was a gifted tinkerer and a tireless worker not a pure scientist.
genius he said is one percent inspiration and ninety nine percent perspiration wondrous devices poured out of his invention factory in new jersey the phonograph the mimeograph the dictaphone and the moving picture.
he is probably best known for his perfection in 1879 of the electric lightbulb which turned night into day and transformed ancient human habits as well.
people had previously slept an average of nine hours a night now they slept just a bit more than seven.
the trust titan emerges despite pious protests to the contrary competition was the bugbear of most business leaders of the day.
tycoons like andrew carnegie the steel king john d rockefeller the oil baron and j pierpont morgan the bankers banker exercised their genius in devising ways to circumvent competition.
carnegie integrated every phase of his steel making operation.
his miners scratched the ore from the earth in the mesabi range carnegie ships oated it across the great lakes carnegie railroads delivered it to the blast furnaces at pittsburgh.
when the molten metal nally poured from the glowing crucibles into the waiting ingot molds no other hands but those in carnegies employ had touched the product.
carnegie thus pioneered the creative entrepreneurial tactic of vertical integration combining into one orga ni zation all phases of manufacturing from mining to marketing.
his goal was to improve efciency by making supplies more reliable controlling the quality of the product at all stages of production and eliminating middlemens fees.
less justiable on grounds of efciency was the technique of horizontal integration which simply meant allying with competitors to monopolize a given market.
rockefeller was a master of this stratagem.
he perfected a device for controlling bothersome rivals the trust.
stockholders in various smaller oil companies assigned their stock to the board of directors of his standard oil company formed in 1870.
it then consolidated and concerted the operations of the previously competing enterprises.
let us prey was said to be rockefellers unwritten motto.
ruthlessly wielding vast power standard oil soon cornered virtually the entire world petroleum market.
weaker competitors left out of the trust agreement were forced to the wall.
rockefellers stunning success inspired many imitators and the word trust came to be generally used to describe any large scale business combination.
the imperial morgan devised still other schemes for eliminating wasteful competition.
the depression of the 1890s drove into his welcoming arms many bleeding businesspeople wounded by cutthroat competition.
his prescribed remedy was to consolidate rival enterprises and to ensure future harmony by placing ofcers of his own banking syndicate on their various boards of directors.
these came to be known as interlocking directorates.
chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 the octopus 1904 this cartoon visually captures a feeling of widespread resentment against standard oil as a powerful sprawling octopus whose tentacles controlled all branches of government.
the supremacy of steel steel is king might well have been the exultant war cry of the new industrialized generation.
the mighty metal ultimately held together the new steel civilization from skyscrapers to coal scuttles while providing it with food shelter and transportation.
steel making notably rails for railroads typied the dominance of heavy industry which concentrated on making capital goods as distinct from the production of consumer goods such as clothes and shoes.
now taken for granted steel was a scarce commodity in the wood and brick america of abraham lincoln.
considerable iron went into railroad rails and bridges but steel was expensive and was used largely for products like cutlery.
the early iron horse snorted exclusively and dangerously over iron rails.
when in the 1870s commodore vanderbilt of the new york central began to use steel rails he was forced to import them from britain.
yet within an amazing twenty years the united states had outdistanced all foreign competitors and was pouring out more than one third of the worlds supply of steel.
by 1900 america was producing as much as britain and germany combined.
what wrought the transformation.
chiey the invention in the 1850s of a method of making cheap steel the bessemer process.
it was named after a derided british inventor although an american had stumbled on it a few years earlier.
william kelly a ken tucky manufacturer of iron kettles discovered that cold air blown on red hot iron caused the metal to become white hot by igniting the carbon and thus eliminating impurities.
he tried to apply the new air boiling technique to his own product but his customers decried kellys fool steel and his business declined.
gradually the bessemer kelly process won acceptance and these two crazy men ultimately made possible the present steel civilization.
carnegie and other sultans of steel kingpin among steelmasters was andrew carnegie an undersized charming scotsman.
as a towheaded lad of thirteen he was brought to america by his impoverished parents in 1848 and got a job as a bobbin boy at 1 20 a week.
mounting the ladder of success so fast that he was said to have scorched the rungs he forged ahead by working hard doing the extra chore cheerfully assuming responsibility and smoothly cultivating inuential people.
after accumulating some capital carnegie entered the steel business in the pittsburgh area.
a gifted organizer and administrator he succeeded by picking high class associates and by eliminating many middlemen.
although inclined to be tough sted in business he was not a monopolist and disliked monopolistic trusts.
his remarkable orga ni zation was a partnership captains of industry andrew carnegie 1835 1919 wrote in 1889 the man who dies leaving behind him millions of available wealth which was his to administer during life will pass away unwept unhonored and unsung no matter to what uses he leaves the dross which he cannot take with him.
of such as these the public verdict will then be the man who dies thus rich dies disgraced j p morgan 1837 1913 as the most inuential banker of his day morgan symbolized to many people the power and arrogance of nance capitalism the chronic skin disorder on his nose inspired the taunt johnny morgans nasal organ has a purple hue that involved at its maximum about forty pittsburgh millionaires by 1900 he was producing one fourth of the nations bessemer steel and the partners in these pre income tax days were dividing prots of 40 million a year as their take home pay with the napoleon of the smokestacks himself receiving a cool 25 million.
into the picture now stepped the nancial giant of the age j pierpont morgan.
jupiter morgan had made a legendary reputation for himself and his wall street banking house by nancing the reorga ni zation of railroads insurance companies and banks.
an impressive gure of a man with massive shoulders shaggy brows piercing eyes and a bulbous acne cursed red nose he had established an enviable reputation for integrity.
he did not believe that money power was dangerous except when in dangerous hands and he did not regard his own hands as dangerous.
the force of circumstances brought morgan and carnegie into collision.
by 1900 the canny little scotsman weary of turning steel into gold was eager to sell his holdings.
morgan had meanwhile plunged heavily into the manufacture of steel pipe tubing.
carnegie cleverly threatening to invade the same business was ready to ruin his rival if he did not receive his price.
the steelmasters agents haggled with the imperious morgan for eight agonizing hours and the nancier nally agreed to buy out carnegie for over 400 million.
fearing that he would die disgraced with so much wealth carnegie dedicated the remaining years of his life to giving away money for public libraries pensions for professors and other such philanthropic purposes in all disposing of about 350 million.
morgan moved rapidly to expand his new industrial empire.
he took the carnegie holdings added others watered the stock liberally and in 1901 launched the enlarged united states steel corporation.
capitalized at 1 4 billion it was americas rst billion dollar corporation a larger sum than the total estimated wealth of the nation in 1800.
the industrial revolution with its hot bessemer breath had come into its own.
rockefeller grows an american beauty rose the sudden emergence of the oil industry was one of the most striking developments of the years during and after the civil war.
traces of oil found on streams had earlier been bottled for back rub and other patent medicines but not until 1859 did the rst well in pennsylvania drakes folly pour out its liquid black gold almost overnight an industry was born that was to take more wealth from the earth than all of the gold extracted by the forty niners and their western successors.
kerosene derived from petroleum was the rst major product of the infant oil industry.
burned from a cotton wick in a glass chimney lamp kerosene produced a much brighter ame than whale oil.
the oil business boomed by the 1870s kerosene was americas fourth most valuable export.
whaling in contrast the lifeblood of ocean roaming new eng landers since chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 washington as seen by the trusts 1900 what a funny little government john d rockefeller observes in this satirical cartoon.
his own wealth and power are presumed to dwarf the resources of the federal government.
before the days of moby dick swiftly became a sick industry.
but what technology gives technology takes away.
by 1885 250 000 of thomas edisons electric lightbulbs were in use fteen years later perhaps 15 million.
the new electric industry rendered kerosene obsolete just as kerosene had rendered whale oil obsolete.
only in rural america and overseas did a market continue for oil red lamps.
oil might thus have remained a modest even a shrinking industry but for yet another turn of the technological tide the invention of the automobile.
by 1900 the gasoline burning internal combustion engine had clearly bested its rivals steam and electricity as the superior means of automobile propulsion.
as the century of the automobile dawned the oil business got a new long lasting and hugely protable lease on life.
john d rockefeller lanky shrewd ambitious abstemious he neither drank smoked nor swore came to dominate the oil industry.
born to a family of precarious income he became a successful businessman at age nineteen.
one upward stride led to another and in 1870 he orga nized the standard oil company of ohio nucleus of the great trust formed in 1882.
locating his re neries in cleveland he sought to eliminate the middlemen and squeeze out competitors.
pious and parsimonious rockefeller ourished in an era of completely free enterprise.
so called piratical practices were employed by corsairs of nance and business ethics were distressingly low.
rockefeller op erating just to the windward of the law pursued a policy of rule or ruin.
sell all the oil that is sold in your district was the hard boiled order that went out to his local agents.
by 1877 rockefeller controlled 95 percent of all the oil re neries in the country.
rockefeller reckafellow as carnegie had once called him showed little mercy.
a kind of primitive savagery prevailed in the jungle world of big business where only the ttest survived.
or so rockefeller believed.
his son later explained that the giant american beauty rose could be produced only by sacricing the early buds that grew up around it his father pinched off the small buds with complete ruthlessness.
employing spies and extorting secret rebates from the railroads he even forced the lines to pay him rebates on the freight bills of his competitors.
rockefeller thought he was simply obeying a law of nature.
the time was ripe for aggressive consolidation he later reected.
it had to come though all we saw at the moment was the need to save ourselves from wasteful conditions.
the day of combination is here to stay.
individualism has gone never to return on the other side of the ledger rockefellers oil monopoly did turn out a superior product at a relatively cheap price.
it achieved important economies both at home and abroad by its large scale methods of production and distribution.
this in truth was the tale of the other trusts as well.
the efcient use of expensive machinery called for bigness and consolidation proved more protable than ruinous price wars.
a philosophy for plutocracy robber barons cyrus field jay gould cornelius vanderbilt and russell sage kept aoat on the broken backs of americas workingmen 1883 other trusts blossomed along with the american beauty of oil.
these included the sugar trust the tobacco trust the leather trust and the harvester trust which amalgamated some two hundred competitors.
the meat industry arose on the backs of bawling western herds and meat kings like gustavus f swift and philip armour took their place among the new royalty.
wealth was coming to dominate the commonwealth.
these untrustworthy trusts and the pirates who captained them were disturbingly new.
they eclipsed an older american aristocracy of modestly successful merchants and professionals.
an arrogant class of new rich was now elbowing aside the patrician families in the mad scramble for power and prestige.
not surprisingly the ranks of the antitrust crusaders were frequently spearheaded by the best men genteel old family do gooders who were not radicals but conser vative defenders of their own vanishing inuence.
the gospel of wealth monarchs of yore invoked the divine right of kings and americas industrial plutocrats took a somewhat similar stance.
some candidly credited heavenly help.
godliness is in league with riches preached the episcopal bishop of massachusetts and hard sted john d rockefeller piously acknowledged that the good lord gave me my money steel baron andrew carnegie agreed that the wealthy entrusted with societys riches had to prove themselves morally responsible according to a gospel of wealth but most defenders of wide open capitalism relied more heavily on the survival of the ttest theories of eng lish philosopher herbert spencer and yale professor william graham sumner.
later mislabeled social darwinists these theorists argued that individuals won their stations in life by competing on the basis of their natural talents.
the wealthy and powerful had simply demonstrated greater abilities than the poor.
spencer and sumner owed less to eng lish evolutionary naturalist charles darwin who stressed the adaptation of organisms than to british laissez faire economists david ricardo and thomas malthus.
in fact spencer not darwin coined the phrase survival of the ttest the millionaires are a product of natural selection sumner declared.
in 1883 he asked what do social classes owe each other then answered his own question nothing.
some social darwinists later applied this theory to explain why some nations were more powerful than others or had the right to dominate lesser peoples often de ned by race.
self justication by the wealthy inevitably involved contempt for the poor.
many of the rich especially the chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 newly rich had pulled themselves up by their own bootstraps hence they concluded that those who stayed poor must be lazy and lacking in enterprise.
the reverend russell conwell of philadelphia became rich by delivering his lecture acres of diamonds thousands of times.
in it he charged there is not a poor person in the united states who was not made poor by his own shortcomings such attitudes were a formidable roadblock to social reform.
plutocracy like the earlier slavocracy took its stand rmly on the constitution.
the clause that gave congress sole jurisdiction over interstate commerce was a godsend to the monopolists their high priced lawyers used it time and again to thwart controls by the state legislatures.
giant trusts likewise sought refuge behind the fourteenth amendment which had been originally designed to protect the rights of the ex slaves as persons.
the courts ingeniously interpreted a corporation to be a legal person and decreed that as such it could not be deprived of its property by a state without due process of law see amendment xiv para.
1 in the appendix.
there is some questionable evidence that slippery corporation lawyers deliberately inserted this loophole when the fourteenth amendment was being fashioned in 1866.
great industrialists likewise sought to incorporate in easy states like new jersey where the restrictions on big business were mild or nonexistent.
for example the southern pacic railroad with much of its trackage in cal i fornia was incorporated in kentucky.
government tackles the trust evil at long last the masses of the people began to mobilize against monopoly.
they rst tried to control the trusts through state legislation as they had earlier attempted to curb the railroads.
failing here as before they were forced to appeal to congress.
after prolonged pulling and hauling the sherman anti trust act of 1890 was nally signed into law.
the sherman act atly forbade combinations in restraint of trade without any distinction between good trusts and bad trusts.
bigness not badness was the sin.
the law proved ineffective largely because it had only baby teeth or no teeth at all and because it contained legal loopholes through which clever corporation lawyers could wriggle.
but it was unexpectedly effective in one respect.
contrary to its original intent the new rich and the new immigrants a well to do family plays chess at its parlor table left while a tenement family does piecework around its kitchen table shelling nuts for commercial use right.
the young working girl seems to be snitching some nuts for herself.
the apparently growing gulf between the rich and the poor deeply worried reformers in the late nineteenth century.
they feared that democracy could not survive in the face of such gross inequality.
industry in the south industrial millionaires were condemned in the populist platform of 1892 the fruits of the toil of millions are boldly stolen to build up colossal fortunes for a few.
and the possessors of these in turn despise the republic and endanger liberty.
from the same prolic womb of governmental injustice we breed the two great classes tramps and millionaires.
it was used to curb labor unions or labor combinations that were deemed to be restraining trade.
early prosecutions of the trusts by the justice department under the sherman act of 1890 as it turned out were neither vigorous nor successful.
the decisions in seven of the rst eight cases presented by the attorney general were adverse to the government.
more new trusts were formed in the 1890s under president mckinley than during any other like period.
not until 1914 were the paper jaws of the sherman act tted with reasonably sharp teeth.
until then there was some question whether the government would control the trusts or the trusts the government.
but the iron grip of monopolistic corporations was being threatened.
a revolutionary new principle had been written into the law books by the sherman antitrust act of 1890 as well as by the interstate commerce act of 1887.
private greed should henceforth be subordinated to public need.
the south in the age of industry the industrial tidal wave that washed over the north after the civil war caused only feeble ripples in the backwater of the south.
as late as 1900 the south still produced a smaller percentage of the nations manufactured goods than it had before the civil war.
the plantation system had degenerated into a pattern of absentee landownership.
white and black sharecroppers now tilled the soil for a share of the crop or they became tenants in bondage to their landlords who controlled needed credit and supplies.
southern agriculture received a welcome boost in the 1880s when machine made cigarettes replaced the roll your own variety and tobacco consumption shot up.
james buchanan duke took full advantage of the new technology to mass produce the dainty cof n nails in 1890 in what was becoming a familiar pattern he absorbed his main competitors into the american tobacco company.
the cigarette czar later showed a virginia tobacco factory ca.
1880 the employment of women and children was a common practice in latenineteenth century american industry north as well as south.
chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 yet formidable obstacles lay in the path of southern industrialization.
one was the paper barrier of regional rate setting systems imposed by the northerndominated railroad interests.
railroads gave preferential rates to manufactured goods moving southward from the north but in the opposite direction they discriminated in favor of southern raw materials.
the net effect was to keep the south in a kind of servitude to the northeast as a supplier of raw materials to the manufacturing metropolis unable to develop a substantial industrial base of its own.
a bitter example of this economic discrimination against the south was the pittsburgh plus pricing system in the steel industry.
rich deposits of coal and iron ore near birmingham alabama worked by lowwage southern labor should have given steel manufacturers there a competitive edge especially in southern markets.
but the steel lords of pittsburgh brought pressure to bear on the compliant railroads.
as a result birmingham steel no matter where it was delivered was charged a ctional fee as if it had been shipped from pittsburgh.
this stunting of the souths natural economic advantages throttled the growth of the birmingham steel industry.
in manufacturing cotton textiles the south fared considerably better.
southerners had long resented shipping their ber to new eng land and now their cry was bring the mills to the cotton beginning about 1880 northern capitalists began to erect cotton mills in the south largely in response to tax benets and the prospect of cheap and nonunionized labor see figure 24 2 and figure 24 3.
henry w grady 1851 1889 editor of the atlanta constitution urged the new south to industrialize.
in a boston speech in 1889 he described the burial in georgia of a confederate veteran the south didnt furnish a thing on earth for that funeral but the corpse and the hole in the ground.
they buried him in a new york coat and a boston pair of shoes and a pair of breeches from chicago and a shirt from cincinnati leaving him nothing to carry into the next world with him to remind him of the country in which he lived and for which he fought for four years but the chill of blood in his veins and the marrow in his bones.
such generosity to trinity college near his birthplace in durham north carolina that the trustees gratefully changed its name to duke university.
industrialists tried to coax the agricultural south out of the elds and into the factories but with only modest success.
the region remained overwhelmingly rural.
prominent among the boosters of a new south was silver tongued henry w grady editor of the atlanta constitution.
he tirelessly exhorted the exconfederates to become georgia yankees and outplay the north at the commercial and industrial game.
spindles in cotton states by thousands spindles in new england by thousands 8 632 figure 24 2 cotton manufacturing moves south 1880 1980 textile manufacturing usually looms large in the early stages of industrial development.
in the later stages it gives way to higher technology businesses.
this trend can be seen here both in the migration of textile manufacturing to the southern united states and in the decline in the number of spindles in the united states as a whole since the 1930s as developing third world countries became major textile producers.
10 934 13 171 15 735 18 287 11 351 5 279 3 739 1 570 4 368 10 494 15 231 18 586 17 641 17 673 16 795 daily life in industrial america world cotton production 1903 bales of approx.
500 lbs in thousands other 5 801 the impact of the new industrial revolution on america china 7 1 200 russia 2 342 egypt 7 1 168 india 19 3 367 america 60 10 758 total 17 636 figure 24 3 world cotton production 1903 cotton manufacturing grew in the united states in the early twentieth century and raw cotton production reached higher levels than anywhere else in the world.
source john a todd the worlds cotton crops london a.
c black 1915 395 396.
the textile mills proved to be a mixed blessing to the economically blighted south.
they slowly wove an industrial thread into the fabric of southern life but at a considerable human cost.
cheap labor was the souths major attraction for potential investors and keeping labor cheap became almost a religion among southern industrialists.
the mills took root in the chronically depressed piedmont region of southern appalachia and came to dominate utterly the communities in which they were located.
rural southerners virtually all of them white for blacks were excluded from all but the most menial jobs in the mills poured out of the hills and hollows to seek employment in the hastily erected company mill towns.
entire families often derided as hillbillies or lintheads worked from dawn to dusk amid the whirring spindles.
they were paid at half the rate of their northern counterparts and often received their compensation in the form of credit at a company store to which they were habitually in debt.
but despite their depressed working conditions and poor pay many southerners saw employment in the mills as a salvation the rst steady jobs and wages they had ever known.
with many mills anxious to tap the cheap labor of women and children mill work often offered destitute farm fugitive families their only chance to remain together.
economic miracles wrought during the decades after the civil war enormously increased the wealth of the republic.
the standard of living rose sharply and wellfed american workers enjoyed more physical com forts than their counterparts in any other industrial nation.
urban centers mushroomed as the insatiable factories demanded more american labor and as immigrants swarmed like honeybees to the new jobs see map 24 2 and makers of america the poles pp.
early jeffersonian ideals were withering before the smudgy blasts from the smokestacks.
as agriculture declined in relation to manufacturing america could no longer aspire to be a nation of small freehold farms.
jeffersons concepts of free enterprise with neither help nor hindrance from washington were being thrown out the factory window.
tariffs had already provided assistance but the long arm of federal authority was now committed to decades of corporation curbing and trust busting older ways of life also wilted in the heat of the factory furnaces.
the very concept of time was revolutionized.
rural american migrants and peasant european immigrants used to living by the languid clock of nature now had to regiment their lives by the factory whistle.
the seemingly arbitrary discipline of industrial labor did not come easily and sometimes had to be forcibly taught.
one large corporation simultaneously instructed its polish immigrant workers in the eng lish language and in the obligations of factory work schedules i hear the whistle.
i must hurry.
i hear the ve minute whistle.
it is time to go into the shop.
i change my clothes and get ready to work.
the starting whistle blows.
i eat my lunch.
it is forbidden to eat until then.
i work until the whistle blows to quit.
i leave my place nice and clean.
i put all my clothes in the locker.
i must go home.
probably no single group was more profoundly affected by the new industrial age than women.
propelled into industry by recent inventions chiey the typewriter and the telephone switchboard millions of ag cu montana territory au au ag nevada c cu cu au california ag utah territory c colorado au ag cu o o pac i f ic ocean o arizona territory cu cu cu au ag cu 120w new mexico territory 30n o o o 110w products manufactured in 20 largest cities o texas o m exico o miss.
o o fe alabama n h rochester n y buffalo conn.
ocean 400 km.
florida o 100w mass.
gulf of mexico 90w n 80w natural resources iron and steel ag silver o oil petroleum printing and publishing au gold pb lead slaughtering and meatpacking c coal textiles cu copper mixed or other fe iron ore timber timber 20n states with 25 or more of employees in manufacturing map 24 2 american industry in 1900 by the end of the nineteenth century once rural america boasted the worlds largest industrial output a development with enormous consequences for politics diplomacy and family life.
stenographers and hello girls discovered new economic and social opportunities.
the gibson girl a magazine image of an independent and athletic new woman created in the 1890s by the artist charles dana gibson became the romantic ideal of the age.
for middle class women careers often meant delayed marriages and smaller families.
most women workers however toiled neither for independence nor for glamour but out of economic necessity.
they faced the same long hours and dangerous working conditions as did their mates and brothers and they earned less as wages for womens jobs were usually set below those for mens.
women canning shrimp 1893 long hours low pay and wretched working conditions were the common fate of women who labored not for pin money but to help support their families.
the family wage for the workingman was more a hope than a reality.
vt ontario georgia louisiana o o food beverage and tobacco processing mich detroit c o o flour milling foundry and machine shop products wisconsin o clothing xxx l boston providence r i o e milwaukee eri c new york l o iowa chicago pa cleveland brooklyn n j c nebraska o pittsburgh philadelphia ind.
c c ohio c c del.
illinois cincinnati c 70w md.
c c c w baltimore va kansas va c c st louis c c louisville c c o c missouri ky c n c o c tennessee o indian arkansas at l a n t i c s c.
territory minneapolis xxx wyoming territory maine l newark n uro au 40n san francisco dakota territory idaho territory jersey city p l su erior fe cu timber timb fe minn er h tim be r oregon canada l michigan tim be r washington territory ag pb cu interactive map examining the evidence the photography of lewis w hine he pell mell onrush of industrialization after the civil war spawned countless human abuses few more objectionable than the employment of children often in hazardous jobs.
for decades reformers tried to arouse public outrage against child labor and they made signicant headway at last with the help of photography especially the photographs of lewis w hine 1874 1940.
a native of wisconsin hine in 1908 became the staff photographer for the national child labor committee an orga ni zation committed to ending child labor.
this 1909 photo of young doffers whose job it was to remove fully wound bobbins from textile spinning machines is typical of hines work.
he shows the boys climbing dangerously on the whirling mechanism and his own caption for the photo names the mill bibb mill no.
1 macon georgia but not the boys as if to underline the impersonal dehumanizing nature of their work and the specic responsibilities of their employer.
his other subjects included child workers on colorado beet farms in pennsylvania coal mines and gulf coast sh canneries and in the glass tobacco and garment trades.
hines images contributed heavily to the eventual success of the campaign to end child labor in the new deal era.
he is also celebrated as one of the fathers of documentary photography.
why might hines graphic im t the clattering machine age likewise accentuated class division.
industrial buccaneers aunted bloated fortunes and their rags to riches spouses displayed glittering diamonds.
such extravagances evoked bitter criticism.
some of it was envious but much of it rose from a small but increasingly vocal group of socialists and other radicals many of whom were recent european immigrants.
the existence of an oligarchy of money was amply demonstrated by the fact that in 1900 about one tenth of the people owned nine tenths of the nations wealth.
ages have succeeded in stirring public opinion more powerfully than factual and statistical demonstrations of the evil of child labor.
given hines own reform objectives can his photographs or any socalled documentary images be taken at face value as literal accurate information about the past.
a nation of farmers and independent producers was becoming a nation of wage earners.
in 1860 half of all workers were self employed by the centurys end two of every three working americans depended on wages.
real wages were rising and times were good for workers who were working.
but with dependence on wages came vulnerability to the swings of the economy and the whims of the employer.
the fear of unemployment was never distant.
a breadwinners illness could mean catastrophe for an entire family.
nothing more sharply dened the growing difference between chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 can products radiated out all over the world notably the ve gallon kerosene can of the standard oil company.
the ag follows trade and empire tends to follow the ag a harsh lesson that america was soon to learn.
in unions there is strength gibson girl 1899 illustrator charles dana gibson created a sensation with his drawings of healthy athletic young women.
the image of the gibson girl inspired new standards of female fashion as the twentieth century opened and came to symbolize womens growing independence and assertiveness.
working class and middle class conditions of life than the precariousness of the laborers lot.
reformers struggled to introduce a mea sure of security job and wage protection and provision for temporary unemployment into the lives of the working class.
finally strong pressures for foreign trade developed as the tireless industrial machine threatened to saturate the domestic market.
aided by developments like the laying of a transatlantic telegraph in 1866 and the opening of the suez canal in 1869 international trade became ever faster cheaper and easier.
ameri the sweat of the laborer lubricated the vast new industrial machine.
yet the wage workers did not share proportionately with their employers in the benets of the age of big business.
the worker suggestive of the roman galley slave was becoming a lever puller in a giant mechanism.
individual originality and creativity were being stied and less value than ever before was being placed on manual skills.
before the civil war the worker might have toiled in a small plant whose owner hailed the employee in the morning by rst name and inquired after the familys health.
but now the factory hand was employed by a corporation depersonalized bodiless soulless and often conscienceless.
the directors knew the worker not and in fairness to their stockholders they were not inclined to engage in large scale private philanthropy.
new machines displaced employees and though in the long run more jobs were created than destroyed in the short run the manual worker was often hard hit.
a glutted labor market moreover severely handicapped wage earners.
employers could take advantage of the vast new railroad network and bring in unemployed workers from the four corners of the country and beyond to beat down high wage levels.
during the 1880s and 1890s several hundred thousand unskilled workers a year poured into the country from europe creating a labor market more favorable to the boss than the worker.
individual workers were powerless to battle singlehandedly against giant industry.
forced to organize and ght for basic rights they found the dice heavily loaded against them.
the corporation could dispense with the individual worker much more easily than the worker could dispense with the corporation.
employers could pool vast wealth through thousands of stockholders retain high priced lawyers buy up the local press and put pressure on the politicians.
they could import strikebreakers scabs and employ thugs to beat up labor organizers.
in 1886 jay gould reputedly boasted i can hire one half of the working class to kill the other half embattled labor unions of blackened coal miners were born in a company house nurtured by a high priced company store and buried in a company graveyard prematurely dead.
the middle class public annoyed by recurrent strikes grew deaf to the outcry of the worker.
american wages were perhaps the highest in the world although a dollar a day for pick and shovel labor does not now seem excessive.
carnegie and rockefeller had battled their way to the top and the view was common that the laborer could do likewise.
somehow the strike seemed like a foreign importation socialistic and hence unpatriotic.
big business might combine into trusts to raise prices but the worker must not combine into unions to raise wages.
unemployment seemed to be an act of god who somehow would take care of the laborer.
labor limps along breaker boys at south pittson pennsylvania 1911 photographer lewis hine captured the grimness of these mine helpers lives.
for hours they sat on benches above a moving belt breathing coal dust deep into their lungs and kicking large pieces of coal with their feet breaking the lumps to uniform size for shipment.
photographs like this one became icons of the reform crusade against child labor a campaign that succeeded only with the passage of the fair labor standards act in 1938.
corporations had still other weapons in their arsenals.
they could call upon the federal courts presided over by well fed and conser vative judges to issue injunctions ordering the strikers to cease striking.
if deance and disorder ensued the company could request the state and federal authorities to bring in troops.
employers could lock their doors against rebellious workers a procedure called the lockout and then starve them into submission.
they could compel them to sign ironclad oaths or yellow dog contracts both of which were solemn agreements not to join a labor union.
they could put the names of agitators on a black list and circulate it among fellow employers.
a corporation might even own the company town with its high priced grocery stores and easy credit.
often the worker sank into perpetual debt a status that strongly resembled serfdom.
countless thousands labor unions which had been few and disorga nized in 1861 were given a strong boost by the civil war.
this bloody con ict with its drain on human resources put more of a premium on labor and the mounting cost of living provided an urgent incentive to unionization.
by 1872 there were several hundred thousand orga nized workers and thirty two national unions representing such crafts as bricklayers typesetters and shoemakers.
the national labor union orga nized in 1866 represented a giant bootstride by workers.
one of the earliest national scale unions to organize in the americas or europe it aimed to unify workers across locales and trades to challenge their ever more powerful bosses.
the union lasted six years and attracted the impressive total of some 600 000 members including the skilled unskilled and farmers though in keeping with the times it excluded the chinese and made only nominal efforts to include women and blacks.
black workers orga nized their own colored national labor union as an adjunct but their support for the republican party and the persistent racism of white unionists prevented the two national unions from working together.
the national labor union agitated for the arbitration of industrial disputes and the eight hour workday winning the latter for government workers.
but the devastating depression of the 1870s dealt it a knockout blow.
labor was generally rocked back on its heels during the tumultuous years of the depression but it never completely toppled.
wage reductions in 1877 touched off such disruptive strikes on the railroads that nothing short of federal troops could restore order.
chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 the strike by robert koehler 1886 scenes like this were becoming more typical of american life in the late nineteenth century as industrialism advanced spectacularly and sometimes ruthlessly.
here koehler 1850 1917 shows an entire community of men women and children many of them apparently immigrant newcomers challenging the power of the boss the scene is tense but orderly though violence seems to be imminent as one striker reaches for a rock.
a new organization the knights of labor seized the torch dropped by the defunct national labor union see makers of america the knights of labor pp.
ofcially known as the noble and holy order of the knights of labor it began inauspiciously in 1869 as a secret society with a private ritual passwords and a special handshake.
secrecy which continued until 1881 would forestall possible reprisals by employers.
the knights of labor like the national labor union sought to include all workers in one big union their slogan was an injury to one is the concern of all a welcome mat was rolled out for the skilled and unskilled for men and women for whites and blacks some ninety thousand of whom joined.
the knights barred only nonproducers liquor dealers professional gamblers lawyers bankers and stockbrokers.
setting up broad goals the embattled knights refused to thrust their lance into politics.
instead they campaigned for economic and social reform including producers cooperatives and codes for safety and health.
voicing the war cry labor is the only creator of values and capital they frowned upon industrial warfare while fostering industrial arbitration.
the ordinary workday was then ten hours or more and the knights waged a determined campaign for the eighthour stint.
a favorite song of these years ran hurrah hurrah for labor it is mustering all its powers and shall march along to victory with the banner of eight hours.
under the eloquent but often erratic leadership of terence v powderly an irish american of nimble wit and uent tongue the knights won a number of strikes for the eight hour day.
when the knights staged a successful strike against jay goulds wabash railroad in 1885 membership mushroomed to about three quarters of a million workers.
the af of l unhorsing the knights of labor despite their outward success the knights were riding for a fall.
they became involved in a number of may day strikes in 1886 about half of which failed.
a focal point was chicago home to about eighty thousand knights.
the city was also honeycombed with a few hundred anarchists many of them foreign born who were advocating a violent overthrow of the american government.
tensions rapidly built up to the bloody haymarket square episode.
labor disorders had broken out and on may 4 1886 the chicago police advanced on a meeting called to protest alleged brutalities by the authorities.
suddenly a dynamite bomb was thrown that killed or injured several dozen people including police.
hysteria swept the windy city.
eight anarchists were rounded up although nobody proved that they had anything to do directly with the bomb.
but the judge and jury held that since they had preached incendiary doctrines they could be charged with conspiracy.
five were sentenced to death one of whom committed suicide and the other three were given stiff prison terms.
agitation for clemency mounted.
in 1892 some six years later john p altgeld a german born democrat of strong liberal tendencies was elected governor of illinois.
after studying the haymarket case exhaustively he pardoned the three survivors.
violent abuse was showered on him by conser vatives unstinted praise by those who thought the men innocent.
he was defeated for reelection and died a few years later in relative obscurity the eagle forgotten whatever the merits of the case altgeld displayed courage in opposing what he regarded as a gross injustice.
the haymarket square bomb helped blow the props from under the knights of labor.
they were associated in the public mind though mistakenly with the anarchists.
the eight hour movement suffered correspondingly and subsequent strikes by the knights met with scant success.
another fatal handicap of the knights was their inclusion of both skilled and unskilled workers.
unskilled labor could easily be replaced by strikebreaking scabs high class craft unionists who enjoyed a semimonopoly of skills could not readily be supplanted and hence enjoyed a superior bargaining position.
they nally wearied of sacricing this advantage on the altar of solidarity with their unskilled coworkers and sought refuge in a federation of exclusively skilled craft unions the american federation of labor.
the desertion of the skilled craft unionists dealt the knights a body blow.
by the 1890s they had melted away to 100 000 members and these gradually fused with other protest groups of that decade.
the af of l to the fore the elitist american federation of labor born in 1886 was largely the brainchild of squat square jawed samuel gompers.
this colorful jewish cigar maker born in a london tenement and removed from school at age ten was brought to america when thirteen.
taking his turn at reading informative literature to fellow cigar makers in new york he was pressed into overtime ser vice because of his strong voice.
rising spectacularly in the labor ranks he was elected president of the american federation of labor every year except one from 1886 to 1924.
signicantly the american federation of labor was just what it called itself a federation.
it consisted of an association of self governing national unions each of which kept its independence with the af of l unifying overall strategy.
no individual laborer could join the central orga ni zation.
gompers adopted a down to earth approach softpedaling attempts to engineer sweeping social reform.
a bitter foe of socialism he shunned politics for economic strategies and goals.
gompers had no quarrel with capitalism but he demanded a fairer share for labor.
all he wanted he said was more promoting what he called a pure and simple unionism he sought better wages hours and working conditions.
unlike the somewhat utopian knights of labor he was not concerned with the sweet by and by but with the bitter here and now.
a major goal of gompers was the trade agreement authorizing the closed shop or all union labor.
his chief weapons were the walkout and the boycott enforced by we dont patronize signs.
the stronger craft unions of the federation by pooling funds were able to amass a war chest that would enable them to ride out prolonged strikes.
the af of l thus established itself on solid but narrow foundations.
although attempting to speak for all workers it fell far short of being representative of them.
composed of skilled craftsmen like the carpenters and the bricklayers it was willing to let unskilled makers of america the knights the great africanof labor american migration i t was 1875.
the young worker was guided into a room where his blindfold was removed.
surrounding him were a dozen men their faces covered by hoods.
one of the masked gures solemnly asked three questions do you believe in god do you gain your bread by the sweat of your brow are you willing to take a solemn vow binding you to secrecy obedience and mutual assistance yes came the reply.
the men doffed their hoods and joined hands in a circle.
their leader the master workman declared on behalf of the toiling millions of earth i welcome you to this sanctuary dedicated to the ser vice of god by serving humanity then the entire group burst into song storm the fort ye knights of labor battle for your cause equal rights for every neighbor down with tyrant laws.
the carefully staged pageantry then drew to a close.
the worker was now a full edged member of the knights of labor.
he had just joined a loose knit orga ni zation of some 100 000 working people soon to swell to nearly a million after the knights led several successful strikes in the 1880s.
the rst women knights joined in 1881 when an all female local was established in the shoe trade in philadelphia and one in ten members was a woman by 1885.
women were organizers too.
fiery mary harris mother jones got her start agitating for the knights in the illinois coalelds.
the rst all black local was founded among coal miners in ottumwa iowa.
the knights preached tolerance and the solidarity of all working men and women and they meant it but even their inclusionary spirit had its limits.
chinese workers were barred from joining and the knights vigorously supported the chinese exclusion act of 1882.
they also championed the contract labor law of 1885 which aimed to restrain competition from low wage immigrant workers though immigrants especially the irish were themselves disproportionately represented among the knights membership.
terence v powderly born to irish immigrant parents in carbondale pennsylvania in 1849 became the grand master workman of the knights in 1879.
slightly built with mild blue eyes behind glasses he had dropped out of school at age thirteen to take a job guarding railroad track switches and rose to mayor of scranton pennsylvania in the 1870s.
in 1894 he became a lawyer despite the fact that the knights excluded lawyers from membership.
a complex colorful and sometimes cynical man he denounced the multimillionaires for laying the foundation for their colossal fortunes on the bodies and souls of living men in the eyes of powderly and his knights only the economic and political independence of american workers could preserve republican traditions and institutions from corruption by monopolists and other parasites powderly denounced wage slavery and dedicated the knights to achieving the cooperative commonwealth shunning socialism which advocated government ownership of the means of production powderly urged laborers to save enough from their wages to purchase mines factories railroads and stores.
they would thereby create a kind of toilers utopia because labor would own and operate those enterprises workers mother jones machinist frank j ferrell black delegate of district assembly no.
49 introducing general master workman terence powderly to the tenth annual convention of the knights of labor held in richmond virginia 1886 themselves would be owner producers and the con ict between labor and capital would evaporate.
the knights actually did operate a few businesses including coal mines in indiana but all eventually failed.
powderlys vision of the cooperative commonwealth reected the persistent dream of many nineteenth century american workers that they would all one day become producers.
as expectant capitalists they lacked class consciousness that is a sense of themselves as a permanent working class that must organize to coax what benets it could out of the capitalist system.
samuel gompers by contrast accepted the framework of american capitalism and his american federation of labor sought to work within that framework not to overturn it.
gomperss conser vative strategy not powderlys utopian dream eventually carried the day.
the swift decline of the knights in the 1890s underscored the obsolescence of their unrealistic even naive view that a bygone age of independent producers could be restored.
yet the knights commitment to unifying all workers in one union regardless of race gender ethnicity or skill level provided a blueprint for the eventual success of similarly committed unions like the congress of industrial organizations in the 1930s.
women delegates to the 1886 convention of the knights of labor chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 samuel gompers 1850 1924 gompers second from the right in the rst row shown here marching in a labor demonstration in washington d c in 1919 once declared show me the country in which there are no strikes and ill show you that country in which there is no liberty laborers including women and especially blacks fend for themselves.
though hard pressed by big industry the federation was basically nonpolitical.
but it did attempt to persuade members to reward friends and punish foes at the polls.
the af of l weathered the panic of 1893 reasonably well and by 1900 it could boast a membership of 500 000.
critics referred to it with questionable accuracy as the labor trust labor disorders continued peppering the years from 1881 to 1900 with a total of over 23 000 strikes.
these disturbances involved 6 610 000 workers with a total loss to both employers and employees of 450 million.
the strikers lost about half their strikes and won or compromised the remainder.
perhaps the gravest weakness of orga nized labor was that it still embraced only a small minority of all working people about 3 percent in 1900.
but attitudes toward labor had begun to change perceptibly by 1900.
the public was beginning to concede the right of workers to organize to bargain collectively and to strike.
as a sign of the times labor day was made a legal holiday by act of congress in 1894.
a few enlightened industrialists had come to perceive the wisdom of avoiding costly economic warfare by bargaining with the unions and signing agreements.
but the vast majority of employers continued to ght orga nized labor which achieved its grudging gains only after recurrent strikes and frequent reverses.
nothing was handed to it on a silver platter.
management still held the whip hand and several trouble fraught decades were to pass before labor was to gain a position of relative equality with capital.
if the age of big business had dawned the age of big labor was still some distance over the horizon.
varying viewpoints chronology congress authorizes transcontinental railroad edison invents electric light national labor union orga nized first working transatlantic telegraph cable haymarket square bombing wabash case american federation of labor formed transcontinental railroad joined near ogden utah knights of labor orga nized suez canal completed interstate commerce act sherman anti trust act united states steel corporation formed standard oil company orga nized bell invents telephone key terms wabash st louis pacic railroad company v illinois 573 interstate commerce act 573 vertical integration 575 horizontal integration 575 trust 575 interlocking directorates 575 people to know standard oil company 578 social darwinists 579 sherman anti trust act 580 national labor union 587 knights of labor 588 haymarket square 589 american federation of labor 589 closed shop 589 cornelius vanderbilt alexander graham bell thomas alva edison andrew carnegie john d rockefeller samuel gompers industrialization boon or blight.
t he capitalists who forged an industrial america in the late nineteenth century were once called captains of industry a respectful title that bespoke the awe due their wondrous material accomplishments.
but these economic innovators have never been universally admired.
during the great depression of the 1930s when the entire industrial order they had created seemed to have collapsed utterly it was fashionable to speak of them as robber barons a term implying scorn for their high handed methods.
this sneer often issued from the lips and pens of leftist critics like matthew josephson who sympathized with the working classes that were allegedly brutalized by the factory system.
criticism has also come from writers nostalgic for a preindustrial past.
these critics believe that industrialization stripped away the traditions values and pride of native farmers and immigrant craftspeople.
chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 conceding that economic development elevated the material standard of living for working americans this interpretation contends that the industrial revolution diminished their spiritual quality of life accordingly historians like herbert gutman and david montgomery portray labors struggle for control of the workplace as the central drama of industrial expansion.
nevertheless even these historians concede that class based protest has never been as powerful a force in the united states as in certain european countries.
many historians believe that this is so because greater social mobility in america dampened class tensions.
the french observer alexis de tocqueville noted in the 1830s that america had few huge inherited fortunes and that most of its wealthy men were self made.
for two centuries a majority of americans have believed that greater opportunity distinguished the new world from the old.
in the 1960s historians led by stephan thernstrom began to test this long standing belief.
look ing at such factors as occupation wealth and geographic mobility they tried to gauge the nature and extent of social mobility in the united states.
most of these historians concluded that although relatively few americans made rags to riches leaps like those heralded in the horatio alger stories large numbers experienced small improvements in their economic and social status.
few sons of laborers became corporate tycoons but many more became line bosses and white collar clerks.
these studies also have found that race and ethnicity often affected ones chances for success.
for instance the children and grandchildren of jewish immigrants tended to rise faster in the professions than americans of italian and irish descent.
throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries blacks lagged far behind other groups in almost every category.
in recent years such studies have been criticized by certain historians who point out the difculties involved in de ning social status.
for instance some white collar clerical workers received lower wages than manual laborers did.
were they higher or lower on the social scale.
furthermore james henretta has pointed out that different groups de ned success differently whereas jewish immigrants often struggled to give their sons professional educations the irish put more emphasis on acquiring land and the italians on building small family run businesses.
meanwhile leftist historians such as michael katz have argued that the degree of social mobility in america has been overrated.
these historians argue that industrial capitalism created two classes a working class that sold its labor and a business class that controlled resources and bought labor.
although most americans took small steps upward they generally remained within the class in which they began.
thus these historians argue the inequality of a capitalistic class system persisted in americas seemingly uid society.
to learn more edward l ayers the promise of the new south life after reconstruction 1992 david h bain empire express building the first transcontinental railroad 1999 sven beckert the monied metropolis new york city and the consolidation of the american bourgeoisie 1850 1896 2001 alfred d chandler jr the visible hand the managerial revolution in american business 1978 james green death in the haymarket a story of chicago the first labor movement and the bombing that divided gilded age america 2006 richard hofstadter social darwinism in american thought 1860 1915 rev.
ed 1955 tera w hunter to joy my freedom southern black womens lives and labors after the civil war 1997 alice kessler harris out to work a history of wageearning women in the united states 1982 david montgomery the fall of the house of labor the workplace the state and american labor activism 1865 1925 1987 daniel t rodgers the work ethic in industrial america 1850 1920 1978 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at america moves to the city 1865 1900 what shall we do with our great cities.
what will our great cities do with us.
t he question.
does not concern the city alone.
the whole country is affected.
by the condition of its great cities.
b orn in the country america moved to the city in the decades following the civil war.
by the year 1900 the united states upsurging population nearly doubled from its level of some 40 million souls enumerated in the census of 1870.
yet in the very same period the population of american cities tripled.
by the end of the nineteenth century four out of ten americans were city dwellers in striking contrast to the rustic population of stagecoach days.
this cityward drift affected not only the united states but the entire industrializing world.
european peasants pushed off the land in part by competition from cheap american foodstuffs were pulled into cities in both europe and america by the new lure of industrial jobs.
a revolution in american agriculture thus fed the industrial and urban revolutions in europe as well as in the united states.
the urban frontier the growth of american metropolises was spectacular.
in 1860 no city in the united states could boast a million inhabitants by 1890 new york chicago and philadelphia had vaulted past the million mark.
by 1900 new york with some 3 5 million people was the secondlargest city in the world outranked only by london.
throughout the world cities were exploding.
london paris berlin tokyo moscow mexico city calcutta and shanghai all doubled or tripled in size between 1850 and 1900.
the population of buenos aires multiplied by more than ten see map 25 1.
american cities grew both up and out.
the cloudbrushing skyscraper allowed more people and workplaces to be packed onto a parcel of land.
appearing this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 side.
embracing mountains plateaus deserts and plains it was the habitat of the indian the buffalo the wild horse the prairie dog and the coyote.
twenty ve years later that is by 1890 the entire domain had been carved into states and the four territories of utah arizona new mexico and indian territory or oklahoma.
pioneers ung themselves greedily on this enormous prize as if to ravish it.
probably never before in human experience had so huge an area been transformed so rapidly.
the clash of cultures on the plains native americans numbered about 360 000 in 1860 many of them scattered about the vast grasslands of the trans missouri west.
but to their eternal misfortune the indians stood in the path of the advancing white pioneers.
an inevitable clash loomed between an acquisitive industrializing nation and the indians lifeways highly evolved over centuries to adapt to the demanding environment of the sparsely watered western plains.
migration and con ict and sometimes dramatic cultural change were no strangers in the arid west even before the whites began to arrive.
the comanches had driven the apaches off the central plains into the upper rio grande valley in the eighteenth century.
the buffalo hunt by frederic remington 1890 a new yorker who rst went west at the age of nineteen as a cowboy and ranch cook remington 1861 1909 became the foremost artist of the vanishing way of life of the old far west.
once a common sight on the high plains the kind of buffalo kill that remington records here was a great rarity by the time he painted this scene in 1890.
the once vast herds of bison had long since been reduced to a pitiful few by the white mans ries and the increasingly concentrated use of the land by ever more constricted indians.
harried by the mandans and chippewas the cheyenne had abandoned their villages along the upper reaches of the mississippi and missouri rivers in the century before the civil war.
the sioux displaced from the great lakes woodlands in the late eighteenth century emerged onto the plains to prey upon the crows kiowas and pawnees.
mounted on spanish introduced horses peoples like the cheyenne and the sioux transformed themselves within just a few generations from foot traveling crop growing villagers to wide ranging nomadic traders and deadly efcient buffalo hunters so deadly that they threatened to extinguish the vast bison herds that had lured them onto the plains in the rst place.
when white soldiers and settlers edged onto the plains in the decades just before the civil war they accelerated a fateful cycle that exacerbated already erce enmities among the indians and ultimately undermined the foundations of native american culture.
white intruders unwittingly spread cholera typhoid and smallpox among the native peoples of the plains with devastating results.
equally harmful whites put further pressure on the steadily shrinking bison population by hunting and by grazing their own livestock on the prairie grasses.
as the once mammoth buffalo herds dwindled warfare intensied among the plains tribes for ever scarcer hunting grounds.
i am traveling all over this country and am cutting the trees of my brothers an arikara indian told a u s army ofcer indians in the west pawnee indians in front of their lodge ca.
1868 the pawnees of central nebraska never made war on the united states which they regarded as an ally in their own struggles against the marauding sioux.
along the platte river in 1835.
i am kill ing their buffalo before my friends arrive so that when they come up they can nd no buffalo the federal government tried to pacify the plains indians by signing treaties with the chiefs of various as early as the coronado expedition in 1541 spanish explorers marveled at the plains indians reliance on the buffalo with the skins the indians build their houses with the skins they clothe and shoe themselves from the skins they make ropes and also obtain wool.
from the sinews they make thread with which they sew their clothing and likewise their tents.
from the bones they shape awls and the dung they use for rewood since there is no fuel in all that land.
the bladders serve as jugs and drinking vessels.
they sustain themselves on the esh of the animals eating it slightly roasted and sometimes uncooked.
taking it in their teeth they pull with one hand with the other they hold a large int knife and cut off mouthfuls swallowing it half chewed like birds.
they eat raw fat without warming it.
tribes at fort laramie in 1851 and at fort atkinson in 1853.
the treaties marked the beginnings of the reservation system in the west.
they established boundaries for the territory of each tribe and attempted to separate the indians into two great colonies to the north and south of a corridor of intended white settlement.
but the white treaty makers misunderstood both indian government and indian society.
tribes and chiefs were often ctions of the white imagination which could not grasp the fact that many native americans living in scattered bands recognized only the authority of their immediate families or perhaps a band elder.
and the nomadic culture of the plains indians was utterly alien to the concept of living out ones life in the con nement of a de ned territory.
one disheartened indian complained to the white sioux commission created by congress tell your people that since the great father promised that we should never be removed we have been moved ve times.
i think you had better put the indians on wheels and you can run them about wherever you wish.
chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 in the 1860s the federal government intensied this policy and herded the indians into still smaller connes principally the great sioux reservation in dakota territory and indian territory in present day oklahoma into which dozens of southern plains tribes were forced.
the indians surrendered their ancestral lands only when they had received solemn promises from washington that they would be left alone and provided with food clothing and other supplies.
regrettably the federal indian agents were often corrupt.
they palmed off moth eaten blankets spoiled beef and other defective provisions on the friendless indians.
one of these cheating ofcials on an annual salary of 1 500 re turned home after four years with an estimated savings of 50 000.
for more than a decade after the civil war erce warfare between indians and the u s army raged in various parts of the west see map 26 1.
army troops many of them recent immigrants who had ironically ed europe to avoid military ser vice met formidable adversaries in the plains indians whose superb horsemanship gave them baf ing mobility.
fully one fth of all u s army personnel on the frontier were african american dubbed buffalo soldiers by the indians supposedly because of the resemblance of their hair to the bisons furry coat.
map 26 1 indian wars 1860 1890 surrendering in 1877 chief joseph of the nez perce declared our chiefs are killed.
the old men are all dead.
the little children are freezing to death.
i want to have time to look for my children.
hear me my chiefs.
my heart is sick and sad.
from where the sun now stands i will ght no more forever c a n a da ft colville ft townsend battle of bear paw mountain 1877 seattle portland ft harney ak er ft reno.
ft hall santa fe ra d ft craig camp grant massacre 1871 r ft sumner 120w canyon de los embudos 1886 geronimo escapes.
major indian battle 110w ft reno arkansas red r miss.
fort worth texas ri o tenn jacksboro skeleton canyon 1886 geronimo surrenders.
n ky arkansas r red river war 1874 1875 m e x ico la.
30n austin 90w san antonio 100w ala waco ft quitman de fort bisbee indian terr.
an gr chief josephs route kiowa comanche ft crittenden missouri r arapaho pi ft garland ind.
ill southern cheyenne arizona terr.
new mexico terr.
amarillo gila m is ft riley massacre kansas topeka ft larned dodge city wichita ft lyon ft crawford canyon de chelly salt river canyon 1872 phoenix 40n lincoln sip san diego navajo iowa sis los angeles lo co r r i r s ou mis california las vegas o.
platte r ft kearney colorado city mich ft randall s cedar city cheyenne wisconsin colorado denver sand creek ft cameron nevada san jose ft ridgely wounded ft niobrara knee 1890 nebraska in utah terr.
arapaho ta salt lake city ft churchill sonoma austin sacramento paiute san francisco esmeralda ft laramie un ft halleck carson city cheyenne ft bridger mcdermit minn ft sully b lac k h i lls wyoming bannock shoshone ft ft bidwell ft abercrombie s dak.
ft meade mo coast modoc little bighorn idaho sn ft klamath bismarck sioux ft yates y nez perce oregon n dak.
montana ck ran ft berthold ft lapwaj columbia r ro ges washington pacific ocean interactive map g ulf of mexico 300 km.
the indian wars receding native population a young lieutenant told colonel chivington that to attack the indians would be a violation of pledges the indian wars in the west were often savage clashes.
aggressive whites sometimes shot peaceful indians on sight just to make sure they would give no trouble.
at sand creek colorado in 1864 colonel j m chivingtons militia massacred in cold blood some four hundred indians who apparently thought they had been promised immunity.
women were shot praying for mercy children had their brains dashed out and braves were tortured scalped and unspeakably mutilated.
cruelty begot cruelty.
in 1866 a sioux war party attempting to block construction of the bozeman trail to the montana goldelds ambushed captain william j fettermans command of eighty one soldiers and civilians in wyomings bighorn mountains.
the indians left not a single survivor and grotesquely mutilated the corpses.
one troopers face was spitted with 105 arrows.
george armstrong custer the buckskin clad boy general of civil war fame now demoted to colonel and turned indian ghter wrote that fettermans annihilation awakened a bitter feeling toward the savage perpetrators the cycle of ferocious warfare intensied.
his reply was bringing his st down close to my face damn any man who sympathizes with indians i told him what pledges were given the indians.
he replied that he had come to kill indians and believed it to be honorable to kill indians under any and all circumstances the fetterman massacre led to one of the few though short lived indian triumphs in the plains wars the battle of the little bighorn.
in another treaty of fort laramie signed in 1868 the government abandoned the bozeman trail.
the sprawling great sioux reservation was guaranteed to the sioux tribes.
but in 1874 a new round of warfare with the plains indians began when custer led a scientic expedition into the black hills of south dakota part of the sioux reservation and announced that he had discovered gold.
hordes of greedy gold seekers swarmed into the sioux battle of the little big horn by amos bad heart bull this depiction of the battle by an oglala sioux tribal historian and artist shows crazy horse in spotted war paint center ring on a trooper of custers 7th cavalry.
the ground is littered with the bodies of dead soldiers.
chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 lands.
the aggrieved sioux aided by the cheyenne and arapaho indians took to the warpath inspired by the inuential and wily sitting bull.
colonel custers 7th cavalry nearly half of them immigrants set out to suppress the indians and to return them to the reservation.
attacking what turned out to be a superior force of some 2 500 well armed warriors camped along the little bighorn river in presentday montana the white chief with yellow hair and geronimo ca.
1823 1909 also known by his apache name goyahkla one who yawns in 1851 mexican troops killed geronimos mother and wife and three of his children initiating his lifelong hatred of mexicans.
ironically in later life when he repeatedly ed the intolerable connement of reservations in the united states he sought refuge and freedom in mexico.
persuaded at last to surrender to american authorities in 1886 he spent the remainder of his life on reservations in florida alabama and oklahoma.
about 250 ofcers and men were completely wiped out in 1876 when two supporting columns failed to come to their rescue.
the indians victory was short lived.
in a series of battles across the northern plains in the ensuing months the u s army relentlessly hunted down the indians who had humiliated custer.
one band of nez perce indians in northeastern oregon were goaded into daring ight in 1877 when u s authorities tried to herd them onto a reservation.
chief joseph nally surrendered his breakaway band of some seven hundred indians after a tortuous seventeenhundred mile three month trek across the continental divide toward canada.
there joseph hoped to rendezvous with sitting bull who had taken refuge north of the border after the battle of the little bighorn.
betrayed into believing they would be returned to their ancestral lands in idaho the nez perces instead were sent to a dusty reservation in kansas where 40 percent of them perished from disease.
the survivors were eventually allowed to return to idaho.
fierce apache tribes of arizona and new mexico were the most difcult to subdue.
led by geronimo whose eyes blazed hatred of the whites they were pursued into mexico by federal troops using the sunashing heliograph a communication device that impressed the indians as big medicine scattered remnants of the warriors were nally persuaded to surrender after the apache women had been exiled to florida.
the apaches ultimately became successful farmers in oklahoma.
this relentless re and sword policy of the whites at last shattered the spirit of the indians.
the vanquished native americans were nally ghettoized on reservations where they could theoretically preserve their cultural autonomy but were in fact compelled to eke out a sullen existence as wards of the government.
their white masters had at last discovered that the indians were much cheaper to feed than to ght.
even so for many decades they were almost ignored to death.
the taming of the indians was engineered by a number of factors.
of cardinal importance was the federal governments willingness to back its land claims with military force.
almost as critical was the railroad which shot an iron arrow through the heart of the west.
locomotives could bring out unlimited numbers of troops farmers cattlemen sheepherders and settlers.
the indians were also ravaged by the white peoples diseases to which they showed little resistance and by their rewater which they could resist even less.
above all the virtual extermination of the buffalo doomed the plains indians nomadic way of life.
federal indian policy bellowing herds of bison tens of millions of buffalo described by early spaniards as hunchback cows blackened the western prairies when white americans rst arrived.
these shaggy lumbering animals were the staff of life for native americans see makers of america the plains indians pp.
their esh provided food their dried dung provided fuel buffalo chips their hides provided clothing lariats and harnesses.
when the civil war closed some 15 million of these meaty beasts were still grazing on the western plains.
in 1868 a kansas pacic locomotive had to wait eight hours for a herd to amble across the tracks.
much of the food supply of the railroad construction gangs came from leathery buffalo steaks.
william buffalo bill cody sinewy telescope eyed and a crack shot killed over 4 000 animals in eighteen months while employed by the kansas pacic.
with the building of the railroad the massacre of the herds began in deadly earnest.
the creatures were slain for their hides for their tongues or a few other choice cuts or for sheer amusement.
sportsmen on lurching railroad trains would lean out the windows and blaze away at the animals to satisfy their lust for slaughter or excitement.
such wholesale butchery left fewer than a thousand buffalo alive by 1885 and the once numerous beasts were in danger of complete extinction.
the whole story is a shocking example of the greed and waste that accompanied the conquest of the continent.
the end of the trail by the 1880s the national conscience began to stir uneasily over the plight of the indians.
helen hunt jackson a massachusetts writer of childrens literature pricked the moral sense of americans in 1881 when she published a century of dishonor.
the book chronicled the sorry record of government ruthlessness and chicanery in dealing with the indians.
her later novel ramona 1884 a love story about discrimination against cal i fornia indians sold some 600 000 copies and further inspired sympathy for the indians.
debate seesawed.
humanitarians wanted to treat the indians kindly and persuade them thereby to walk the white mans road yet hard liners insisted on the current policy of forced containment and brutal punishment.
neither side showed much respect for civil war veteran and long time indian ghter general philip sheridan 1831 1888 reected on the wars against the indians we took away their country and their means of support broke up their mode of living their habits of life introduced disease and decay among them and it was for this and against this they made war.
could anyone expect less.
native american culture.
christian reformers who often administered educational facilities on the reservations sometimes withheld food to force the indians to give up their tribal religions and assimilate to white society.
in 1884 these zealous white souls joined with military men in successfully persuading the federal govern ment to outlaw the sacred sun dance.
when the ghost dance cult later spread to the dakota sioux the army bloodily stamped it out in 1890 at the so called battle of wounded knee.
in the ghting thus provoked an estimated two hundred indian men women and children were killed as well as twenty nine invading soldiers.
the misbegotten offspring of the movement to reform indian policy was the dawes severalty act of 1887.
reecting the forced civilization views of the reformers the act dissolved many tribes as legal entities wiped out tribal ownership of land and set up individual indian family heads with 160 free acres.
if the indians behaved themselves like good white settlers they would get full title to their holdings as well as citizenship in twenty ve years.
the probationary period was later extended but full citizenship was granted to all indians in 1924.
former reservation land not allotted to the indians under the dawes act was to be sold to railroads and white settlers with the proceeds used by the federal government to educate and civilize the native peoples.
in 1879 the government had already funded the carlisle indian school in pennsylvania where native american children separated from their tribes were taught eng lish and inculcated with white values and customs.
kill the indian and save the man was the school founders motto.
in the 1890s the government expanded its network of indian boarding schools and sent eld matrons to the reservations to teach makers of america plains thethe great africanindians american migration t he last of the native peoples of north america to bow before the military might of the whites the indians of the northern great plains long defended their lands and their ways of life against the american cavalry.
after the end of the indian wars toward the close of the nineteenth century the plains tribes struggled on jealously guarding their communities against white encroachment.
crowded onto reservations subject to ever changing federal indian policies assailed by corrupt settlers and indian agents the plains indians have nonetheless preserved much of their ancestral culture to this day.
before europeans rst appeared in north america in the sixteenth century the vast plains from northern texas to saskatchewan were home to some thirty different tribes.
there was no typical plains indian each tribe spoke a distinct language practiced its own religion and formed its own government.
when members of different bands met on the prairies communication depended on a special sign language.
indians had rst trod the arid plains to pursue sprawling herds of antelope elk and especially buf a comanche village by george catlin 1834 falo all important sources of protein.
but these early peoples of the plains were not exclusively hunters the women were expert farmers coaxing lush gardens of pumpkins squash corn and beans from the dry but fertile soil.
still the shaggy pelt and heavy esh of the buffalo constituted the staff of life on the plains.
hunted by men the great bison were butchered by women who used every part of the beast.
they fashioned horns and hooves into spoons and intestines into containers.
they stretched sinews into strong bowstrings and wove buffalo hair into ropes.
meat not immediately eaten was pounded into pemmican thin strips of smoked or sun dried buffalo esh mixed with berries and stuffed into rawhide bags.
the nomadic plains indians sought what shelter they could in small bands throughout the winter gathering together in summer for religious ceremonies socializing and communal buffalo hunts.
at rst these seasonal migrations required arduous loading and carting.
the indians carried all their possessions or heaped them on wheelless carts called travois which were dragged by dogs their only beasts of burden.
a sioux carving horses were essential to the culture of the plains indians and they often carved likenesses of horses killed in battle.
note the red stained holes depicting this horses wounds.
right a cheyenne cradleboard for carrying a baby then in the sixteenth century the mounted spanish conquistadores ventured into the new world.
their steeds some of them escaping to become mustangs the wild horses of the american west and others acquired by the indians in trade quickly spread over the plains.
the horse revolutionized indian societies for a time turning the plains tribes into efcient hunting machines that promised to banish hunger from the prairies.
but horse mounted hunters turned out to be too efcient overhunting made buffalo ever harder to nd.
the plains pony also ignited a furious competition for grazing lands for trade goods and for ever more horses so that wars of aggression and of revenge became increasingly bitter and frequent.
the european invasion soon eclipsed the shortlived era of the horse.
after many battles the plains indians found themselves crammed together on tiny chan ch ui tein teton sioux woman by karl bodmer ca.
1830s bodmer a german artist painted this womans portrait during an expedition to the great plains.
her name means woman of the crow nation which seems to suggest that she was taken captive from the siouxs mortal enemies the crows.
reservations clinging with tired but determined ngers to their traditions.
although much of plains indian culture persists to this day the indians free ranging way of life has passed into memory.
as black elk an oglala sioux put it once we were happy in our own country and we were seldom hungry for then the twoleggeds and the four leggeds lived together like relatives and there was plenty for them and for us.
but then the wasichus white people came and they made little islands for us.
and always these islands are becoming smaller for around them surges the gnawing ood of wasichus chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 lakotas receiving rations at standing rock reservation ca.
1881 once the scourge of the plains the lakota part of the sioux tribes were reduced by the 1890s to the humiliation of living on government handouts.
native american women the art of sewing and to preach the virtues of chastity and hygiene.
the dawes act struck directly at tribal orga ni zation and tried to make rugged individualists out of the indians.
this legislation ignored the inherent reliance of traditional indian culture on tribally held land liter ally pulling the land out from under them.
by 1900 indians had lost 50 percent of the 156 million acres they had held just two decades earlier see map 26 2.
the forced assimilation doctrine of the dawes act remained the cornerstone of the governments ofcial indian policy for nearly half a century until the indian the indian removal act of 1830 eliminated all indian land rights east of the mississippi river.
the dawes act in 1887 changed common tribal lands into individual allotments.
nearly 90 million acres of tribal land were lost before the act was repealed in 1932.
since then through court battles and federal recognition of old claims some indian lands have been restored to the tribes.
indian lands present day boundaries white settlement map 26 2 vanishing lands once masters of the continent native americans have been squeezed into just 2 percent of u s territory.
source copyright 2000 by the new york times.
reprinted by permission.
interactive map the mining and cattle frontiers the indian spokesman plenty coups 1848 1932 said in 1909 i see no longer the curling smoke rising from our lodge poles.
i hear no longer the songs of the women as they prepare the meal.
the antelope have gone the buffalo wallows are empty.
only the wail of the coyote is heard.
the white mans medicine is stronger than ours.
we are like birds with a broken wing.
reorga ni zation act the indian new deal of 1934 partially reversed the individualistic approach and belatedly tried to restore the tribal basis of indian life see p 838.
under these new federal policies defective though they were the indian population started to mount slowly.
the total number had been reduced by 1887 to about 243 000 the result of bullets bottles and bacteria but the census of 2000 counted more than 1 5 million native americans urban and rural.
mining from dishpan to ore breaker the conquest of the indians and the coming of the railroad were life giving boons to the mining frontier.
the golden gravel of cal i fornia continued to yield pay dirt and in 1858 an electrifying discovery convulsed colorado.
avid fty niners or pikes peakers rushed west to rip at the ramparts of the rockies.
but there were more miners than minerals and many goldgrubbers with pikes peak or bust inscribed on the canvas of their covered wagons creaked wearily back with the added inscription busted by gosh yet countless bearded fortune seekers stayed on some to strip away the silver deposits others to extract nonmetallic wealth from the earth in the form of golden grain.
fifty niners also poured feverishly into nevada in 1859 after the fabulous comstock lode had been uncovered.
a fantastic amount of gold and silver worth more than 340 million was mined by the kings of the comstock from 1860 to 1890.
the scantily populated state of nevada child of the comstock lode was prematurely railroaded into the union in 1864 partly to provide three electoral votes for president lincoln.
hydraulic mining nevada 1866 once miners had panned and dredged the most accessible gold from streambeds they ripped open the earth itself in search of other deposits.
highpressure streams of water delivered through huge nozzles called monitors washed away entire hillsides and created the nightmarish debris strewn landscapes that still scar western mountains and foothills.
chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 smaller lucky strikes drew frantic gold and silverseekers into montana idaho and other western states.
boomtowns known as helldorados sprouted from the desert sands like magic.
every third cabin was a saloon where sweat stained miners drank adulterated liquor rotgut in the company of accommodating women.
lynch law and hempen vigilante justice as in early cal i fornia preserved a crude semblance of order in the towns.
and when the diggings petered out the gold seekers decamped leaving eerily picturesque ghost towns such as virginia city nevada silhouetted in the desert.
begun with a boom these towns ended with a whimper.
once the loose surface gold was gobbled up orebreaking machinery was imported to smash the goldbearing quartz.
this operation was so expensive that it could ordinarily be undertaken only by corporations pooling the wealth of stockholders.
gradually the age of big business came to the mining industry.
dusty bewhiskered miners dishpans in hand were replaced by impersonal corporations with their costly machinery and trained engineers.
the once independent goldwasher became just another day laborer.
yet the mining frontier had played a vital role in conquering the continent.
magnetlike it attracted population and wealth while advertising the wonders of the wild west.
women as well as men found opportunity running boardinghouses or working as prostitutes.
they won a kind of equality on the rough frontier that earned them the vote in wyoming 1869 utah 1870 colorado 1893 and idaho 1896 long before their sisters in the east could cast a ballot.
the amassing of precious metals helped nance the civil war facilitated the building of railroads and intensied the already bitter con ict between whites and indians.
the outpouring of silver and gold enabled the treasury to resume specie payments in 1879 and injected the silver issue into american politics.
silver senators representing the thinly peopled acreage states of the west used their disproportionate inuence to promote the interests of the silver miners.
finally the mining frontier added to american folklore and literature as the writings of bret harte and mark twain so colorfully attest.
beef bonanzas and the long drive when the civil war ended the grassy plains of texas supported several million tough long horned cattle.
dressed to kill cowboys came in all varieties and sizes in the wild and woolly frontier west and in all kinds of garb as well.
these scrawny beasts whose horn spreads sometimes reached eight feet were killed primarily for their hides.
there was no way of getting their meat protably to market.
the problem of marketing was neatly solved when the transcontinental railroads thrust their iron ngers into the west.
cattle could now be shipped alive to the stockyards and under beef barons like the swifts and armours the highly industrialized meatpacking business sprang into existence as a main pillar of the economy.
drawing upon the gigantic stockyards at kansas city and chicago the meatpackers could ship their fresh products to the east coast in the newly perfected refrigerator cars.
a spectacular feeder of the new slaughterhouses was the long drive see map 26 3.
texas cowboys black white and mexican drove herds numbering from one thousand to ten thousand head slowly over the unfenced and unpeopled plains until they reached a railroad terminal.
the bawling beasts grazed en route on the free government grass.
favorite terminal points were yspecked cow towns like dodge city the bibulous babylon of the frontier and abilene kansas ogallala nebraska and cheyenne wyoming.
at abilene order was maintained by marshal james b.
wild bill hickok a fabulous gunman who reputedly landmark land laws n te missou ri nebraska r kansas city 40n an k ri og ran de.
sa s kansas ellsworth abilene pacific r r.
arkansas r rand e atchison top eka dodge city r r.
goodnig ht loving trail atchison t opeka trail fe new mexico terr.
chisholm trail rn weste rio g okla terr.
ta san pe co so u the r sr.
san angelo n pa c ific r r.
bandera san antonio o ri ark.
30n g ul f of mexi co e n d an gr indian terr.
red r texas sedalia newton baxter wichita springs mo.
santa fe se da lia and baxter sprin gs tra il ver mts denver colorado r de n r rocky omaha union pacific r r.
cheyenne iowa r wyoming pla t cattle trail railroad m ex i co eastern boundary of open range brought out the homesteader and the sheepherder.
both of these intruders sometimes amid ying bullets built barbed wire fences that were too numerous to be cut down by the cowboys.
furthermore the terrible winter of 1886 1887 with blinding blizzards reaching 68 degrees below zero left thousands of dazed cattle starving and freezing.
overexpansion and overgrazing likewise took their toll as the cowboys slowly gave way to plowboys.
the only escape for the stockmen was to make cattle raising a big business and avoid the perils of overproduction.
breeders learned to fence their ranches lay in winter feed import blooded bulls and produce fewer and meatier animals.
they also learned to organize.
the wyoming stock growers association especially in the 1880s virtually controlled the state and its legislature.
this was the heyday of the cowboy.
the equipment of the cowhand from shooting irons and tengallon hat to chaps and spurs served a useful not an ornamental function.
a genuwine gun toting cowpuncher riding where men were men and smelled like horses could justiably boast of his toughness.
these bowlegged knights of the saddle with their colorful trappings and cattle lulling songs became part of american folklore.
many of them perhaps ve thousand were blacks who especially enjoyed the newfound freedom of the open range.
100w the farmers frontier map 26 3 cattle trails interactive map killed only in self defense or in the line of duty and who was fatally shot in the back in 1876 while playing poker.
the steer was king in a cattle kingdom richly carpeted with grass.
as long as lush grass was available the long drive proved protable that is to the luckier cattlemen who escaped indians stampedes cattle fever and other hazards.
from 1866 to 1888 bellowing herds totaling over 4 million steers were driven northward from the beef bowl of texas.
the steer was king in a cattle kingdom richly carpeted with grass.
what the lord giveth the lord also can taketh away.
the railroad made the long drive and the railroad unmade the long drive primarily because the locomotives ran both ways.
the same rails that bore the cattle from the open range to the kitchen range miners and cattlemen created the romantic legend of the west but it was the sober sodbuster who wrote the nal chapter of frontier history.
a fresh day dawned for western farmers with the homestead act of 1862.
the new law allowed a settler to acquire as much as 160 acres of land a quarter section by living on it for ve years improving it and paying a nominal fee of about 30.
the homestead act marked a drastic departure from previous policy.
before the act public land had been sold primarily for revenue now it was to be given away to encourage a rapid lling of empty spaces and to provide a stimulus to the family farm the backbone of democracy the new law was a godsend to a host of farmers who could not afford to buy large holdings.
during the forty years after its passage about half a million families took advantage of the homestead act to carve out new homes in the vast open stretches.
yet ve times that many families purchased chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 acres 11 000 000 10 000 000 9 000 000 8 000 000 7 000 000 6 000 000 frontier line ends 5 000 000 4 000 000 3 000 000 2 000 000 figure 26 1 homesteads from the public lands acreage legally transferred to private ownership see related map 26 5 on p 658.
1 000 000 their land from the railroads the land companies or the states see figure 26 1.
the homestead act often turned out to be a cruel hoax.
the standard 160 acres quite adequate in the well watered mississippi basin frequently proved pitifully inadequate on the rain scarce great plains.
thousands of homesteaders perhaps two out of three were forced to give up the one sided struggle against drought.
uncle sam it was said bet 160 acres against ten dollars that the settlers could not live on their homesteads for ve years.
one of these unsuccessful gambles in greer county western oklahoma inspired a folk song hurrah for greer county.
the land of the free the land of the bedbug grasshopper and ea ill sing of its praises ill tell of its fame while starving to death on my government claim.
naked fraud was spawned by the homestead act and similar laws.
perhaps ten times more of the public domain wound up in the clutches of land grabbing promoters than in the hands of bona de farmers.
unscrupulous corporations would use dummy homesteaders often their employees or aliens bribed with cash or a bottle of beer to grab the best properties containing timber minerals and oil.
settlers would later swear that they had improved the property by erecting a twelve by fourteen dwelling which turned out to mea sure twelve by fourteen inches.
the railways also played a major role in developing the agricultural west largely through the protable marketing of crops.
some railroad companies induced americans and european immigrants to buy the cheap land earlier granted to the railroads by the government.
the northern pacic railroad at one time had nearly a thousand paid agents in europe distributing roseate leaets in various languages.
shattering the myth of the great american desert opened the gateways to the agricultural west even wider.
the windswept prairies were for the most part treeless and the tough sod had been pounded solid by millions of buffalo hooves.
pioneer explorers and trappers had assumed that the soil must be sterile simply because it was not heavily watered and did not support immense forests.
but once the prairie sod was broken with heavy iron plows pulled by four yokes of oxen the plow that broke the plains the earth proved astonishingly fruitful.
sodbusters poured onto the prairies.
lacking trees for lumber and fuel they built homes from the very sod they dug from the ground and burned corncobs for warmth.
in making the arduous journey across the western prairies many women settlers discovered new condence in their abilities.
early on in her trek mary richardson walker 1811 1897 conded in her diary that my circumstances are rather trying.
so much danger attends me on every hand.
a long journey before me going i know not whither without mother or sister to attend me can i expect to survive it all.
only a month later she recorded that in the afternoon we rode thirty ve miles without stopping.
pretty well tired out all of us.
stood it pretty well myself.
landmark land laws 120w 110w 100w 90w 80w 50n c a n a d a r g r eat basi n wine wheat beef cattle beef cattle fruit wheat wine pac i f ic beef cattle beef cattle wheat wheat beef cattle 60 80 under 10 40 60 20 inch rainfall line 20 40 corn major agricultural product corn wheat corn corn wheat tobacco tobacco beef cattle n wheat hogs corn wheat corn wheat hay corn wheat tobacco tobacco wheat rice corn cotton beef cattle at l a n t i c ocean cotton corn beef cattle beef cattle mean annual rainfall inches 10 20 n 40 wheat hogs corn sheep cotton cotton corn cotton over 80 hay dairy beef cattle ocean wheat dairy n s p l a i wheat n s t a i u n m o coa s ta l k y sheep wheat dairy c wheat a t g r e ran o ge 70w 30n sugar cane rice rice gu lf o f m exic o m e x i c o 100w 400 km.
map 26 4 average annual precipitation with major agricultural products 1900 northern hemisphere storms typically circle the globe in a west to east direction.
much of the life nourishing water in these storms is dumped as rainfall on the western slopes of the pacic coastal ranges and the rocky mountains creating huge rain shadows in the great basin and in the western great plains.
westward faring pioneers had to learn new agricultural techniques when they pushed settlement into the drought prone regions west of the 100th meridian as reected in the patterns of crop distribution by 1900.
interactive map the homesteaders wife by harvey dunn women as well as men toiled without shade or respite on the sunscorched and wind parched great plains.
chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 wa nh 30 8 mt nd 31 3 or vt 14 4 me 7 6 0 8 3 0 mn 49 7 id 6 9 sd 65 0 wy 50 6 ca 47 0 ut 66 5 il 1 9 ks 1 1 az 50 1 pa ia co 34 9 mi 0 9 3 0 ok nm 3 0 34 2 11 1 7 3 ms 1 9 va 10 0 nc tn ar al 3 7 nj 0 5 3 9 2 9 wv 3 0 6 6 12 0 ri 0 8 ct de 1 7 2 3 ky 6 6 tx 2 5 oh in mo 5 1 2 1 ny 1 1 10 0 ne nv 91 7 ma wi 5 7 4 8 md 3 3 dc 29 5 sc ga 6 4 6 2 la 5 2 fl 13 3 percentage of public lands within each state 2002 over 40 5 10 20 40 under 5 10 20 map 26 5 myth and reality in the west american folklore pictures the western united states as a land of rugged individualists who tamed the wild region with grit and brawn.
the reality is that the federal government is by far the wests largest landowner and that federal projects especially dam building have done more to shape the region than all the cowboys and farmers put together.
sources center of the american west statistical abstract of the united states 2003.
interactive map lured by higher wheat prices resulting from crop failures elsewhere in the world settlers in the 1870s rashly pushed still farther west onto the poor marginal lands beyond the 100th meridian.
that imaginary line running north to south from the dakotas through west texas separated two climatological regions a well watered area to the east and a semiarid area to the west see map 26 4.
bewhiskered and one armed geologist john wesley powell explorer of the colorado rivers grand canyon and director of the u s geological survey warned in 1874 that beyond the 100th meridian so little rain fell that agriculture was impossible without massive irrigation.
ignoring powells advice farmers heedlessly chewed up the crusty earth in western kansas eastern colorado and montana.
they quickly went broke as a six year drought in the 1880s further desiccated the al ready dusty region.
western kansas lost half its population between 1888 and 1892.
there is no god west of salina one hapless homesteader declared.
in the wake of the devastating drought the new technique of dry farming took root on the plains.
its methods of frequent shallow cultivation supposedly were adapted to the arid western environment but over time dry farming created a nely pulverized surface soil that contributed to the notorious dust bowl several decades later see p 837.
other adaptations to the western environment were more successful.
tough strains of wheat resistant to cold and drought were imported from russia and blossomed into billowing yellow carpets.
wise farmers abandoned corn in favor of sorghum and other droughtresistant grains.
barbed wire perfected by joseph f glidden in 1874 solved the problem of how to build fences on the treeless prairies.
eventually federally nanced irrigation projects on a colossal scale beyond even what john wesley powell had dreamed caused the great american desert to bloom.
a century after powells predictions arching dams had tamed the missouri and columbia rivers and had so penned up and diverted the canyon gnawing colorado that its mouth in the gulf of cal i fornia was dry.
more than 45 million acres were irrigated in seventeen western states.
in the long run the hydrau lic engineers had more to do with shaping the modern west than all the trappers miners cavalrymen and cowboys ever did see map 26 5.
as one engineer boasted we enjoy pushing rivers around robert louis stevensons transcontinental journey 1879 he celebrated scottish writer robert louis stevenson author of such enduring classics as treasure island kidnapped and the strange case of dr jekyll and mr hyde journeyed from scotland to cal i fornia in 1879 to rendezvous with his american ance frances osbourne.
between new york and san francisco stevenson traveled on the transcontinental railroad line completed just ten years earlier and he dutifully recorded his impressions of america the west in particular as he made his way toward cal i fornia.
stevensons account of his trip provides an unusually gifted writers vivid portrait of the trans mississippi west at the close of the era of the indian wars.
like all travelogues steven t sons colorful tale may reveal as much about the traveler as it does about the things he saw.
yet historians frequently make use of such documents to reconstruct the original appearance and texture of places that were once the exotic destinations of adventurous travelers before they were transformed by the onrush of modernity.
in the passages reproduced here inspired by the view as stevensons train passed through nebraska and wyoming what features of the landscape does the author nd most remarkable.
how does he portray the railroad.
source robert louis stevenson across the plains new york charles scribners sons 1897.
the plains of nebraska.
we were at sea there is no other adequate expression on the plains of nebraska.
it was a world almost without a feature an empty sky an empty earth front and back the line of railway stretched from horizon to horizon like a cue across a billiard board on either hand the green plain ran till it touched the skirts of heaven.
g razing beasts were seen upon the prairie at all degrees of distance and diminution and now and again we might perceive a few dots beside the railroad which grew more and more distinct as we drew nearer till they turned into wooden cabins and then dwindled and dwindled in our wake until they melted into their surroundings and we were once more alone upon the billiard board.
the train toiled over this innity like a snail and being the one thing moving it was wonderful what huge proportions it began to assume in our regard.
that evening we left laramie wyoming.
and yet when day came it was to shine upon the same broken and unsightly quarter of the world.
mile upon mile and not a tree a bird or a river.
only down the long sterile caons the train shot hooting and awoke the resting echo.
that train was the one piece of life in all the deadly land it was the one actor the one spectacle t to be observed in this paralysis of man and nature.
and when i think how the railroad has been pushed through this unwatered wilderness and haunt of savage tribes and now will bear an emigrant for some 12 from the atlantic to the golden gates how at each stage of the construction roaring impromptu cities full of gold and lust and death sprang up and then died away again and are now but wayside stations in the desert how in these uncouth places pig tailed chinese pirates worked side by side with border rufans and broken men from europe talking together in a mixed dialect mostly oaths gambling drinking quarrelling and murdering like wolves how the plumed hereditary lord of all america heard in this last fastness the scream of the bad medicine waggon charioting his foes and then when i go on to remember that all this epical turmoil was conducted by gentlemen in frock coats and with a view to nothing more extraordinary than a fortune and a subsequent visit to paris it seems to me i own as if this railway were the one typical achievement of the age in which we live as if it brought together into one plot all the ends of the world and all the degrees of social rank and offered to some great writer the busiest the most extended and the most varied subject for an enduring literary work.
chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 the far west comes of age the great west experienced a fantastic surge in migration from the 1870s to the 1890s.
a parade of new western states proudly joined the union.
boomtown colorado offspring of the pikes peak gold rush was greeted in 1876 as the centennial state in 1889 1890 a republican congress eagerly seeking more republican electoral and congressional votes admitted in a wholesale lot six new states north dakota south dakota montana washington idaho and wyoming.
the mormon church formally and belatedly in many americans eyes banned polygamy in 1890 but not until 1896 was utah deemed worthy of admission.
only oklahoma new mexico and arizona remained to be lifted into statehood from contiguous territory on the mainland of north america.
in a last gaudy ing the federal government made available to settlers vast stretches of fertile plains formerly occupied by the indians in the district of oklahoma the beautiful land.
scores of overeager and well armed sooners illegally jumping the gun had entered oklahoma territory.
they had to be evicted repeatedly by federal troops who on occasion would shoot the intruders horses.
on april 22 1889 all was in readiness for the legal opening and some 50 000 boomers were poised expectantly on the boundary line.
at high noon the bugle shrilled and a horde of eighty niners poured in on lathered horses or careening vehicles.
that night a lonely spot on the prairie had mushroomed into the tent city of guthrie with over 10 000 people.
by the end of the year oklahoma boasted 60 000 inhabitants and congress made it a territory.
in 1907 it became the sooner state the fading frontier in 1890 a watershed date the superintendent of the census announced that for the rst time in americas experience a frontier line was no longer discernible.
all the unsettled areas were now broken into by isolated bodies of american settlement.
the closing of the frontier inspired one of the most inuential essays ever written about american history frederick jackson turners the signicance of the frontier in american history in 1893 see thinking globally the great frontier pp.
as the nineteenth century neared its sunset the westward tramping american people were disturbed to nd that their fabled free land was going or had gone.
the secretary of war had prophesied in 1827 that ve hundred years would be needed to ll the west.
but as the nation nally recognized that its land was not inexhaustible seeds were planted to preserve the vanishing resource.
the government set aside land for national parks rst yellowstone in 1872 followed by yosemite and sequoia in 1890.
but the frontier was more than a place it was also a state of mind and a symbol of opportunity.
its passing ended a romantic phase of the nations internal development and created new economic and psychological problems.
traditionally footloose americans have been notorious for their mobility.
the nations farmers unlike the peasants of europe have seldom remained rooted to their soil.
the land sold for a prot as settlement closed in was often the settlers most protable crop.
much has been said about the frontier as a safety valve the theory is that when hard times came the unemployed who cluttered the city pavements merely moved west took up farming and prospered.
in truth relatively few city dwellers at least in the populous eastern centers migrated to the frontier during depressions.
most of them did not know how to farm few of them could raise enough money to transport themselves west and then pay for livestock and expensive machinery.
but the safety valve theory does have some validity.
free acreage did lure to the west a host of immigrant farmers who otherwise might have remained in the eastern cities to clog the job markets and to crowd the festering and already overpopulated slums.
and the very possibility of westward migration may have induced urban employers to maintain wage rates high enough to discourage workers from leaving.
but the real safety valve by the late nineteenth century was in western cities like chicago denver and san francisco where failed farmers busted miners and displaced easterners found ways to seek their fortunes.
indeed after about 1880 the area from the rocky mountains to the pacic coast was the most urbanized region in america mea sured by the percentage of people living in cities.
u s history cannot be properly understood unless it is viewed in light of the westward moving experience.
as frederick jackson turner wrote american history has been in a large degree the history of the colonization of the great west the story of settling and taming the trans mississippi west in the late nineteenth century was but the last chapter in the saga of colonizing the vanishing frontier various american wests since columbuss day from the west indies to the chesapeake shore from the valleys of the hudson and connecticut rivers to the valleys of the tennessee and ohio rivers.
and yet the trans mississippi west formed a distinct chapter in that saga and retains even to this day much of its uniqueness.
there the native american peoples waged their last and most desperate struggle against colonization and there most native americans live today.
there anglo culture collided most directly with hispanic culture the historic rival of the anglo americans for dominance in the new world and the southwest remains the most hispanicized region in america.
there america faced across the pacic to asia and there most asian americans dwell today.
there the scale and severity of the environment posed their largest challenges to human ambitions and there the environment with its aridity and stillmagical emptiness continues to mold social and political life and the american imagination as in no other part of the nation.
and in no other region has the federal government with its vast landholdings its subsidies to the railroads and its massive irrigation projects played so conspicuous a role in economic and social development.
the westward moving pioneers and the country they confronted have assumed mythic proportions in the american mind.
they have been immortalized by such writers as bret harte mark twain helen hunt jackson and francis parkman and by such painters as george catlin frederic remington and albert bier harvesting in washington state this turn of the century scene.
for better or worse those pioneers planted the seeds of american civilization in the immense western wilderness.
the life we live they dreamed of the life they lived we can only dream.
the farm becomes a factory the situation of american farmers once jacks andjills of all trades was rapidly changing.
they had raised their own food fashioned their own clothing and bartered for other necessities with neighbors.
now high prices persuaded farmers to concentrate on growing single cash crops such as wheat or corn and use their prots to buy foodstuffs at the general store and manufactured goods in town or by mail order.
the chicago rm of aaron montgomery ward sent out its rst catalogue a single sheet in 1872.
farmers were becoming both consumers and producers in the world economy as their crops journeyed by rail and ship to distant parts of the globe.
large scale farmers especially in the immense grain producing areas of the mississippi valley were now both specialists and businesspeople.
as cogs in the vast industrial machine these farmers were intimately tied to banking railroading and manufacturing.
they had to buy expensive machinery in order to plant and harvest their crops.
a powerful steam engine could drag behind it simultaneously the plow seeder and harrow.
the speed of harvesting wheat was dramatically increased in the 1870s by the invention of the humans horses and machines join forces in thinking globally the great frontier t he american pioneers who surged westward in the nineteenth century were part of a great global land grab that changed lives and landscapes on several continents.
from the australian outback to the canadian prairies from the argentine pampas to the russian steppes and the african savannas millions of mostly white settlers poured into vast new territories and claimed them as their own.
everywhere the settlers encountered indigenous peoples who had lived on those lands since time immemorial.
with their superiority in weaponry transportation and political organization every where the newcomers prevailed.
by the centurys close they had displaced or destroyed countless native peoples and extended their dominion over parts of the planet once considered too remote or rugged to be habitable.
the american frontier soon became the stuff of legend and even the subject of a scholarly explanation of american uniqueness frederick jackson turners fabled frontier thesis which hailed the grit and gumption of the pioneers and commended them as the agents of civilization and democracy.
yet far from being unique those westering americans had much in common with settlers in sister societies abroad.
argentina had its cowboys gauchos and australia had its colorful backcountry outlaws such as ned kelly whose exploits rivaled those of billy the kid.
the russians and south africans had their own versions of manifest destiny and like the americans they often cloaked them in the language of racial superiority.
the worlds various frontiers also reected the particularities of geography and history.
australians soon conceded that much of their continent the worlds driest was too arid for traditional farming.
most of the outback proved suitable only for enormous sheep stations sometimes measuring tens of thousands of acres.
consequently small farm homesteading of the american and canadian type never took root nor did cities of any consequence emerge in the parched australian interior.
canadas westward movement came later than that in the united states and proceeded more peaceably.
only after the ottawa government promised in 1871 to build a transcontinental railroad connecting eastern canada to its western provinces did settlement begin in earnest.
and unlike in america where restless pioneers typically struck out on their own and made much mischief among themselves and with the indians they encountered in canada settlers were generally preceded by government authori north west mounted police ca.
1890 empowered by an act of parliament in 1873 to establish canadian authority and order in the northwest territories this force made frontier settlement somewhat more peaceful in canada than in the united states.
in 1920 the north west mounted police absorbed the dominion police and became the famed royal canadian mounted police or mounties russian peasants in siberia 1910 ties usually the red jacketed north west mounted police or mounties who established at least a semblance of order before large numbers of pioneers appeared on the scene.
as a result canadas frontier was markedly less violent than americas.
canada then and now a more lawabiding society than the united states never had a wild west like that of its southern neighbor.
in argentina and russia inherited patterns of landholding and politics shaped their nineteenth century frontiers.
when argentinas general julio roca vanquished the native araucanians in 1879 he ung open the horizonless pampas to white settlement.
but he also retained the venerable custom handed down from spanish colonial times of apportioning the land in gigantic estancias ranches to a few favored fellow soldiers and friends.
these lordly landowners then employed wage workers mostly italian immigrants who turned the fertile argentine interior into a beef bowl and breadbasket to the world.
the immigrants themselves however had little hope of ever possessing land of their own.
russias frontier lay to the east and long felt the heavy hand of the tsar.
for centuries autocratic rulers had strongarmed landowning nobles to move their serfs onto the virgin lands beyond the settled edge of european russia.
by the nineteenth century imperial russia had pushed its frontier onto the rolling steppes of central asia home to tartars kalmyks kazakhs and myriad other indigenous peoples.
only military conquest and a strengthened state bureaucracy made possible european settlement in those regions.
between 1867 and 1897 more than a million of the tsars subjects left for the hinterland.
as elsewhere the railroad proved essential to the growth of the tsarist empire especially after the government began construction of the trans siberian line in 1891.
the dutch descended afrikaners or boers in southern africa found their frontier to the north and unlike their american counterparts they made scant claim to be spreading democracy.
rather they sought to escape british rule in the cape colony in particular to escape from the threat of racial equality for blacks after britain abolished slavery in the 1830s.
the afrikaners great trek took them into the land of the zulus who ferociously resisted the oncoming boers but eventually like indigenous peoples every where were forced to submit to white rule.
in the americas australia asia and africa the great frontier of the nineteenth century was the companion of conquest.
the frontier brought opportunity to some and oppression to others.
in many places it nurtured democracy elsewhere it invigorated autocracy.
and every where it expanded the domains of european civilization for better or worse.
chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 twine binder and then in the 1880s by the combine the combined reaper thresher which was drawn by twenty to forty horses and which both reaped and bagged the grain.
widespread use of such costly equipment naturally called for rst class management.
but the farmers often unskilled as businesspeople were inclined to blame the banks and railroads or the volatility of the global marketplace rather than their own shortcomings for their losses.
this amazing mechanization of agriculture in the postwar years was almost as striking as the mechanization of industry.
in fact agricultural modernization drove many marginal farmers off the land thus swelling the ranks of the new industrial work force.
as the rural population steadily decreased those farmers who remained achieved miracles of production making america the worlds breadbasket and butcher shop.
the farm was attaining the status of a factory an outdoor grain factory.
bonanza wheat farms of the minnesota north dakota area for example were enormous.
by 1890 at least a half dozen of them were larger than fteen thousand acres with communication by telephone from one part to another.
these bonanza farms foreshadowed the gigantic agribusinesses of the next century.
agriculture was a big business from its earliest days in cal i fornias phenomenally productive and phenomenally irrigated central valley.
cal i fornia farms carved out of giant spanish mexican land grants and the railroads huge holdings were from the outset more than three times larger than the national average.
the reformer henry george in 1871 described the golden state as not a country of farms but a country of plantations and estates with the advent of the railroad refrigerator car in the 1880s cal i fornia fruit and vegetable crops raised on sprawling tracts by ill paid migrant mexican and chinese farmhands sold at a handsome prot in the rich urban markets of the east.
deation dooms the debtor once the farmers became chained to a one crop economy wheat or corn they were in the same leaky boat with the southern cotton growers.
as long as prices stayed high all went well.
but when they skidded in the 1880s bankruptcy fell like a blight on the farm belts.
the grain farmers were no longer the masters of their own destinies.
they were engaged in one of the most ercely competitive of businesses for the price of their product was determined in a world market by the world output.
if the wheat elds of argentina russia and other foreign countries ourished the price of the farmers grain would fall and american sodbusters would face ruin as they did in the 1880s and 1890s.
low prices and a deated currency were the chief worries of the frustrated farmers north south and west.
if a family had borrowed 1 000 in 1855 when wheat was worth about a dollar a bushel they expected to pay back the equivalent of one thousand bushels plus interest when the mortgage fell due.
but if they let their debt run to 1890 when wheat had fallen to about fty cents a bushel they would have to pay back the price of two thousand bushels for the 1 000 they had borrowed plus interest.
this unexpected burden struck them as unjust though their steely eyed creditors often branded the complaining farmers as slippery and dishonest rascals.
the deationary pinch on the debtor owed partly from the static money supply.
there were simply not enough dollars to go around and as a result prices were forced down.
in 1870 the currency in circulation for each person was 19 42 in 1890 it was only 22 67.
yet during these twenty years business and industrial activity increasing manyfold had intensied the scramble for available currency.
the forgotten farmers were caught on a treadmill.
despite unremitting toil they operated year after year at a loss and lived off their fat as best they could.
in a vicious circle their farm machinery increased their output of grain lowered the price and drove them even deeper into debt.
mortgages engulfed homesteads at an alarming rate by 1890 nebraska alone reported more than 100 000 farms blanketed with mortgages.
the repeated crash of the sheriff auctioneers hammer kept announcing to the world that another sturdy american farmer had become landless in a landed nation.
ruinous rates of interest running from 8 to 40 percent were charged on mortgages largely by agents of eastern loan companies.
the windburned sons and a contemporary farm protest song the kansas fool ran the bankers followed us out west and did in mortgages invest they looked ahead and shrewdly planned and soon theyll have our kansas land.
struggling farmers daughters of the sod who felt that they deserved praise for developing the country cried out in despair against the loan sharks and the wall street octopus.
farm tenancy rather than farm ownership was spreading like stinkweed.
the trend was especially marked in the sharecropping south where cotton prices also sank dismayingly.
by 1880 one fourth of all american farms were operated by tenants.
the united states was ready to feed the world but under the new industrial feudalism the farmers were about to sink into a status suggesting old world serfdom.
unhappy farmers even mother nature ceased smiling as her powerful forces conspired against agriculture.
mile wide clouds of grasshoppers leaving nothing but the mortgage periodically ravaged prairie farms.
the terrible cottonboll weevil was also wreaking havoc in the south by the early 1890s.
the good earth was going sour.
floods added to the waste of erosion which had already washed the topsoil off millions of once lush southern acres.
expensive fertilizers were urgently needed.
a long succession of droughts seared the trans mississippi west beginning in the summer of 1887.
whole towns were abandoned.
going home to the wifes folks and in god we trusted in kansas we busted were typical la ments of many impoverished farmers as they ed their weather beaten shacks and sun baked sod houses.
one irate poet snarled fifty miles to water a hundred miles to wood to hell with this damned country im going home for good.
to add to their miseries the soil tillers were gouged by their government local state and national.
their land was overassessed and they paid painful local taxes whereas wealthy easterners could conceal their stocks and bonds in safe deposit boxes.
high protective tariffs in these years poured prots into the pockets of manufacturers.
farmers on the other hand had no choice but to sell their low priced products in a ercely competitive unprotected world market while buying high priced manufactured goods in a protected home market.
the farmers were also farmed by the corporations and processors.
they were at the mercy of the harvester trust the barbed wire trust and the fertilizer trust all of which could control output and raise prices to extortionate levels.
middlemen took a juicy cut from the selling price of the goods that the farmers bought while operators pushed storage rates to the ceiling at grain warehouses and elevators.
in addition the railroad octopus had the grain growers in its grip.
freight rates could be so high that nebraska homesteaders in front of their sod house 1887 these two brothers and their families had escaped to canada from the slave south during the civil war.
returning to the united states in the 1880s they took advantage of the homestead act to stake out farms in custer county nebraska.
chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 the farmers sometimes lost less if they burned their corn for fuel than if they shipped it.
if they raised their voices in protest the ruthless railroad operators might let their grain spoil in damp places or refuse to provide them with cars when needed.
farmers still made up nearly one half the population in 1890 but they were hopelessly disorga nized.
the manufacturers and the railroad barons knew how to combine to promote their interests and so increasingly did industrial workers.
but the farmers were by nature independent and individualistic dead set against consolidation or regimentation.
no really effective carnegie or gompers arose among them to preach the gospel of economic integration and concentration.
they never did organize successfully to restrict production until forced to by the federal government nearly half a century later in franklin roosevelts new deal days.
what they did manage to organize was a monumental political uprising.
the farmers take their stand agrarian unrest had ared forth earlier in the greenback movement shortly after the civil war.
prices sagged in 1868 and a host of farmers unsuccessfully the farmers grievances this poster from 1875 expresses one of the agrarian radicals fundamental premises that all other walks of life were dependent or even parasitic on the indispensable work of farmers.
in his famous cross of gold speech in 1896 see p 661 populist presidential candidate william jennings bryan put it this way burn down your cities and leave our farms and your cities will spring up again as if by magic but destroy our farms and the grass will grow in the streets of every city in the country sought relief from low prices and high indebtedness by demanding an ination of the currency with paper money.
the national grange of the patrons of husbandry better known as the grange was orga nized in 1867.
its leading spirit was oliver h kelley a shrewd and energetic minnesota farmer then working as a clerk in washington.
kelleys rst objective was to enhance the lives of isolated farmers through social educational and fraternal activities.
farm men and women cursed with loneliness in widely separated farmhouses found the granges picnics concerts and lectures a godsend.
kelley a mason even found farmers receptive to his mumbo jumbo of passwords and secret rituals as well as his four ply hierarchy ranging for men from laborer to husbandman and for women from maid to matron.
the grange spread like an old time prairie re and by 1875 claimed 800 000 members chiey in the midwest and south.
buzzing with gossip these calicoed and callous folk often met in red schoolhouses around potbellied stoves.
the grangers gradually raised their goals from individual self improvement to improvement of the farmers collective plight.
in a determined effort to escape the clutches of the trusts they established cooperatively owned stores for consumers and cooperatively owned grain elevators and warehouses for producers.
persuasive populists their most ambitious experiment was an attempt to manufacture harvesting machinery but this venture partly as a result of mismanagement ended in nancial disaster.
embattled grangers also went into politics enjoying their most gratifying success in the grain growing regions of the upper mississippi valley chiey in illinois wisconsin iowa and minnesota.
there through state legislation they strove to regulate railway rates and the storage fees charged by railroads and by the operators of warehouses and grain elevators.
many of the state courts notably in illinois were disposed to recognize the principle of public control of private business for the general welfare.
a number of the socalled granger laws however were badly drawn and they were bitterly fought through the high courts by the well paid lawyers of the interests following judicial reverses most severely at the hands of the supreme court in the famous wabash decision of 1886 see p 573 the grangers inuence faded.
but their orga ni zation has lived on as a vocal champion of farm interests while brightening rural life with social activities.
farmers grievances likewise found a vent in the greenback labor party which combined the inationary appeal of the earlier greenbackers with a program for improving the lot of labor.
in 1878 the high water mark of the movement the greenback laborites polled over a million votes and elected fourteen members of congress.
in the presidential election of 1880 the greenbackers ran general james b weaver an old granger who was a favorite of civil war veterans and who possessed a remarkable voice and bearing.
he spoke to perhaps half a million citizens in a hundred or so speeches but polled only 3 percent of the total popular vote.
prelude to populism a striking manifestation of rural discontent came through the farmers alliance founded in texas in the late 1870s see p 557.
farmers came together in the alliance to socialize but more importantly to break the strangling grip of the railroads and manufacturers through cooperative buying and selling.
local chapters spread throughout the south and the great plains during the 1880s until by 1890 members numbered more than a million hard bitten souls.
unfortunately the alliance weakened itself by ignoring the plight of landless tenant farmers sharecroppers and farmworkers.
even more debilitating was the alliances exclusion of blacks who counted for nearly half the agricultural population of the south.
in the 1880s a separate colored farmers national alliance emerged to attract black farmers and by 1890 membership numbered more than 250 000.
the long history of racial division in the south however made it difcult for white and black farmers to work together in the same orga ni zation.
out of the farmers alliances a new political party emerged in the early 1890s the peoples party.
better known as the populists these frustrated farmers attacked wall street and the money trust they called for nationalizing the railroads telephone and telegraph instituting a graduated income tax and creating a new federal subtreasury a scheme to provide farmers with loans for crops stored in governmentowned warehouses where they could be held until market prices rose.
they also wanted the free and unlimited coinage of silver yet another of the debtors demands for ination that echoed continuously throughout the gilded age.
numerous ery prophets leapt forward to trumpet the populist cause.
the free coinage of silver struck many populists as a cure all especially after the circulation of an enormously popular pamphlet titled coins financial school 1894.
written by william hope harvey it was illustrated by clever woodcuts one of which depicted the gold ogre beheading the beautiful silver maiden.
in ction parading as fact the booklet showed how the little professor coin harvey overwhelmed the bankers and professors of economics with his brilliant arguments on behalf of free silver.
another notorious spellbinder was red haired ignatius donnelly of minnesota three times elected to congress.
the queen of the populist calamity howlers was mary elizabeth mary yellin lease a tall athletic woman known as the kansas pythoness she reportedly demanded that kansans should raise less corn and more hell the big city new york evening post snarled we dont want any more states until we can civilize kansas to many easterners complaint not corn was rural americas staple crop.
yet the populists despite their oddities were not to be laughed away.
they were leading a deadly earnest and impassioned campaign to relieve the farmers many miseries.
smiles faded from republican and democratic faces alike as countless thousands of populists began to sing good bye my party goodbye in 1892 the populists had jolted the traditional parties by winning several congressional seats and polling more than 1 million votes for their presidential chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 a swarm of newspaper reporters.
his platform included a demand that the government relieve unemployment by an inationary public works program supported by some 500 million in legal tender notes to be issued by the treasury.
coxey himself rode in a carriage with his wife and infant son appropriately named legal tender coxey while his tiny army tramped along behind singing were coming grover cleveland 500 000 strong were marching on to washington to right the nations wrong.
mary e lease 1853 1933 she was so eloquent as to be called the patrick henry in petticoats candidate james b weaver.
racial divisions continued to hobble the populists in the south but in the west their ranks were swelling.
could the peoples party now reach beyond its regional bases in agrarian america join hands with urban workers and mount a successful attack on the northeastern citadels of power.
coxeys army and the pullman strike the panic of 1893 and the severe ensuing depression strengthened the populists argument that farmers and laborers alike were being victimized by an oppressive economic and political system.
ragged armies of the unemployed began marching to protest their plight.
in the growing hordes of displaced industrial toilers the populists saw potential political allies.
the most famous marcher was general jacob s coxey a wealthy ohio quarry owner.
he set out for washington in 1894 with a few score of supporters and the commonweal army of coxeyites nally straggled into the nations capital but the invasion took on the aspects of a comic opera when general coxey and his lieutenants were arrested for walking on the grass.
elsewhere violent are ups accompanied labor protests notably in chicago.
most dramatic was the crippling pullman strike of 1894.
eugene v debs a charismatic labor leader had helped organize the american railway union of about 150 000 members.
the pullman palace car company which maintained a model town near chicago for its employees was hit hard by the depression and cut wages by about onethird while holding the line on rent for the company houses.
the workers nally struck in some places overturning pullman cars and paralyzed railway trafc from chicago to the pacic coast.
the american federation of labor conspicuously declined to support the pullman strikers thus enhancing the af of ls reputation for respectability even while weakening labors cause by driv ing a large wedge into the workers ranks.
the turmoil in chicago was serious but not yet completely out of hand.
at least this was the judgment of governor john peter altgeld of illinois a friend of after the pullman strike collapsed eugene debs 1855 1926 said no strike has ever been lost.
in 1897 he declared the issue is socialism versus capitalism.
i am for socialism because i am for humanity.
pullman strikers coxeys army enters the district of columbia 1894 coxeys followers are shown here clearing a lock on the chesapeake and ohio canal.
jacob sechler coxey arrived in the capital with only about 500 men far short of the 100 000 he had predicted would come to make a living petition of the unemployed.
the downtrodden who had pardoned the haymarket square anarchists the year before see p 589.
but u s attorney general richard olney an archconser vative and an ex railroad attorney urged the dispatch of federal troops.
his legal grounds were that the strikers were interfering with the transit of the u s mail.
president cleveland supported olney with the ringing declaration if it takes the entire army and navy to deliver a postal card in chicago that card will be delivered to the delight of conser vatives federal troops bayonets xed crushed the pullman strike.
debs was sentenced to six months imprisonment for contempt of court because he had deed a federal court injunction to cease striking.
ironically the lean labor agitator spent much of his enforced leisure reading radical the pullman strike 1894 illinois national guardsmen re on pullman company strikers on july 7 1894.
police clubs and u s army ries and bayonets nally broke the back of the strike which halted railroads throughout the country.
chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 literature which led to his later leadership of the socialist movement in america.
embittered cries of government by injunction now burst from orga nized labor.
this was the rst time that such a legal weapon had been used conspicuously by washington to break a strike and it was all the more distasteful because deant workers who were held in contempt could be imprisoned without a jury trial.
signs multiplied that employers were striving to smash labor unions by court action.
nonlabor elements of the country including the populists and other debtors were likewise incensed.
they saw in the brutal pullman episode further proof of an unholy alliance between business and the courts.
golden mckinley and silver bryan the smoldering grievances of the long suffering farmers and the depression plagued laborers gave ominous signicance to the election of 1896.
conservatives of all stripes feared an impending upheaval while downand out husbandmen and discontented workers cast about desperately for political salvation.
increasingly monetary policy whether to maintain the gold standard or inate the currency by monetizing silver loomed as the issue on which the election would turn.
the leading candidate for the republican presidential nomination in 1896 was former congressman william mckinley of ohio sponsor of the ill starred tariff bill of 1890 see p 672.
he had established a creditable civil war record having risen to the rank of major he hailed from the electorally potent state of ohio and he could point to long years of honorable ser vice in congress where he had made many friends with his kindly and conciliatory manner.
as a presidential candidate mckinley was largely the creature of a fellow ohioan marcus alonzo hanna who had made his fortune in the iron business and now coveted the role of president maker.
i love mckinley he once said.
as a wholehearted hamiltonian hanna believed that a prime function of government was to aid business.
honest earnest tough and direct he became the personication of big industry in politics.
he was often caricatured in cartoons quite unfairly as a bloated bully in a loud checkered suit with a dollar sign in each square.
he believed that in some mea sure prosperity trickled down to the laborer whose dinner pail was full when business ourished.
critics assailed this idea as equivalent to feeding the horses in order to feed the sparrows.
mckinley campaign headquarters chicago 1896 those few black americans who could exercise their right to vote in the 1890s still remained faithful to the party of lincoln the hardheaded hanna although something of a novice in politics orga nized his preconvention campaign for mckinley with consummate skill and with a liberal outpouring of his own money.
the convention steamroller well lubricated with hannas dollars nominated mckinley on the rst ballot in st louis in june 1896.
the republican platform cleverly straddled the money question but leaned toward hard money policies.
it declared for the gold standard even though mckinleys voting record in congress had been embarrassingly friendly to silver.
the platform also condemned hard times and democratic incapacity while pouring praise on the protective tariff.
dissension riddled the democratic camp.
cleveland no longer led his party.
the depression had driven the last nail into his political cof n dubbed the stuffed prophet he was undeniably the most unpopular man in the country.
labor debtor groups remembered too vividly his intervention in the pullman strike mckinley versus bryan the convention hall setting was made to order for a magnicent oratorical effort.
a hush fell over the delegates as bryan stood before them.
with an organlike voice that rolled into the outer corners of the huge hall he delivered a fervent plea for silver.
rising to supreme heights of eloquence he thundered we will answer their demands for a gold standard by saying to them you shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold the cross of gold speech was a sensation.
swept off its feet in a tumultuous scene the democratic convention nominated bryan the next day on the fth ballot.
the platform demanded ination through the unlimited coinage of silver at the ratio of 16 ounces of silver to 1 of gold though the market ratio was about 32 to 1.
this meant that the silver in a dollar would be worth about fty cents.
democratic gold bugs unable to swallow bryan bolted their party over the silver issue.
a conser vative senator from new york when asked if he was a democrat still reportedly replied yes i am a democrat crying for protection 1896 uncle sam is called on in this cartoon to nurse so called infant industries some of which had in fact long since grown into vigorous adulthood.
the backstairs morgan bond deal and especially his stubborn hard money policies.
ultraconser vative in nance cleveland now looked more like a republican than a democrat on the money issue.
rudderless the democratic convention met in chicago in july 1896 with the silverites lusting for victory.
shouting insults at the absent cleveland the delegates refused by a suicidal vote of 564 to 357 to endorse their own administration.
they had the enthusiasm and the numbers all they lacked was a leader.
a new moses suddenly appeared in the person of william jennings bryan of nebraska.
then only thirtysix years of age and known as the boy orator of the platte he stepped condently onto the platform before fteen thousand people.
his masterful presence was set off by a peninsular jaw and raven black hair.
he radiated honesty sincerity and energy.
one contemporary sneered that bryan like the platte river in his home state of nebraska was six inches deep and six miles wide at the mouth william jennings bryan campaigning again in 1908 the premier orator of his day bryan also became a perennial presidential candidate running in 1896 1900 and 1908.
he lost every time.
chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 still very still the democratic minority including cleveland charged that the populist silverites had stolen both the name and the clothes of their party.
they nominated a lost cause ticket of their own and many of them including cleveland not too secretly hoped for a mckinley victory.
the populists now faced a dilemma because the democratic majority had appropriated their main plank 16 to 1 that heaven born ratio the bulk of the populists fearing a hard money mckinley victory endorsed both fusion with the democrats and bryan for president sacricing their identity in the mix.
singing the jolly silver dollar of the dads they became in effect the demo pop party though a handful of the original populists refused to support bryan and went down with their colors nailed to the mast.
class conict plowholders versus bondholders mark hanna smugly assumed that he could make the tariff the focus of the campaign.
but bryan a dynamo of energy forced the free trade issue into the backseat when he took to the stump in behalf of free silver.
sweeping through 27 states and traveling 18 000 miles he made nearly 600 speeches 36 in one day and even invaded the east the enemys country vachel lindsay caught the spirit of his oratorical orgy prairie avenger mountain lion bryan bryan bryan bryan gigantic troubadour speaking like a siege gun smashing plymouth rock with his boulders from the west.
free silver became almost as much a religious as a nancial issue.
hordes of fanatical free silverites hailed bryan as the messiah to lead them out of the wilderness of debt.
they sang well all have our pockets lined with silver and no crown of thorns no cross of gold bryan created panic among eastern conser vatives with his threat of converting their holdings overnight into fty cent dollars.
the gold bugs responded with their own free and unlimited coinage of verbiage.
they reprinted with the permission of scribner an imprint of simon schuster adult publishing group from the collected poems of vachel lindsay revised edition by vachel lindsay.
copyright 1920 by the macmillan company copyright renewed 1948 by elizabeth c lindsay.
all rights reserved.
vented their alarm in abusive epithets ranging from fanatic and madman to traitor and murderer in god we trust with bryan we bust the republicans sneered while one eastern clergyman cried that platform was made in hell widespread fear of bryan and the silver lunacy enabled dollar mark hanna now chairman of the republican national committee to shine as a money raiser.
he shook down the trusts and plutocrats and piled up an enormous slush fund for a campaign of education or of propaganda depending on ones point of view.
reminding the voters of clevelands democratic panic republicans appealed to the belly vote with their prize slogan mckinley and the full dinner pail the mckinleyites amassed the most formidable political campaign chest thus far in american history.
at all levels national state and local it amounted to about 16 million as contrasted with about 1 million for the poorer democrats roughly 16 to 1.
with some justication the bryanites accused hanna of buying the election and of oating mckinley into the white house on a tidal wave of mud and money.
bryans cyclonic campaign began to lose steam as the weeks passed.
fear was probably hannas strongest ally as it was bryans worst enemy.
republican businesspeople placed contracts with manufacturers contingent on the election of mckinley.
a few factory owners with thinly veiled intimidation paid off their workers and told them not to come to work on wednesday morning if bryan won.
reports also circulated that employers were threatening to pay their employees in fty cent pieces instead of in dollars if bryan triumphed.
such were some of the dirty tricks of the stop bryan save america crusade.
hannas campaign methods paid off.
on election day mckinley triumphed decisively.
the vote was 271 to 176 in the electoral college and 7 102 246 to in gold standard britain there was much relief over mckinleys victory.
the london standard commented the hopelessly ignorant and savagely covetous waifs and strays of american civilization voted for bryan but the bulk of the solid sense business integrity and social stability sided with mckinley.
the nation is to be heartily congratulated.
the free silver campaign wash n h vt r 4 d 4 mont.
r 6 r 3 oregon minn r 4 mass.
r 9 idaho s dak.
r 12 d 3 r 13 d 8 ill calif d 3 r 24 colo d 4 arizona terr.
new mexico terr.
va d 12 r 12 d 1 md.
r 8 n c d 11 d 21 s c ark.
d 9 d 8 miss.
d 9 texas r 10 r 3 w va tenn ind.
conn n j r 6 del.
r 23 ky d 17 d 10 r 15 r 32 ohio r 6 mo.
kansas ind.
r i r 4 pa utah r 8 d 1 mich iowa neb.
d 3 r 36 r 14 nev r 15 n y ala d 11 ga d 13 la.
d 15 d 8 fla d 4 candidate party electoral vote popular vote mckinley republican 61 7 102 246 51 1 bryan democrat 39 6 492 559 47 7 territories indian reservations unsettled etc.
map 26 6 presidential election of 1896 with electoral vote by state this election tolled the death knell of the gilded age political party system with its razor close elections strong party loyalties and high voter turnouts.
bryans sweep of the southern states and strong showing in the west gave him only 176 electoral votes to mckinleys 271 from the more populous north and east.
for years after 1896 republicans predominated and citizens showed a declining interest in joining parties and voting.
interactive map 6 492 559 in the popular election.
driven by fear and excitement an unprecedented outpouring of voters ocked to the polls.
mckinley ran strongly in the populous east where he carried every county of new england and in the upper mississippi valley.
bryans states concentrated in the debt burdened south and the trans mississippi west boasted more acreage than mckinleys but less population see map 26 6.
the free silver election of 1896 was perhaps the most signicant political turning point since lincolns victories in 1860 and 1864.
despite bryans strength in the south and west the results vividly demonstrated his lack of appeal to the unmortgaged farmer and especially to the eastern urban laborer.
many wage earners in the east voted for their jobs and full dinner pails threatened as they were by free silver free trade and reless factories.
living precariously on a xed wage the factory workers had no reason to favor ination which was the heart of the bryanites program.
the bryan mckinley battle heralded the advent of a new era in american politics.
at rst glance the election seemed to be the age old story of the underprivileged many against the privileged few of the indebted backcountry against the wealthier seaboard of the country against the city of the agrarians against the industrialists of main street against wall street of the nobodies against the somebodies.
yet when bryan made his evangelical appeal to all those supposed foes of the existing social order not enough of them banded together to form a political majority.
the outcome was instead a resounding victory for big business the big cities middle class values and chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 nancial conservatism.
bryans defeat marked the last serious effort to win the white house with mostly agrarian votes.
the future of presidential politics lay not on the farms with their dwindling population but in the mushrooming cities with their growing hordes of freshly arriving immigrants.
the grand old partys smashing victory of 1896 also heralded a republican grip on the white house for sixteen consecutive years indeed for all but eight of the next thirty six years.
mckinleys election thus imparted a new character to the american political system.
the long reign of republican political dominance that it ushered in was accompanied by diminishing voter participation in elections the weakening of party orga ni zations and the fading away of issues like the money question and civil ser vice reform which came to be replaced by concern for industrial regulation and the welfare of labor.
scholars have dubbed this new political era the period of the fourth party system signaling a break with the previous third party system in place since 1860 and characterized by remarkably high voter turnouts and close contests between democrats and republicans.
the sacrilegious candidate a hostile cartoonist makes sport of bryans notorious cross of gold speech in 1896.
campaign gimcracks 1896 these mechanical cards predicted republican prosperity with mckinley and economic ruin with bryan.
the election of 1896 republican stand pattism enthroned an eminently safe mckinley took the inaugural oath in 1897.
with his impeccable white vest he seemed never to perspire even in oppressively muggy washington.
though a man of considerable ability he was an ear tothe ground politician who seldom got far out of line with majority opinion.
his cautious conser vative nature caused him to shy away from the aming banner of reform.
business was given a free rein and the trusts which had trusted him in 1896 were allowed to develop more mighty muscles without serious restraints.
almost as soon as mckinley took ofce the tariff issue which had played second ddle to silver in the battle of 96 quickly forced itself to the fore.
the current wilson gorman law was not raising enough revenue to cover the annual treasury decits and the republican trusts thought that they had purchased the right to additional tariff protection by their lush contributions to hannas war chest.
in due course the dingley tariff bill was jammed through the house in 1897 under the pounding gavel of the rethroned czar reed.
the proposed new rates were high but not high enough to satisfy the paunchy lobbyists who once again descended upon the senate.
over 850 amendments were tacked onto the overburdened bill.
the resulting piece of patchwork nally established the average rates at 46 5 percent substantially higher than the democratic wilson gorman act of 1894 and in some categories even higher than the mckinley act of 1890.
see the chart in the appendix.
prosperity long lurking around the corner began to return with a rush in 1897 the rst year of mckinleys term.
the depression of 1893 had run its course and farm prices rose.
paint thirsty midwestern barns blossomed in new colors and the wheels of industry resumed their hum.
republican politicians like crowing roosters believing they caused the sun to rise claimed credit for attracting the sunlight of prosperity.
with the return of prosperity the money issue that had overshadowed politics since the civil war gradually faded away.
the gold standard act of 1900 passed over last ditch silverite opposition provided that the paper currency be redeemed freely in gold.
nature and science gradually provided an ination that the gold bug east had fought so frantically to prevent.
electrifying discoveries of new gold deposits in canadas fabled klondike as well as in alaska south africa and australia brought huge quantities of gold onto world markets as did the perfecting of the cheap cyanide process for extracting gold from low grade ore.
moderate ination thus took care of the currency needs of an explosively expanding nation as its circulatory system greatly improved.
the tide of silver heresy rapidly receded and the popocratic sh were left gasping high and dry on a golden sanded beach.
chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 chronology ca.
1700 new indian peoples move onto great plains 1889 north dakota south dakota montana washington idaho and wyoming admitted to union census bureau declares frontier line ended emergence of peoples party populists pikes peak gold rush nevada comstock lode discovered homestead act battle of wounded knee construction of trans siberian railroad begins sand creek massacre nevada admitted to union populist party candidate james b weaver polls more than 1 million votes in presidential election frederick jackson turner publishes the signicance of the frontier in american history coxeys army marches on washington pullman strike utah admitted to union mckinley defeats bryan for presidency dingley tariff act gold standard act oklahoma admitted to union national grange orga nized battle of the little bighorn colorado admitted to union nez perce war helen hunt jackson publishes a century of dishonor federal government outlaws indian sun dance canadian pacic railway rst transcontinental rail line completed across canada.
1885 local chapters of farmers alliance formed dawes severalty act indians granted u s citizenship oklahoma opened to u s citizen settlement indian reorga ni zation act key terms reservation system 635 little bighorn battle of the 637 wounded knee battle of 639 dawes severalty act 639 mining industry 644 homestead act 645 people to know mechanization of agriculture 654 populists 657 pullman strike 658 fourth party system 664 gold standard act 665 frederick jackson turner jacob s coxey william mckinley marcus alonzo hanna varying viewpoints was the west really won.
f or more than half a century the turner thesis dominated historical writing about the west.
in his famous essay of 1893 the signicance of the frontier in american history historian frederick jackson turner argued that the frontier experience molded both region and nation.
not only the west turner insisted but the national character had been uniquely shaped by the westward movement.
pioneers had brought the raw west into the embrace of civilization.
and the struggle to overcome the hazards of the western wilderness including distance deserts drought and indians had transformed europeans into tough inventive and self reliant americans.
turners thesis raised a question that americans found especially intriguing in 1893.
just three years earlier the superintendent of the census declared that the frontier de ned as a zone with little or no settled population had closed forever.
what new forces turner asked would shape a distinctive american national character now that the testing ground of the frontier had been plowed and tamed.
turners hypothesis that the american character was forged in the western wilderness is surely among the most provocative statements ever made about the formative inuences on the nations development.
but as the frontier era recedes ever further into the past scholars are less persuaded that turners thesis adequately explains the national character.
american society is still conspicuously different from european and other cultures even though turners frontier disappeared more than a century ago.
modern scholars charge that turner based his thesis on several questionable assumptions.
historian david j weber for example suggests that the line of the frontier did not de ne the quavering edge of civilization but marked the boundary between diverse cultures each with its own claims to legitimacy and indeed to legitimate possession of the land.
the frontier should therefore be understood not as the place where civilization triumphed over sav agery but as the principal site of interaction between those cultures.
several so called new western historians take this argument still further.
scholars such as patricia nelson limerick richard white and donald worster suggest that the cultural and ecological damage in icted by advancing civilization must be reckoned with in any nal accounting of what the pioneers accomplished.
these same scholars insist that the west did not lose its regional identity after the frontier line was no longer recognizable in 1890.
the west they argue is still a unique part of the national mosaic a region whose history culture and identity remain every bit as distinctive as those of new eng land or the old south.
but where turner saw the frontier as the principal shaper of the regions character the new western historians emphasize the effects of ethnic and racial confrontation topography climate and the roles of government and big business as the factors that have made the modern west.
the new western historians thus reject turners emphasis on the triumphal civilizing of the wilderness.
as they see the matter european and american settlers did not tame the west but rather conquered it by suppressing the native american and hispanic peoples who had preceded them into the region.
but those conquests were less than complete so the argument goes and the west therefore remains uniquely among american regions an unsettled arena of commingling and competition among those groups.
moreover in these accounts the wests distinctively challenging climate and geography yielded to human habitation not through the efforts of heroic individual pioneers but only through massive corporate and especially federal government investments in transportation systems like the transcontinental railroad and irrigation projects like the watering of cal i fornias central valley.
such developments still give western life its special character today.
chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 to learn more dee brown bury my heart at wounded knee an indian history of the american west 1970 william cronon natures metropolis chicago and the great west 1991 lawrence goodwyn the populist moment a short history of the agrarian revolt in america 1978 steven hahn the roots of southern populism yeoman farmers and the transformation of the georgia upcountry 1850 1890 1983 robert v hine the american west a new interpretive history 2nd ed 1984 patricia nelson limerick legacy of conquest the unbroken past of the american west 1987 frederick jackson turner the signicance of the frontier in american history 1893 elliott west the contested plains indians goldseekers and the rush to colorado 1998 richard white its your misfortune and none of my own a new history of the american west 1991 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at empire and expansion 1890 1909 we assert that no nation can long endure half republic and half empire and we warn the american people that imperialism abroad will lead quickly and inevitably to despotism at home.
i n the years immediately following the civil war americans remained astonishingly indifferent to the outside world.
enmeshed in struggles over reconstruction and absorbed in efforts to heal the wounds of civil war build an industrial economy make their cities habitable and settle the sprawling west most citizens took little interest in international affairs.
but the sunset decades of the nineteenth century witnessed a momentous shift in u s foreign policy.
americas new diplomacy reected the far reaching changes that were reshaping agriculture industry and the social structure.
american statesmen also responded to the intensifying scramble of several other nations for international advantage in the dawning age of empire by the beginning of the twentieth century america had acquired its own empire an astonishing departure from its venerable anticolonial traditions.
the world now had to reckon with a new great power potentially powerful but with diplomatic ambitions and principles that remained to be de ned.
america turns outward many developments fed the nations ambition for overseas expansion.
both farmers and factory owners began to look for markets beyond american shores as agricultural and industrial production boomed.
many americans believed that the united states had to expand or explode.
their country was bursting with a new sense of power generated by the robust growth in population wealth and productive capacity and it was trembling from the hammer blows of labor violence and agrarian unrest.
overseas markets might provide a safety valve to relieve those pressures.
other forces also whetted the popular appetite for overseas involvement.
the lurid yellow press of joseph pulitzer and william randolph hearst described foreign exploits as manly adventures the kind of dashing derring do that was the stuff of young boys dreams.
pious missionaries inspired by books like the rever this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
chapter 27 empire and expansion 1890 1909 the imperial menu a pleased uncle sam gets ready to place his order with headwaiter william mckinley.
swallowing some of these possessions eventually produced political indigestion.
end josiah strongs our country its possible future and its present crisis looked overseas for new souls to harvest.
strong trumpeted the superiority of anglo saxon civilization and summoned americans to spread their religion and their values to the backward peoples.
he cast his seed on fertile ground.
at the same time aggressive americans like theodore roosevelt and congressman later senator henry cabot lodge were in 1896 the washington post editorialized a new consciousness seems to have come upon us the consciousness of strength and with it a new appetite the yearning to show our strength.
ambition interest land hunger pride the mere joy of ghting whatever it may be we are animated by a new sensation.
we are face to face with a strange destiny.
the taste of empire is in the mouth of the people even as the taste of blood is in the jungle.
it means an imperial policy the republic renascent taking her place with the armed nations.
interpreting darwinism to mean that the earth belonged to the strong and the t that is to uncle sam.
this view was strengthened as latecomers to the colonial scramble scooped up leavings from the banquet table of earlier diners.
africa previously unexplored and mysterious was partitioned by the europeans in the 1880s in a pell mell rush of colonial conquest.
in the 1890s japan germany and russia all extorted concessions from the anemic chinese empire.
if america was to survive in the competition of modern nationstates perhaps it too would have to become an imperial power.
the development of a new steel navy also focused attention overseas.
captain alfred thayer mahans book of 1890 the inuence of sea power upon history 1660 1783 argued that control of the sea was the key to world dominance.
mahan helped stimulate the naval race among the great powers that gained momentum around the turn of the century.
red blooded americans joined in the demands for a mightier navy and for an american built isthmian canal between the atlantic and the pacic.
americas new international interest manifested itself in several ways.
two time secretary of state james g blaine pushed his big sister policy aimed at rallying the latin american nations behind uncle sams leadership and opening latin american markets to yankee imperialist stirrings traders.
blaines efforts bore some fruit in 1889 when he presided over the rst pan american conference held in washington d c the modest beginnings of an increasingly important series of inter american assemblages.
a number of diplomatic crises or near wars also marked the path of american diplomacy in the late 1880s and early 1890s.
the american and german navies nearly came to blows in 1889 over the faraway samoan islands in the south pacic which were formally divided between the two nations in 1899.
german samoa eventually became an independent republic american samoa remains an american possession.
the lynching of eleven italians in new orleans in 1891 brought america and italy to the brink of war until the united states agreed to pay compensation.
in the ugliest affair american demands on chile after the deaths of two american sailors in the port of valparaiso in 1892 made hostilities between the two countries seem inevitable.
the threat of attack by chiles modern navy spread alarm on the pacic coast until the chileans nally agreed to pay an indemnity.
a simmering argument between the united states and canada over seal hunting near the pribilof islands off the coast of alaska was resolved by arbitration in 1893.
the willingness of americans to risk war over such distant and minor disputes demonstrated the aggressive new national mood.
americas new belligerence combined with oldtime anti british feeling to generate a serious crisis between the united states and britain in 1895 1896.
the jungle boundary between british guiana and venezuela had long been in dispute but the discovery of gold in the contested area brought the conict between britain and venezuela to a head.
president cleveland and his pugnacious secretary of state richard olney waded into the affair with a the undiplomatic note to britain by secretary of state richard olney 1835 1917 read to day the united states is practically sovereign on this continent and its at is law upon the subjects to which it connes its interposition.
its innite resources combined with its isolated position render it master of the situation and practically invulnerable as against any or all other powers.
they cant fight britain and america waged a war of words during the venezuelan boundary dispute but cooler heads prevailed.
a new era of diplomatic cooperation between the two former foes dawned as they saw themselves bound together by ties of language culture and mutual economic interest.
as the german chancellor otto von bismarck reportedly remarked the supreme geopolitical fact of the modern era is that the americans speak english combative note to britain invoking the monroe doctrine.
not content to stop there olney haughtily informed the worlds number one naval power that the united states was now calling the tune in the western hemisphere.
unimpressed british ofcials shrugged off olneys salvo as just another twist of the lions tail and replied that the affair was none of uncle sams business.
president cleveland mad clear through as he put it sent a bristling special message to congress.
he urged an appropriation for a commission of experts who would run the line where it ought to go.
if the british would not accept this rightful boundary he implied the united states would ght for it.
the entire country irrespective of political party was swept off its feet in an outburst of hysteria.
war seemed inevitable.
fortunately sober second thoughts chapter 27 empire and expansion 1890 1909 prevailed on both sides of the atlantic.
a rising challenge from kaiser wilhelms germany as well as a looming war with the dutch descended boers in south africa left britain in no mood for war with america.
london backed off and consented to arbitration.
the chastened british their eyes fully opened to the european peril were now determined to cultivate yankee friendship.
the british inaugurated an era of patting the eagles head which replaced a century or so of americas twisting the lions tail sometimes called the great rapprochement or reconciliation between the united states and britain the new angloamerican cordiality became a cornerstone of both nations foreign policies as the twentieth century opened.
control the islands.
desperate whites though only a tiny minority orga nized a successful revolt early in 1893 openly assisted by american troops who landed under the unauthorized orders of the expansionist american minister in honolulu.
the hawaiian pear is now fully ripe he wrote exultantly to his superiors in washington and this is the golden hour for the united states to pluck it a treaty of annexation was rushed to washington but before it could be railroaded through the senate republican president harrisons term expired and democratic president cleveland came in.
suspecting that his powerful nation had gravely wronged the deposed queen liliuokalani and her people old grover abruptly withdrew the treaty.
a subsequent investigation determined that a majority of the hawaiian na spurning the hawaiian pear enchanted hawaii had early attracted the attention of americans.
in the morning years of the nineteenth century the breeze brushed islands were a way station and provisioning point for yankee shippers sailors and whalers.
in 1820 the rst new eng land missionaries arrived preaching the twin blessings of protestant christianity and protective calico.
they came to do good and did well as hawaii became an increasingly important center for sugar production.
americans gradually came to regard the hawaiian islands as a virtual extension of their own coastline.
the state department beginning in the 1840s sternly warned other powers to keep their grasping hands off.
americas grip was further tightened in 1887 by a treaty with the native government guaranteeing priceless naval base rights at spacious pearl harbor.
but trouble was brewing in the insular paradise.
old world pathogens had scythed the indigenous hawaiian population down to one sixth of its size at the time of the rst contact with europeans leading the american sugar lords to import large numbers of asian laborers to work the caneelds and sugar mills.
by centurys end chinese and japa nese immigrants outnumbered both whites and native hawaiians amid mounting worries that tokyo might be tempted to intervene on behalf of its often abused nationals.
then sugar markets went sour in 1890 when the mckinley tariff raised barriers against the hawaiian product.
white american planters thereupon renewed their efforts to secure the annexation of hawaii to the united states.
they were blocked by the strong willed queen liliuokalani who insisted that native hawaiians should queen liliuokalani 1838 1917 liliuokalani was the last reigning queen of hawaii whose defense of native hawaiian self rule led to a revolt by white settlers and to her dethronement.
she wrote many songs the most famous of which was aloha oe or farewell to thee played countless times by hawaiian bands for departing tourists.
alaska purchased from russia 1867 arctic circle russia 60n canada beijing u s troops help suppress boxer rebellion 1900 beijing korea china 30n japan shanghai hong kong gr.
united states hawaii overthrow of monarchy 1893 annexed 1898 tokyo atlantic ocean cuba war with spain 1898 u s protectorate 1902 midway 1867 philippines acquired from spain 1898 tropic of cancer wake i.
1899 puerto rico acquired from spain 1898 johnston atoll guam acquired from spain 1898 howland i.
0 equator niihau kingman reef baker i kauai molokai maui palmyra atoll jarvis i oahu honolulu pacifi c o c ea n samoa potential naval conflict 1889 divided between germany and united states 1899 australia 30s pearl harbor diamond head lanai kahoolawe hilo bay hawaii boundary dispute between venezuela and british guiana 1895 1896 hawaiian islands south america tropic of capricorn dispute over u s sailors attacked in chile 1891 n 120e oahu 180 1 000 2 000 km.
1 000 150w 2 000 mi.
120w 90w map 27 1 united states expansion 1857 1917 with the annexation of the philippines hawaii and puerto rico in 1898 the united states became an imperial power.
tives opposed annexation.
although queen liliuokalani could not be reinstated the sugarcoated move for annexation had to be temporarily abandoned.
the hawaiian pear continued to ripen until the fateful year of 1898 when the united states acquired its overseas empire see map 27 1.
cubans rise in revolt cubas masses frightfully misgoverned again rose against their spanish oppressors in 1895.
the roots of their revolt were partly economic.
sugar production the backbone of the islands prosperity was crippled 60w 30w interactive map when the american tariff of 1894 restored high duties on the toothsome product.
the desperate insurgents now sought to drive out their spanish overlords by adopting a scorched earth policy.
the insurrectos torched caneelds and sugar mills and dynamited passenger trains.
their destructive tactics also menaced american interests on the island.
american sympathies went out to the cuban underdogs.
sentiment aside american business had an investment stake of about 50 million in cuba and an annual trade stake of about 100 million all of it put at risk by revolutionary upheaval.
moreover as the calculating senator lodge put it cuba lay right athwart the line that led to the much anticipated panama canal.
chapter 27 empire and expansion 1890 1909 whoever controlled cuba said lodge controls the gulf of mexico much was riding on the outcome of events in troubled cuba.
fuel was added to the cuban conagration in 1896 with the arrival of the spanish general butcher weyler.
he undertook to crush the rebellion by herding many civilians into barbed wire reconcentration camps where they could not give assistance to the armed insurrectos.
lacking proper sanitation these enclosures turned into deadly pestholes the victims died like dogs.
atrocities in cuba were red meat for the sensational new yellow journalism of william randolph hearst and joseph pulitzer.
engaged in a titanic duel for circulation each attempted to outdo the other with screeching headlines and hair raising scoops where atrocity stories did not exist they were invented.
hearst sent the gifted artist frederic remington to cuba to draw sketches allegedly with the pointed admonition you furnish the pictures and ill furnish the war among other outrages remington depicted spanish customs ofcials brutally disrobing and searching an american woman.
most readers of hearsts journal their indignation soaring had no way of knowing that such tasks were performed by female attendants.
hearst also sensationally publicized a private letter from the spanish minister in washington dupuy de lme.
the indiscreet epistle stolen from the mails described president mckinley in decidedly unattering terms.
the resulting uproar forced dupuy de lmes resignation and further infuriated the american public.
then early in 1898 washington sent the battleship maine to cuba ostensibly for a friendly visit but actually to protect and evacuate americans if a dangerous are up should occur and to demonstrate washingtons concern for the islands stability.
tragedy struck on february 15 1898 when the maine mysteriously blew up in havana harbor with a loss of 260 sailors.
two investigations of the iron cof n ensued one by u s naval ofcers and the other by spanish ofcials.
the explosion of the maine february 15 1898 encouraged and amplied by the yellow press the outcry over the tragedy of the maine helped drive the country into an impulsive war against spain.
the spanish american war cuba libre by captain fritz w guerin of st louis 1898 this elaborately staged tableau depicts confederate and union ofcers reconciled three decades after the civil war as they join hands to liberate innocent cuba from her chains of bondage to spain.
whelming evidence that the initial explosion had resulted from spontaneous combustion in one of the coal bunkers adjacent to a powder magazine.
but americans in 1898 now mad for war blindly embraced the less likely explanation.
lashed to fury by the yellow press they leapt to the inaccurate conclusion that the spanish government had been guilty of intolerable treachery.
the battle cry of the hour became remember the maine.
to hell with spain.
the spaniards concluded that the explosion had been internal and presumably accidental the americans argued that the blast had been caused by a submarine mine.
not until 1976 did u s navy admiral h g rickover con rm the original spanish nding with over many spaniards felt that accusations about their blowing up the maine reected on spanish honor.
one madrid newspaper spoke up the american jingoes.
imagine us capable of the most foul villainies and cowardly actions.
scoundrels by nature the american jingoes believe that all men are made like themselves.
what do they know about noble and generous feelings.
we should not in any way heed the jingoes they are not even worth our contempt or the saliva with which we might honor them in spitting at their faces.
nothing would do but to hurl the dirty spanish ag from the hemisphere.
the national war fever burned ever higher even though american diplomats had already gained madrids agreement to washingtons two basic demands an end to the reconcentration camps and an armistice with cuban rebels.
the cautious mckinley found himself in a jam.
he did not want hostilities but neither did he want spain to remain in possession of cuba.
nor for that matter did he want a fully independent cuba over which the united states could exercise no control.
more impetuous souls denounced the circumspect president as wobbly willie mckinley.
fight hungry theodore roosevelt reportedly snarled that the white livered occupant of the white house did not have the backbone of a chocolate clair the president whose shaken nerves required sleeping pills was even being hanged in efgy.
mckinley recognizing the inevitable eventually yielded and gave the people what they wanted.
but public pressure did not fully explain mckinleys course.
he had little faith in spains oft broken promises.
he worried about democratic reprisals in the upcoming presidential election of 1900 if he continued to appear indecisive in a time of crisis.
he also acknowledged americas commercial and strategic interests in cuba.
on april 11 1898 mckinley sent his war message to congress urging armed intervention to free the oppressed cubans.
the legislators responded uproariously with what was essentially a declaration of war.
in a burst of self righteousness they likewise adopted chapter 27 empire and expansion 1890 1909 the hand tying teller amendment.
this proviso proclaimed to the world that when the united states had overthrown spanish misrule it would give the cubans their freedom a declaration that caused imperialistic europeans to smile skeptically.
deweys may day victory at manila yet dewey was in a perilous position.
he had destroyed the enemy eet but he could not storm the 120e hong kong gr.
formosa taiwan pac i f ic ocean 20n japan hainan n y we de oh dewy was the morning upon the rst of may and dewey was the admiral down in manila bay.
and dewy were the spaniards eyes them orbs of black and blue and dew we feel discouraged.
i dew not think we dew.
110e c h in a south china french sea indochina an ta ba the american people plunged into the war lightheartedly like schoolchildren off to a picnic.
bands blared incessantly therell be a hot time in the old town tonight and hail hail the gangs all here leading some foreigners to believe that those were national anthems.
the war got off to a giddy start for american forces.
even before the declaration of war on february 25 1898 while navy secretary john d long was away from the ofce his hot blooded assistant secretary theodore roosevelt took matters into his own hands.
roosevelt cabled commodore george dewey commanding the american asiatic squadron at hong kong to descend upon spains philippines in the event of war.
the very devil seemed to possess him long later wrote of roosevelts actions.
but president mckinley subsequently con rmed roosevelts instructions even though an attack in the distant far east seemed like a strange way to free nearby cuba.
dewey carried out his orders magnicently on may 1 1898 see map 27 2.
sailing boldly with his six warships at night into the fortied harbor of manila he trained his guns the next morning on the moldy ten ship spanish eet.
the entire collection of antiquated and overmatched vessels was quickly destroyed with a loss of nearly four hundred spaniards killed and wounded and without the loss of a single american life.
taciturn george dewey became a national hero overnight.
an amateur poet blossomed forth with this forts of manila with his sailors.
his nerves frayed he was forced to wait in the sweltering bay while troop reinforcements were slowly assembled in america.
the appearance of german warships in manila harbor deepened the tension.
long awaited american troops nally arriving in force captured manila on august 13 1898 in collaboration with filipino insurgents commanded by their well educated part chinese leader emilio aguinaldo.
dewey to his later regret had brought this shrewd and magnetic revolutionary from exile in asia so that he might weaken spanish resistance.
these thrilling events in the philippines had meanwhile focused attention on hawaii.
an impression spread that america needed the archipelago as a coaling and provisioning way station in order to send supplies and reinforcements to dewey.
mckinley also worried that japan might grab the hawaiian islands while america was distracted elsewhere.
a joint resolution of annexation was rushed through congress and approved by mckinley on july 7 1898.
it granted ha luzon south manila surrenders aug china 13 1898 manila sea bay manila philippine sea manila philippine islands corregidor dewey spanish fleet destroyed may 1 1898 10n sulu sea mindanao britis h north borneo sarawak gr.
east indies 400 km.
american forces american victory spanish possessions map 27 2 deweys route in the philippines 1898 interactive map victory over spain emilio aguinaldo ca.
1869 1964 and followers 1900 aguinaldo had a colorfully checkered career.
exiled from the philippines by the spanish in 1897 he was brought back in 1898 to assist the american invasion.
a year later he led the filipino insurrection against the new american rulers.
captured in 1901 he declared his loyalty to the united states.
during world war ii he collaborated with the japanese when they occupied the philippines.
after a lifetime of political intrigue and armed struggle aguinaldo died peacefully in manila in 1964 in his ninety fth year.
waiian residents u s citizenship hawaii received full territorial status in 1900.
the confused invasion of cuba shortly after the outbreak of war the spanish government ordered a eet of decrepit warships to cuba.
panic seized the eastern seaboard of the united states.
american vacationers abandoned their seashore cottages while ner vous investors moved their securities to inland depositories.
the spanish armada eventually wheezed into bottle shaped santiago harbor cuba where it was easily blockaded by the much more powerful american eet.
sound strategy seemed to dictate that an american army be sent in from the rear to drive out the spanish ships.
leading the invading force was the grossly overweight general william r shafter a would be warrior so blubbery and gout stricken that he had to be carried about on a door.
his troops were woefully unequipped for war in the tropics they had been amply provided with heavy woolen underwear and uniforms designed for subzero operations against the indians.
the rough riders a part of the invading army now charged onto the stage of history.
this colorful regiment of volunteers short on discipline but long on dash consisted largely of western cowboys and other hardy characters with a sprinkling of ex polo players and ex convicts.
commanded by colonel leonard wood the group was orga nized principally by the glory chasing theodore roosevelt who had resigned from the navy department to serve as lieutenant colonel.
he was so nearsighted that as a safeguard he took along a dozen pairs of spectacles cached in handy spots on his person or nearby.
about the middle of june a bewildered american army of seventeen thousand men nally embarked at congested tampa florida amid scenes of indescribable confusion.
shafters landing near santiago thanks to the diversionary tactics of cuban insurrectos met little opposition.
brisk ghting broke out on july 1 at el caney and kettle hill up which colonel roosevelt and his horseless rough riders charged with strong support from two crack black regiments.
they suffered heavy casualties but the colorful colonel having the time of his life shot a spaniard with his revolver and with a mixture of modesty and immodesty colonel theodore roosevelt 1858 1919 wrote privately in 1903 of his rough riders in my regiment nine tenths of the men were better horsemen than i was and probably two thirds of them better shots than i was while on the average they were certainly hardier and more enduring.
yet after i had had them a very short while they all knew and i knew too that nobody else could command them as i could.
chapter 27 empire and expansion 1890 1909 colonel theodore roosevelt with some of the rough riders roosevelt later described his rst encounter with the spanish enemy soon we came to the brink of a deep valley.
there was a good deal of cracking of ries way off in front of us but as they used smokeless powder we had no idea as to exactly where they were or who they were shooting at.
then it dawned on us that we were the target.
the bullets began to come overhead making a sound like the ripping of a silk dress with sometimes a kind of pop.
we advanced ring at them and drove them off rejoiced to see his victim double up like a jackrabbit.
he later wrote a book on his exploits which the famed satirist finley peter dunnes character mr.
dooley remarked ought to have been entitled alone in cubia sic.
the american army fast closing in on santiago spelled doom for the badly outgunned spanish eet.
on july 3 the spaniards dutifully steamed out of the harbor and into the teeth of the waiting american warships.
dont cheer men captain philip of the texas admonished his seamen.
the poor devils are dying shortly thereafter santiago surrendered see map 27 3.
hasty preparations were now made for a descent upon puerto rico before the war should end.
there the american army met even less resistance than in cuba.
by this time spain had satised its honor.
on august 12 1898 it signed an armistice.
if the spaniards had held out a few months longer in cuba the american army might have melted away.
the inroads of malaria typhoid fever dysentery and yellow fever became so severe that hundreds were incapacitated an army of convalescents others suffered from malodorous canned meat known as embalmed beef all told nearly four hundred men lost their lives to bullets over ve thousand succumbed to bacteria and other causes.
30n u ni ted sta tes 80w el caney july 1 1898 san juan hill july 1 1898 santiago santiago harbor gulf of tampa mexico florida kettle hill july 1 1898 bahamas gr.
spanish fleet destroyed july 3 1898 havana cuba 20n a tl a ntic ocea n santiago uss maine exploded feb 1898 haiti dominican republic jamaica gr.
caribbean sea n puerto rico san juan guayama gunica 300 km.
american forces spanish forces american victory u s.
naval blockade spanish possessions map 27 3 the cuban campaign 1898 interactive map the burdens of empire americas course curse.
of empire late in 1898 spanish and american negotiators met in paris.
war racked cuba as expected was freed from its spanish overlords.
the americans had little difculty in securing the remote pacic island of guam which they had captured early in the con ict from the astonished spaniards who lacking a cable had not known that a war was on.
spain also ceded puerto rico to the united states as payment for war costs.
ironically the last remnant of spains vast new world empire thus became the rst territory ever annexed to the united states without the express promise of eventual statehood.
in the decades to come american investment in the island and puerto rican immigration to the united states would make this acquisition one of the weightier consequences of this somewhat carefree war see makers of america the puerto ricans pp.
knottiest of all was the problem of the philippines a veritable apple of discord.
these lush islands not only embraced an area larger than the british isles but also contained an ethnically diverse population of some 7 million souls.
mckinley was confronted with a devils dilemma.
he did not feel that america could honorably give the islands back to spanish misrule especially after it had fought a war to free cuba.
and america would be turning its back upon its responsibilities in a cowardly fashion he believed if it simply pulled up anchor and sailed away.
mckinley viewed virtually all the choices open to him as trouble fraught.
the filipinos if left to govern themselves might fall into anarchy.
one of the major powers possibly aggressive germany or japan might then try to seize them.
the result could be a major war into which the united states would be sucked.
seemingly the least of the evils consistent with national honor and safety was to acquire all the philippines and then perhaps give the filipinos their freedom later.
president mckinley ever sensitive to public opinion kept a carefully attuned ear to the ground.
the rumble that he heard seemed to call for the entire group of islands.
zealous protestant missionaries were eager for new converts from spanish catholicism and the invalid mrs mckinley to whom her husband was de the philippines had been substantially christianized by catholics before the founding of jamestown in 1607 voted expressed deep concern about the welfare of the filipinos.
wall street had generally opposed the war but awakened by the booming of deweys guns it was clamoring for prots in the philippines.
a tormented mckinley later claimed that he went down on his knees seeking divine guidance and heard an inner voice telling him to take all the philippines and christianize and civilize them.
accordingly he decided for outright annexation of the islands.
manila remained a sticking point with the spaniards because it had been captured the day after the armistice was signed and the city could not therefore properly be claimed among the spoils of war.
but the americans broke the deadlock by agreeing to pay spain 20 million for the philippine islands the last great spanish haul from the new world.
the signing of the pact of paris touched off one of the most impassioned foreign policy debates in american history.
the issue of what to do with the philippines confronted americans with fundamental questions about their national identity.
except for glacial alaska coral reefed hawaii and a handful of pacic atolls acquired mostly for whaling stations and guano fertilizer needed to replenish southern soil exhausted by overcultivation the republic had hitherto absorbed only contiguous territory on the continent.
all previous accessions had been thinly peopled and eligible for ultimate statehood.
but in the philippines the nation had on its hands a distant tropical area thickly populated by asians of a different culture tongue and government institutions.
president william mckinley 1843 1901 later described his decision to annex the philippines when next i realized that the philippines had dropped into our laps i confess i did not know what to do with them.
i went down on my knees and prayed almighty god for light and guidance.
and one night late it came to me this way.
that there was nothing left for us to do but to take them all and to educate the filipinos and uplift and civilize and christianize them and by gods grace do the very best we could by them as our fellow men for whom christ also died.
and then i went to bed and went to sleep and slept soundly.
makers of america theafricanthe great puerto ricans american migration a t dawn on july 26 1898 the u s warship gloucester steamed into puerto ricos gunica harbor red at the spanish blockhouse and landed some thirty three hundred troops.
within days the americans had taken possession of the militarily strategic caribbean island a thousand miles southeast of florida.
in so doing they set in motion changes on the island that ultimately brought a new wave of immigrants to u s shores.
puerto rico had been a spanish possession since christopher columbus claimed it for castile in 1493.
the spaniards enslaved many of the islands forty thousand taino indians and set them to work on farms and in mines.
many tainos died of exhaustion and disease and in 1511 the indians rebelled.
the spaniards crushed the uprising killed thousands of indians and began importing african slaves thus establishing the basis for puerto ricos multiracial society.
the rst puerto rican immigrants to the united states arrived as political exiles in the nineteenth century.
from their haven in america they agitated for the islands independence from spain.
in 1897 spain nally granted the island local autonomy ironically however the first puerto ricans the spanish conquistadores treated the native taino people in puerto rico with extreme cruelty and the indians were virtually extinct by the mid 1500s.
the spanish american war the following year placed it in american hands.
puerto rican political migrs in the united states returned home but they were soon replaced by poor islanders looking for work.
changing conditions in puerto rico after the u s takeover had driven these new immigrants north.
although slow to grant puerto ricans u s citizenship the americans quickly improved health and sanitation on the island triggering a population surge in the early twentieth century.
at the same time growing monopoly control of puerto ricos sugar cane plantations undermined the islands subsistence economy and a series of hurricanes devastated the coffee plantations that had employed large numbers of people.
with almost no industry to provide wage labor puerto ricos unemployment rate soared.
thus when congress nally granted puerto ricans u s citizenship in 1917 thereby eliminating immigration hurdles many islanders hurried north to nd jobs.
over the ensuing decades puerto ricans went to work in arizona cotton elds new jersey soup factories and utah mines.
the majority however clustered in new york city and found work in the citys cigar factories shipyards and garment industry.
migration slowed somewhat after the 1920s as the great depression shrank the job market on the mainland and as world war ii made travel hazardous.
when world war ii ended in 1945 the sudden advent of cheap air travel sparked an immigration explosion and set the stage for leonard bernsteins great musical production west side story which adapted the story of romeo and juliet to the clash of white and puerto rican gangs in new york city.
as late as the 1930s the tab for a boat trip to the mainland exceeded the average puerto ricans yearly earnings.
but with an airplane surplus after world war ii the six hour ight from puerto rico to new york cost under fty dollars.
the puerto rican population on the mainland quadrupled between 1940 and 1950 and tripled again by 1960.
in 1970 1 5 million puerto ricans lived in the united states one third of the islands total population.
u s citizenship and affordable air travel made it easy for puerto ricans to return home.
thus to a far greater degree than most immigrant groups puerto ricans kept one foot in the united states and the other on their native island.
by some estimates 2 million people a year journeyed to and from the island during the postwar period.
puerto ricos gubernatorial candidates protesting in new york puerto ricans demonstrate in april 2001 against u s navy bombing exercises on the puerto rican island of vieques.
preparing for carnaval carnival this mask maker displays an elaborate mscara de carton paper mach mask made for the annual puerto rican festival.
masked gures at carnaval have been part of puerto rican culture for more than two hundred years.
sometimes campaigned in new york for the thousands of voters who were expected to return to the island in time for the election.
this transience worked to keep puerto ricans educational attainment and eng lish prociency far below the national average.
at the same time the immigrants encountered a deep seated racism in america unlike anything on their multiracial island.
throughout the postwar years puerto ricans remained one of the poorest groups in the united states with a median family income below that of african americans and mexican americans.
still puerto ricans have fared better economically in the united states than on the island where in 1970 60 percent of all inhabitants lived below the poverty line.
in recent years puerto ricans have attained more schooling and many have attended college.
invigorated by the civil rights movement of the 1960s puerto ricans also became more politically active electing growing numbers of congressmen and state and city ofcials.
chapter 27 empire and expansion 1890 1909 uncle sam and people from his colonies postcard ca.
1900 the acquisition of puerto rico the philippines hawaii and other pacic islands brought millions of people of color under the american ag and as depicted here the paternal watch of uncle sam whether they would eventually become citizens or remain colonial subjects was hotly debated in the united states.
many anti imperialists opposed colonial expansion precisely because they regarded the exotic new peoples as unassimilable opponents of annexation argued that such a step would dishonor and ultimately destroy americas venerable commitments to self determination and anticolonialism.
goddamn the united states for its vile conduct in the philippine isles burst out the usually mild mannered professor william james.
the harvard philosopher could not believe that the united states could puke up its ancient soul in ve minutes without a wink of squeamishness speaker of the house thomas czar reed resigned in protest against americas new imperial adventure.
proponents countered that philippine annexation would simply continue a glorious history of expansion that had pushed american civilization to the pacic and now beyond.
if americans were morally bound to abandon the philippines thundered theodore roosevelt we were also morally bound to abandon arizona to the apaches the anti imperialist league sprang into being to ght the mckinley administrations expansionist moves.
the orga ni zation counted among its members some of the most prominent people in the united states includ ing the presidents of stanford and harvard universities and the novelist mark twain.
the anti imperialist blanket even stretched over such strange bedfellows as the labor leader samuel gompers and the steel titan andrew carnegie.
anti imperialists raised many objections.
the filipinos thirsted for freedom to annex them would violate the consent of the governed philosophy in the declaration of independence and the constitution.
despotism abroad might well beget despotism at home.
imperialism was costly and unlikely ever to turn a prot.
finally annexation would propel the united states into the political and military cauldron of east asia.
yet the expansionists or imperialists could sing a seductive song.
they appealed to patriotism invoked americas civilizing mission and played up possible trade prots.
manila they claimed might become another hong kong.
rudyard kipling the british poet laureate of imperialism urged america down the slippery path with a quotable poem that he had circulated puerto rico and cuba the contest over american imperialism took place on the senate oor as well as around the globe.
in 1900 senator albert j beveridge 1862 1927 republican from indiana returned from an investigative trip to the philippines to defend its annexation the philippines are ours forever.
and just beyond the philippines are chinas illimitable markets.
we will not retreat from either.
we will not abandon our opportunity in the orient.
we will not renounce our part in the mission of our race trustee under god of the civilization of the world.
two years later senator george f hoar 1826 1904 republican from massachusetts broke with his party to denounce american annexation of the philippines and other territories you cannot maintain despotism in asia and a republic in america.
if you try to deprive even a savage or a barbarian of his just rights you can never do it without becoming a savage or a barbarian yourself.
before publication to theodore roosevelt and henry cabot lodge roosevelt found it good sense but poor poetry take up the white mans burden ye dare not stoop to less nor call too loud on freedom to cloak your weariness.
in short the wealthy americans must help to uplift and exploit the underprivileged underfed and underclad of the world.
over heated protests the senate approved the treaty with spain with just one vote to spare on february 6 1899.
america was now ofcially an empire.
perplexities in puerto rico and cuba from the outset the status of puerto rico was anomalous neither a state nor a territory and with little prospect of eventual independence.
the foraker act of 1900 accorded the puerto ricans a limited degree of popular government and outlawed cockghting a favorite island pastime.
congress granted u s citizenship to puerto ricans in 1917 but withheld full selfrule.
although the american regime worked wondrous improvements in education sanitation and transportation many of the inhabitants still aspired to independence.
great numbers of puerto ricans ultimately moved to new york city where they added to the complexity of the melting pot.
the annexation of puerto rico and the philippines posed a thorny legal problem did the constitution follow the ag.
did american laws including tariff laws and the bill of rights apply with full force to the newly acquired possessions.
who are we a group of puerto rican petitioners asked congress in 1900.
are we citizens or are we subjects beginning in 1901 with the insular cases a badly divided supreme court decreed in effect that the ag did outrun the constitution and that the outdistanced document did not necessarily extend with full force to the new windfall.
puerto ricans and filipinos might be subject to american rule but they did not enjoy all american rights.
cuba scorched and chaotic presented another headache.
an american military government set up under the administrative genius of general leonard wood of rough rider fame wrought miracles in government nance education agriculture and public health.
under his leadership and that of colonel william c gorgas a frontal attack was launched on yellow fever.
spectacular experiments were performed by dr walter reed and others upon american soldiers who volunteered as human guinea pigs and the stegomyia mosquito was proved to be the lethal carrier.
cleaning up breeding places for mosquitoes wiped out yellow fever in havana while dampening the fear of recurrent epidemics in cities of the south and atlantic seaboard.
the united states honoring its self denying teller amendment of 1898 withdrew from cuba in 1902.
old world imperialists could scarcely believe their eyes.
but the washington government could not turn this rich and strategic island completely loose on the international sea a grasping power like germany might secure dangerous lodgment near americas soft underbelly.
the cubans were therefore forced to write into their own constitution of 1901 the so called platt amendment.
the cubans loathed the amendment which served mckinleys ultimate purpose of bringing cuba under american control.
plattism survives as a colloquial chapter 27 empire and expansion 1890 1909 term of derision even in modern day cuba.
the newly liberated cubans were forced to agree not to conclude treaties that might compromise their independence as uncle sam saw it and not to take on debt beyond their resources as uncle sam mea sured them.
they further agreed that the united states might intervene with troops to restore order when it saw t.
finally the cubans promised to sell or lease needed coaling or naval stations ultimately two and then only one guantnamo to their powerful benefactor the united states nally abrogated the amendment in 1934 although uncle sam still occupies a twenty eightthousand acre cuban beachhead at guantnamo under an agreement that can be revoked only by the consent of both parties see p 855.
better battleships.
a masterly organizer secretary of war elihu root established a general staff for the army and founded the war college in washington.
one of the most benecial results of the con ict was the further closing of the bloody chasm between north and south.
thousands of patriotic southerners had ocked to the stars and stripes and the graybearded general joseph fighting joe wheeler a confederate cavalry hero of about a thousand civil war skirmishes and battles was given a command in cuba.
he allegedly cried in the heat of battle to hell with the yankees.
dammit i mean the spaniards even so the newly imperial nation was not yet prepared to pay the full bill for its new status.
by taking on the philippine islands the united states became new horizons in two hemispheres in essence the spanish american war was a kind of colossal coming out party.
deweys thundering guns merely advertised the fact that the nation was already a world power.
the war itself was short 113 days low in casualties and theatrically successful despite the bungling.
secretary of state john hay called it a splendid little war american prestige rose sharply and the europeans grudgingly accorded the republic more respect.
britain france russia and other great powers pointedly upgraded their legations in washington d c which had previously been regarded as a diplomatic backwater.
an exhilarating new martial spirit thrilled america buoyed along by the newly popular military marching band music of john philip sousa.
most americans did not start the war with consciously imperialistic motives but after falling through the cellar door of imperialism in a drunken t of idealism they wound up with imperialistic and colonial fruits in their grasp.
captain mahans big navyism seemed vindicated energizing popular support for more and three years after the spanish american war ended a foreign diplomat in washington remarked i have seen two americas the america before the spanish american war and the america since.
the new jingoism an enthusiastic uncle sam cheers the u s navy in the splendid little war of 1898.
many americans however were less than enthused about americas new imperial adventure.
the filipino insurrection a full edged far eastern power.
but the distant islands eventually became a heel of achilles a kind of indefensible hostage given to japan as events proved in world war ii.
here and elsewhere the americans had shortsightedly assumed burdensome commitments that they proved unwilling to defend with appropriate naval and military outlays.
little brown brothers in the philippines the liberty loving filipinos assumed that they like the cubans would be granted their freedom after the spanish american war.
they were tragically deceived.
washington excluded them from the peace negotiations with spain and made clear its intention to stay in the philippines inde nitely.
bitterness toward the occupying american troops erupted into open insurrection on february 4 1899 under emilio aguinaldo.
having plunged into war with spain to free cuba the united states was now forced to deploy some 126 000 troops ten thousand miles away to rivet shackles onto a people who asked for nothing but freedom in the american tradition.
the poorly equipped filipino rebels soon melted into the jungle to wage vicious guerrilla warfare.
months earlier american soldiers thought they were rescuing innocent victims of spanish tyranny.
now they viewed the filipinos as dangerous enemies of the united states.
this shift contributed to a mounting race war in which both sides perpetrated sordid atrocities.
uncle sams soldiers adopted the water cure forcing water down victims throats until they yielded information or died.
american built reconcentration camps rivaled those of butcher weyler in cuba.
having begun the spanish war with noble ideals america now dirtied its hands.
one new york newspaper published a reply to rudyard kiplings famous poem weve taken up the white mans burden of ebony and brown now will you kindly tell us rudyard how we may put it down.
the americans broke the back of the filipino insurrection in 1901 when they cleverly in ltrated a guerrilla camp and captured aguinaldo.
but sporadic ghting dragged on for many dreary months eventually claiming the lives of 4 234 americans and as many as 600 000 filipinos.
captured filipino insurrectionists ca.
1899 for three years after its annexation of the philippine islands in 1898 the united states fought a savage war to suppress a filipino rebellion against american rule.
some 600 000 filipinos perished.
there was bitter irony in this clash as the americans had claimed to be liberating the filipinos from their oppressive spanish masters now the yankee liberators appeared to be no less oppressive than the spaniards they had ousted.
future president william h taft an able and amiable ohioan who weighed some 350 pounds became civil governor of the philippines in 1901.
forming a strong attachment to the filipinos he called them his little brown brothers and danced light footedly with the filipino women.
but mckinleys benevolent assimilation of the philippines proceeded with painful slowness.
washington poured millions of dollars into the islands to improve roads sanitation and public health.
important economic ties including trade in sugar developed between the two peoples.
american teachers set up an unusually good school system and helped make eng lish a second language.
but all this vast expenditure which proted america little was illreceived.
the filipinos hated compulsory americanization and pined for liberty.
they nally got their freedom on the fourth of july 1946.
in the meantime thousands of filipinos emigrated to the united states see makers of america the filipinos pp.
makers of america theafricanthe great filipinos american migration a t the beginning of the twentieth century the united states its imperial muscles just exed in the war with spain found itself in possession of the philippines.
uncertain of how to manage this empire which seethed resentfully against its new masters the united states promised to build democracy in the philippines and to ready the islanders for home rule.
almost immediately after annexation the american governor of the archipelago sent a corps of filipino students to the united states hoping to forge future leaders steeped in american ways who would someday govern an independent philippines.
yet this small student group found little favor in their adopted country although in their native land many went on to become respected citizens and leaders.
most filipino immigrants to the united states in these years however came not to study but to toil.
with chinese immigration banned hawaii and the pacic coast states turned to the philippines for cheap agricultural labor.
beginning in 1906 the hawaiian sugar planters association aggressively recruited fili filipino laborers at work on a hawaiian pineapple plantation 1930s pino workers.
enlistments grew slowly at rst but by the 1920s thousands of young filipino men had reached the hawaiian islands and been assigned to sugar plantations or pineapple elds.
typically a young filipino wishing to emigrate rst made his way to manila where he signed a contract with the growers that promised three years labor in return for transportation to hawaii wages free housing and fuel and return passage at the end of the contract.
not all of the emigrants returned there remain in hawaii today some former eld workers still theoretically eligible for free transport back to their native land.
those filipinos venturing as far as the american mainland found work less arduous but also less certain than did their countrymen on hawaiian plantations.
many mainlanders worked seasonally in winter as domestic servants busboys or bellhops in summer journeying to the elds to harvest lettuce strawberries sugar beets and potatoes.
eventually filipinos along with mexican immigrants shared the dubious honor of making up cal i fornias agricultural work force.
filipino workers arriving in honolulu 1940s tags around their necks indicated the plantations to which they had been assigned.
a mobile society filipino americans also were overwhelmingly male there was only one filipino woman for every fourteen filipino men in cal i fornia in 1930.
thus the issue of intermarriage became acutely sensitive.
cal i fornia and many other states prohibited the marriage of asians and caucasians in demeaning laws that remained on the books until 1948.
and if a filipino so much as approached a caucasian woman he could expect reprisals sometimes violent.
for example white vigilante groups roamed the yakima valley in washington and the san joaquin and salinas valleys in cal i fornia intimidating and even attacking filipinos whom they accused of improperly accosting white women.
in 1930 one filipino was murdered and others wounded after they invited some caucasian women to a dance.
undeterred the filipinos challenged the restrictive state laws and the hooligans who found in them an excuse for mayhem.
but filipinos who did not become eligible for american citizenship until 1946 long lacked political leverage.
after world war ii filipino immigration accelerated.
between 1950 and 1970 the number of filipinos in the united states nearly doubled with women and men stepping aboard the new transpacic airliners in roughly equal numbers.
many of these recent arrivals sprang from sturdy middle class stock and sought in america a better life for their children than the philippines seemed able to offer.
today the war torn and perpetually depressed archipelago sends more immigrants to american shores than does any other asian nation.
filipino nurses the nursing shortage in the united states has created many job opportunities for filipino nurses who are trained to high medical standards and speak english.
a nurse in the united states today can earn more than a physician in the philippines.
chapter 27 empire and expansion 1890 1909 hinging the open door in china ominous events had meanwhile been brewing in faraway and enfeebled china.
after its defeat by japan in 1894 1895 the imperialistic european powers notably russia and germany moved in.
like vultures descending upon a wounded animal they began to tear away valuable leaseholds and economic spheres of inuence from the manchu government.
a growing group of americans viewed the vivisection of china with alarm.
churches worried about their missionary strongholds.
merchants feared that europeans would monopolize chinese markets.
an alarmed american public openly prodded by the press and slyly nudged by certain free trade britons demanded that washington do something.
secretary of state john hay a quiet but witty poet novelist diplomat with a air for capturing the popular imagination nally decided upon a dramatic move.
in the summer of 1899 hay dispatched to all the great powers a communication soon known as the open door note.
he urged them to announce that in their leaseholds or spheres of inuence they would respect certain chinese rights and the ideal of fair competition.
tellingly hay had not bothered to consult the chinese themselves.
american missionary grace roberts teaching in china 1903 by the turn of the twentieth century thousands of american men and women had established christian missions in faraway places such as hawaii china africa and turkey.
missionaries educational and religious work helped build sentimental political and economic ties between americans and distant nations.
at times however these close connections led to violent confrontations such as when the nationalist boxer rebels attacked missionaries in china in 1900 as symbols of foreign encroachment.
protestant women justied their missionary activities as a logical extension of their traditional female duty to nurture and uplift but in reality these foreign assignments often propelled them to undertake responsibilities that their stateside mothers and sisters rarely encountered.
the phrase open door quickly caught the american publics fancy.
but hays proposal caused much squirming in the leading capitals of the world though all the great powers save russia with covetous designs on manchuria eventually agreed to it.
open door or not patriotic chinese did not care to be used as a doormat by the western powers.
in 1900 a superpatriotic group known as the boxers for their training in the martial arts broke loose with the cry kill foreign devils in what became known as the boxer rebellion they murdered more than two hundred foreigners and thousands of chinese christians and besieged the foreign diplomatic community in the capital beijing peking.
a multinational rescue force of some eighteen thousand soldiers arrived in the nick of time and quelled the rebellion.
they included several thousand american troops dispatched from the philippines to protect u s rights under the 1844 treaty of wanghia see p 430 and to keep the open door propped open.
the victorious allied invaders acted angrily and vindictively.
they assessed prostrate china an excessive indemnity of 333 million of which americas share was to be 24 5 million.
when washington discovered that this sum was much more than enough to pay damages and expenses it remitted about 18 million to be used for the education of a selected group of chinese students in the united states a not so subtle initiative to further the westernization of asia.
the rise of roosevelt troubled years and were formally incorporated into the nine power treaty of 1922 only to be callously violated by japans takeover of manchuria a decade later see pp.
802 and 819.
imperialism or bryanism in 1900.
columbias easter bonnet many americans felt a surge of pride as the united states became an imperial power at the dawn of the twentieth century.
but then and later americas world role proved hotly controversial at home as well as abroad.
secretary hay let y another paper broadside in 1900 announcing that henceforth the open door would embrace the territorial integrity of china in addition to its commercial integrity.
those principles helped spare china from possible partition in those the commercial interests of britain and america were imperiled by the power grabs in china and a close concert between the two powers would have helped both.
yet as secretary of state john hay 1838 1905 wrote privately in june 1900 every senator i see says for gods sake dont let it appear we have any understanding with england how can i make bricks without straw.
that we should be compelled to refuse the assistance of the greatest power in the world britain in carrying out our own policy because all irishmen are democrats and some american germans are fools is enough to drive a man mad.
president mckinleys renomination by the republicans in 1900 was a foregone conclusion.
he had won a war and acquired rich though burdensome real estate he had safeguarded the gold standard and he had brought the promised prosperity of the full dinner pail.
an irresistible vice presidential boom developed for theodore teddy roosevelt tr the cowboy hero of the cuban campaign.
capitalizing on his war born popularity he had been elected governor of new york where the local political bosses had found him headstrong and difcult to manage.
they therefore devised a scheme to kick the colorful colonel upstairs into the vice presidency.
this plot to railroad roosevelt worked beautifully.
gesticulating wildly he sported a western style cowboy hat that made him stand out like a white crow at the republican convention.
to cries of we want teddy he was handily nominated.
a wary mark hanna reportedly moaned that there would now be only one heartbeat between that damned cowboy and the presidency of the united states.
william jennings bryan was the odds on choice of the democrats meeting at kansas city.
their platform proclaimed that the paramount issue was republican overseas imperialism.
mckinley the soul of dignity once again campaigned safely from his front porch.
bryan again took to the stump in a cyclonic campaign.
lincoln he charged had abolished slavery for 3 5 million africans mckinley had reestablished it for 7 million filipinos.
roosevelt out bryaned bryan touring the country with revolver shooting cowboys.
flashing his monumental teeth and pounding his st into his palm roosevelt denounced all dastards who would haul down old glory.
mckinley handily triumphed by a much wider margin than in 1896 7 218 491 to 6 356 734 popular votes and 292 to 155 electoral votes.
but victory for the republicans was not a mandate for or against imperialism.
if there was any mandate at all it was for the two ps prosperity and protectionism.
meanwhile the new york bosses gleefully looked forward to watching the nettlesome roosevelt take the veil as vice president.
chapter 27 empire and expansion 1890 1909 tr brandisher of the big stick kindly william mckinley had scarcely served another six months when in september 1901 he was murdered by a deranged anarchist in buffalo new york.
roosevelt rode a buckboard out of his campsite in the adirondacks to take the oath of ofce becoming at age fortytwo the youngest president thus far in american history.
born into a wealthy and distinguished new york family roosevelt a red blooded blue blood had ercely built up his spindly asthmatic body by a stern and self imposed routine of exercise.
educated partly in europe he graduated from harvard with phi beta kappa honors and published at the age of twenty four the rst of some thirty volumes of muscular prose.
he worked as a ranch owner and cowboy in the dakotas before pursuing his political career full time.
barrelchested bespectacled and ve feet ten inches tall with mulelike molars squinty eyes droopy mustache and piercing voice he was ever the delight of cartoonists.
the rough riders high voltage energy was electrifying.
believing that it was better to wear out than to rust out he would shake the hands of some six thousand people at one stretch or ride horseback many miles in a day as an example for portly cavalry ofcers.
incurably boyish and bellicose roosevelt ceaselessly preached the virile virtues and denounced paci stic ubdubs and mollycoddles an ardent champion of military and naval preparedness he adopted as his pet proverb speak softly and carry a big stick and you will go far his outsized ego caused it to be said of him that he wanted to be the bride at every wedding and the corpse at every funeral.
he loved people and mingled with those of all ranks from catholic cardinals to professional prizeghters one of whom blinded a rooseveltian eye in a white house bout.
tr commanded an idolatrous personal following.
after visiting him a journalist wrote you go home and wring the personality out of your clothes above all tr believed that the president should lead boldly.
he had no real respect for the delicate checks and balances among the three branches of the government.
the president he felt may take any action in the general interest that is not specically forbidden by the laws of the constitution.
building the panama canal theodore roosevelt roosevelt gives a speech with both voice and body language in north carolina in 1902.
roosevelt soon applied his bullish energy to foreign affairs.
the spanish american war had reinvigorated interest in the long talked about canal across the central american isthmus through which only printers ink had ever owed.
americans had learned a sobering lesson when the battleship oregon stationed on the pacic coast at the outbreak of war in 1898 took weeks to steam all the way around south america to join the u s eet in cuban waters.
an isthmian canal would plainly augment the strength of the navy by increasing its mobility.
such a waterway would also make easier the defense of such recent acquisitions as puerto rico hawaii and the philippines while facilitating the operations of the u s merchant marine.
initial obstacles in the path of the canal builders were legal rather than geographical.
by the terms of the ancient clayton bulwer treaty concluded with britain in 1850 the united states could not secure exclusive control over an isthmian route.
but by 1901 roosevelt and panama americas british cousins were willing to yield ground.
confronted with an unfriendly europe and bogged down in the south african boer war they consented to the hay pauncefote treaty in 1901.
it not only gave the united states a free hand to build the canal but conceded the right to fortify it as well.
but where exactly should the canal be dug.
many american experts favored a route across nicaragua but agents of the old french canal company were eager to salvage something from their costly failure at s shaped panama.
represented by a young energetic and unscrupulous engineer philippe bunau varilla the new panama canal company suddenly dropped the price of its holdings from 109 million to the re sale price of 40 million.
congress in june 1902 nally decided on the panama route.
the scene now shifted to colombia of which panama was a restive part.
the colombian sen ate rejected an american offer of 10 million and annual payment of 250 000 for a six mile wide zone across panama.
roosevelt railed against those dagoes who were frustrating his ambitions.
meanwhile impatient panamanians who had rebelled numerous times were ripe for another revolt.
they had counted on a wave of prosperity to follow construction of the canal and they feared that the united states would now turn to the nicaraguan route.
scheming bunauvarilla was no less disturbed by the prospect of losing the companys 40 million.
working hand in glove with the revolutionists he helped incite a rebellion on november 3 1903.
u s naval forces prevented colombian troops from crossing the isthmus to quell the uprising.
roosevelt moved rapidly to make steamy panama a virtual outpost of the united states.
just three days after the insurrection he hastily extended the right cutting through the continental divide in panama the culebra cut the southeastern section of the panama canal that extends through the continental divide was later renamed the gaillard cut in honor of the u s army corps of engineers ofcer who oversaw this excavation but died shortly before the canal opened in 1914.
the cut was one of the greatest engineering feats of its time.
hundreds of drills prepared holes for tons of dynamite which twice daily blasted the rock so that it could be excavated by steam shovels.
dirt trains shown in the background then hauled loads of debris to dumps twelve miles away.
the summit of culebra mountain through which the cut was made was lowered from 193 feet to 40 feet above sea level and widened considerably.
chapter 27 empire and expansion 1890 1909 hand of recognition.
fifteen days later bunau varilla who was now the panamanian minister despite his french citizenship signed the hay bunau varilla treaty in washington.
the price of the canal strip was left the same but the zone was widened from six to ten miles.
the french company gladly pocketed its 40 million from the u s treasury.
roosevelt it seems clear did not actively plot to tear panama from the side of colombia.
but the conspirators knew of his angrily expressed views and they counted on his using the big stick to hold colombia at bay.
the rough rider became so indiscreetly involved in the panama affair as to create the impression that he had been a secret party to the intrigue and the so called rape of panama marked an ugly downward lurch in u s relations with latin america.
canal construction began in 1904 in the face of daunting difculties ranging from labor troubles to landslides and lethal tropical diseases.
colonel william c gorgas the quiet and determined exterminator of yellow fever in havana ultimately made the canal zone as safe as a health resort at a cost of some 400 million an autocratic west point engineer colonel george washington goethals ultimately brought the project to completion in 1914 just as world war i was breaking out.
theodore roosevelt wrote to a correspondent in february 1904 i have been hoping and praying for three months that the santo domingans would behave so that i would not have to act in any way.
i want to do nothing but what a policeman has to do.
as for annexing the island i have about the same desire to annex it as a gorged boa constrictor might have to swallow a porcupine wrong end to.
trs perversion of monroes doctrine latin american debt defaults prompted further rooseveltian involvement in affairs south of the border.
nations such as venezuela and the dominican republic were chronically in arrears in their payments to european creditors.
germany actually bombarded a town in delinquent venezuela in 1903.
theodore roosevelt and his big stick in the caribbean 1904 roosevelts policies seemed to be turning the caribbean into a yankee pond.
roosevelt mediates between russia and japan roosevelt feared that if the germans or british got their foot in the door as bill collectors they might remain in latin america in agrant violation of the monroe doctrine.
he therefore declared a brazen policy of preventive intervention better known as the roosevelt corollary to the monroe doctrine.
he announced that in the event of future nancial malfeasance by the latin american nations the united states itself would intervene take over the customs houses pay off the debts and keep the troublesome europeans on the other side of the atlantic.
in short no outsiders could push around the latin nations except uncle sam policeman of the caribbean.
this new brandishing of the big stick in the caribbean became effective in 1905 when the united states took over the management of tariff collections in the dominican republic an arrangement formalized in a treaty with the dominicans two years later.
trs rewriting of the monroe doctrine probably did more than any other single step to promote the bad neighbor policy begun in these years.
as time wore on the new corollary was used to justify wholesale interventions and repeated landings of the marines all of which helped turn the caribbean into a yankee lake to latin americans it seemed as though the revised monroe doctrine far from providing a shield was a cloak behind which the united states sought to strangle them.
the shadow of the big stick likewise fell again on cuba in 1906.
revolutionary disorders brought an appeal from the cuban president and necessity being the mother of intervention u s marines landed.
these police forces were withdrawn temporarily in 1909 but in latin american eyes the episode was but another example of the creeping power of the colossus of the north.
roosevelt on the world stage booted and spurred roosevelt charged into international affairs far beyond latin america.
the outbreak of war between russia and japan in 1904 gave him a chance to perform as a global statesman.
the russian bear having lumbered across asia was seeking to bathe its frostbitten paws in the ice free ports of chinas manchuria particularly port arthur.
in japanese eyes manchuria and korea in tsarist hands were pistols pointed at japans strategic heart.
the japa nese responded in 1904 with a devastating surprise pounce on the russian eet at port arthur.
they proceeded to administer a humiliating series of beatings to the inept russians the rst serious military setback to a major european power by a non european force since the turkish invasions of the sixteenth century.
but as the war dragged on japan began to run short of men and yen a weakness it did not want to betray to the enemy.
tokyo ofcials therefore approached roosevelt in the deepest secrecy and asked him to help sponsor peace negotiations.
roosevelt was happy to oblige as he wanted to avoid a complete russian collapse so that the tsars empire could remain a counterweight to japans growing power.
at portsmouth new hampshire in 1905 tr guided the warring parties to a settlement that satised neither side and left the japa nese who felt they had won the war especially resentful.
japan was forced to drop its demands for a cash indemnity and russian evacuation of sakhalin island though it received some compensation in the form of effective control over korea which it formally annexed in 1910.
for achieving this agreement as well as for helping arrange an international conference at algeciras spain in 1906 to mediate north african disputes tr received the nobel peace prize in 1906.
but the price of his diplomatic glory was high for u s foreign relations.
two historic friendships withered on the windswept plains of manchuria.
u s relations with russia once friendly soured as the russians implausibly accused roosevelt of robbing them of military victory.
revelations about savage massacres of russian jews further poisoned american feeling against russia.
japan once americas protg felt cheated out of its due compensation.
both newly powerful japan and america now became rivals in asia as fear and jealousy between them grew.
a subjick race is ony funny whin its raaly subjek said finley peter dunnes mr dooley see thinking globally the age of empire pp.
about three years ago i stopped laughin at japa nese jokes japa nese laborers in california americas pacic coast soon felt the effects of the russo japa nese war.
a new restlessness swept over the rice paddies of japan occasioned by the recent con icts dislocations and tax burdens.
a new wave of japa nese immigrants began pouring into the spacious thinking globally the age of empire t he closing years of the nineteenth century witnessed an unprecedented explosion of imperialism roughly dened as the forcible imposition of one countrys rule on the unwilling inhabitants of another.
between 1870 and the outbreak of world war i in 1914 a handful of european states extended their sway over nearly one quarter of the earths surface.
other countries followed suit notably japan and eventually the united states.
all the imperial powers had in common a heritage of nationalism and a high degree of industrialization.
they commanded the elaborate administrative apparatus of large unied states along with quantities of wealth technology and murderous repower utterly beyond the capacity of the so called backward peoples they sought to dominate.
as a result imperialism was from the start a lopsided game.
as one english wit mordantly noted in 1898 whatever happens we have got the maxim gun and they have not.
yet ultimately even with their enormously disproportionate advantages the imperial states were unable to sustain the age of imperialism for much more than a century.
in many ways modern imperialism resembled eighteenth century mercantilism as economically advanced states backed away from the free trade doctrines that had energized the early stages of the industrial revolution and sought instead to create what one british imperialist called a great self sustaining and self protecting empire the new imperialism also differed from older colonialism in that the imperial powers sought not merely to exploit but also to transform modernize and westernize the backward societies under their control.
imperialists often justied their dominion over less developed societies with high toned slogans.
the british professed to be nobly shouldering the white mans burden the french piously invoked their mission civilisatrice civilizing mission.
the germans touted the benets of spreading their vaunted kultur culture.
the americans prated about the superiority of the anglo saxons as the japanese did about their own yamato race.
a young ho chi minh ho chi minh 1890 1969 attended the congress of the socialist party in tours france where the french communist party was created in late december 1920.
these protestations may have been sincere but other motives more powerfully propelled the imperial enterprise.
prominent among them was the quest for new markets as maturing industrial economies appeared to be exhausting the possibilities for economic growth at home.
the need for reliable sources of products such as cotton sugar copper coffee and tea also gured conspicuously.
an even more compelling incentive was the need to protect the huge investments of capital that built the railroads highways bridges ports mills foundries mines smelters and telegraphs of the developing world.
by the eve of the first world war fully one quarter of britains accumulated wealth was invested overseas.
but perhaps the most important factor driving the imperialist venture was simply the competitive nature of the international system itself.
in an unstable unpredictable world inhabited by ambitious and wary powers no state thought it could afford to cede an advantage however illdened to any real or imagined rival.
indeed quite independently of their hard economic value colonies came to be considered the necessary symbols of great power status.
this perverse logic proved to be a powerful dynamic once the imperial race began it was difcult to stop.
as cecil rhodes the fabled british colonizer in southern africa once said i would annex the planets if i could.
i often think of that so when belgiums king leopold took an interest in africas congo basin in the 1870s he touched off a mad imperial scramble that eventually involved belgium britain germany france italy and portugal.
less than two decades later with the exceptions of ethiopia and liberia the entire continent much of it unexplored and of dubi 30w 0 30e 60e 90e 120e 150e greenland denmark arctic circle 60n great britain russia neth.
germany belg.
morocco persia alger ia nejd egypt rio de oro tibet trucial oman kuwait li bya qatar macao port.
india f r ench west af r ic a nigeria togo kamerun r sp.
guinea f ethiopia ceylon british somaliland formosa british east africa belgian congo french indochina sarawak malay states italian somaliland du german east africa angola northern rhodesia at l a n t i c ocean siam hadhramaut french somaliland uganda ua t liberia 0 equator ic a gold coast afr sierra leone eq port.
guinea angloegyptian sudan tc nyasaland n mariana is.
philippine is.
u s marshall is.
north borneo caroline is.
s h ea st indie pa p solomon is.
ua new hebrides gr.
and france madagascar tropic of capricorn au st r ali a mozambique union of south africa tropic of cancer east timor port.
indian ocean southern rhodesia german southwest bechuanaland africa 30s pac i f ic ocean hong kong gr.
burma eritrea gambia japan shanghai gr.
bhutan nepal oman korea china afghanistan cyprus karafuto manchuria port arthur japan ottoman empire tunisia 30n mongolia italy portugal spain ifni sakhalin austriahungary france new caledonia france fiji is.
swaziland lesotho new zealand the colonial powers and their possessions germany netherlands russia france portugal united states great britain italy japan belgium spain map 27 4 the great powers and their colonial possessions 1913 ous economic value lay under european domination see map 27 4.
in asia germany annexed part of new guinea in 1884.
france completed its annexation of indochina present day vietnam laos and cambodia that same year.
britain acquired burma now myanmar in 1885 and parts of borneo and the malay peninsula soon after.
japan closed its grip on okinawa in 1872 formosa taiwan in 1895 port arthur in 1905 and korea in 1910.
all those powers in addition to russia also had designs on china which despite its venerable history seemed a poor match for the energetic nations on the make in the open door notes of 1899 and 1900 see pp.
688 689 the united states tried to temper the imperialists appetites for chinese territory and concessions while at the same time america was becoming an imperial power itself with the takeover of the philippines and puerto rico.
1 000 2 000 km.
1 000 2 000 mi.
interactive map the imperialists brought not only their might and their majesty their capital and their maxim guns.
they also brought their ideas including concepts of nationalism selfdetermination and democracy.
in 1919 a young vietnamese nationalist named nguyen sinh cung unsuccessfully petitioned the post world war i peacemakers at versailles for his countrys right to self determination.
a little more than half a century later under the name ho chi minh he secured vietnams independence by prevailing in a war rst against the french and then against the americans.
by that time the united states had long since voluntarily relinquished the philippines in 1946 though puerto rico remains an american possession and virtually all of africa and asia had been decolonized.
with the handover of hong kong 1997 and macao 1999 to the peoples republic of china the age of empire effectively ended.
chapter 27 empire and expansion 1890 1909 japanese workers building a road in california ca.
1910 valleys of california.
although japanese residents never amounted to more than 3 percent of the states population white cal i fornians ranted about a new yellow peril and feared being drowned in an asian sea.
a showdown on the inux came in 1906 when san franciscos school board coping with the aftermath of a frightful earthquake and re ordered the segregation of chinese japa nese and korean students in a special school to free more space for whites.
instantly the incident boiled into an international crisis.
the people of japan understandably sensitive on questions of race regarded this discrimination as an insult to them and their beloved children.
on both sides of the pacic irresponsible war talk sizzled in the yellow press the real yellow peril roosevelt who as a rough rider had relished shooting was less happy over the prospect that cal i fornia might stir up a war that all the other states would have to wage.
he therefore invited the entire san francisco board of education headed by a bassoon playing mayor under indictment for graft to come to the white house.
tr nally broke the deadlock but not until he had brandished his big stick and bared his big teeth.
the cal i fornians were induced to repeal the offensive school order and to accept what came to be known as the gentlemens agreement by this secret understanding worked out during 1907 1908 tokyo agreed to stop the ow of laborers to the american mainland by withholding passports.
worried that his intercession might be interpreted in tokyo as prompted by fear roosevelt hit upon a dramatic scheme to impress the japa nese with the heft of his big stick.
he daringly decided to send the entire battleship eet on a highly visible voyage around the world.
late in 1907 sixteen sparkling white smokebelching battleships started from virginia waters.
their commander pointedly declared that he was ready for a feast a frolic or a ght the great white fleet saluted by cannonading champagne corks received tumultuous welcomes in latin america hawaii new zealand and australia though it ended up having to borrow coal from the british to complete the voyage.
as events turned out an overwhelming reception in japan was the high point of the trip.
tens of thousands of kimonoed schoolchildren trained to wave tiny american ags movingly sang the star spangled banner in the warm diplomatic at mosphere created by the visit of the eet the u s signed the roottakahira agreement with japan in 1908.
it pledged both powers to respect each others territorial possessions in the pacic and to uphold the open door in china.
for the moment at least the two rising rival powers had found a means to maintain the peace.
chronology chronology supreme court insular cases platt amendment mckinley assassinated roosevelt becomes president filipino rebellion suppressed hay pauncefote treaty with britain gives united states exclusive right to build panama canal u s troops leave cuba colombian senate rejects u s proposal for canal across panama panamanian revolution against colombia hay bunau varilla treaty gives united states control of canal zone in newly independent panama cubans revolt against spain roosevelt corollary to monroe doctrine 1895 venezuelan boundary crisis with britain 1904 construction of panama canal maine explosion in havana harbor spanish american war teller amendment deweys victory at manila bay hawaii annexed united states takes over dominican republic customs ser vice roosevelt mediates russo japa nese peace treaty san francisco japa nese education crisis roosevelt arranges algeciras conference 1906 u s marines occupy cuba great white fleet makes world voyage 1907 gentlemens agreement with japan root takahira agreement puerto ricans granted u s citizenship new eng land missionaries arrive in hawaii samoa crisis with germany pan american conference mahan publishes the inuence of sea power upon history new orleans crisis with italy valparaiso crisis with chile pribilof islands dispute with canada white planter revolt in hawaii cleveland refuses hawaii annexation senate raties treaty acquiring philippines aguinaldo launches rebellion against united states in philippines first american open door note hawaii receives full territorial status foraker act for puerto rico boxer rebellion and u s military expedition to china second open door note mckinley defeats bryan for presidency chapter 27 empire and expansion 1890 1909 key terms big sister policy 670 great rapprochement 672 mckinley tariff 672 insurrectos 673 maine 674 teller amendment 676 rough riders 677 anti imperialist league 682 foraker act 683 people to know insular cases 683 platt amendment 683 open door note 688 boxer rebellion 688 hay pauncefote treaty 691 roosevelt corollary 693 root takahira agreement 696 josiah strong alfred thayer mahan james g blaine richard olney liliuokalani butcher weyler dupuy de lme george dewey emilio aguinaldo william h taft john hay theodore teddy roosevelt why did america become a world power.
a merican imperialism has long been an embarrassing topic for students of american history who remember the republics own revolutionary origins and anticolonial tradition.
perhaps for that reason many historians have tried to explain the dramatic overseas expansionism of the 1890s as some kind of aberration a sudden singular and shortlived departure from time honored american principles and practices.
various explanations have been offered to account for this spasmodic lapse.
scholars such as julius pratt pointed to the irresponsible behavior of the yellow press.
richard hofstadter ascribed americas imperial ing as the psychic crisis of the 1890s a crisis brought on he argued by the strains of the decades economic depression and the populist upheaval.
howard k beale emphasized the contagious scramble for imperial possessions by the european powers as well as japan in these years.
in beales argument the united states and theodore roosevelt in particular succumbed to a kind of international peer pressure if other countries were expanding their international roles and even establishing colonies around the globe could the united states safely refrain from doing the same.
in beales view theodore roosevelt was no simpleminded imperial swashbuckler but a coolly calculating diplomatic realist who perceived that if the united states did not hold its own against other powers it would soon risk being pushed around even in its own hemisphere despite the monroe doctrine.
more recent scholarship by paul kramer and others has stressed the degree to which american imperialists turned to european precedents for guidance and inspiration.
u s colonial ofcials in the philippines and puerto rico circulated widely in the british colonial world selectively adapting elements of british imperial policy.
perhaps the most controversial interpretation of american imperialism has come from a so called new left school of writers inspired by william appleman williams and before him by v i lenins 1916 book imperialism the highest stage of capitalism.
historians such as williams and walter lafeber argue that the explanation for political and military expansion abroad is to be found in economic expansion at home.
increasing industrial output so the argument goes required ever more raw materials and especially overseas markets.
to meet those needs the nation adopted a strategy of informal empire shunning formal territorial possessions with the conspicuous exceptions of puerto rico and the philippines but seeking economic dominance over foreign markets materials and investment outlets.
that revisionist interpretation in turn has been sharply to learn more criticized by scholars who point out that foreign trade accounted for only a tiny share of american output and that the diplomacy of this period was far too complex to be reduced to economic need most recently historians have highlighted the importance of race and gender in the march toward empire.
roosevelt and other imperialists perceived their world in gendered terms.
american society many feared was losing touch with the manly virtues.
it had grown soft and feminine since the closing of the frontier.
imperialists also saw the nations of the world in a strict racial hierarchy with primi tive blacks and indians at the bottom and civilized anglo saxons at the top.
in this world view the conquest of inferior peoples seemed natural a tropical tonic to restore the nations masculine virility.
scholars who emphasize these explanations of imperialism are less likely to see the expansionism of the 1890s as an aberration in american history.
instead they argue these overseas adventures were part of a long tradition of race fueled militarism from the nations earliest indian wars to cold war engagements in korea and vietnam.
to learn more gail bederman manliness and civilization a cultural history of gender and race in the united states 1880 1917 1995 robert l beisner twelve against empire the antiimperialists 1898 1900 1968 william r hutchison errand to the world american protestant thought and foreign missions 1987 matthew frye jacobson barbarian virtues the united states encounters foreign peoples at home and abroad 1876 1917 2000 paul a kramer the blood of government race empire the united states and the philippines 2006 walter lafeber the cambridge history of american foreign relations vol.
2 the american search for opportunity 1865 1913 1993 ernest r may imperial democracy the emergence of america as a great power 1961 thomas g paterson american foreign policy a brief history 2nd ed 1983 louis a perez jr the war of 1898 the united states and cuba in history and historiography 1998 emily s rosenberg spreading the american dream american economic and cultural expansion 1890 1945 1982 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at part five struggling for justice at home and abroad 1901 1945 t he new century brought astonishing changes to the united states.
victory in the spanish american war made it clear that the united states was now a world power.
industrialization ushered in giant corporations sprawling factories sweatshop labor and the ubiquitous automobile.
a huge wave of immigration was altering the face of the nation especially the cities where a majority of americans lived by 1920.
with bigger cities came bigger fears of crime vice poverty and disease.
changes of such magnitude raised vexing questions.
what role should the united states play in the world.
how could the enormous power of industry be controlled.
how would the millions of new immigrants make their way in america.
what should the country do about poverty disease and the continuing plague of racial inequality.
all these issues turned on a fundamental point should government remain narrowly limited in its powers or did the times require a more potent government that would actively shape society and secure american interests abroad.
the progressive movement represented the rst attempt to answer those questions.
reform minded men and women from all walks of life and from both major parties shared in the progressive crusade for greater government activism.
buoyed by this outlook presidents theodore roosevelt william howard taft and woodrow wilson enlarged the capacity of government to ght graft bust business trusts regulate suffrage parade in brooklyn new york reformers fought on many fronts in the progressive era.
the enormous political effort of american suffragists to secure the vote for women nally succeeded with the ratication of the nineteenth amendment in 1920.
struggling for justice at home and abroad corporations and promote fair labor practices child welfare conservation and consumer protection.
these progressive reformers convinced that women would bring greater morality to politics bolstered the decades long struggle for female suffrage.
women nally secured the vote in 1920 with the ratication of the nineteenth amendment.
the progressive era presidents also challenged americas tradition of isolationism in foreign policy.
they felt the country had a moral obligation to spread democracy and an economic opportunity to reap prots in foreign markets.
roosevelt and taft launched diplomatic initiatives in the caribbean central america and east asia.
wilson aspired to make the world safe for democracy by rallying support for american intervention in the first world war.
the progressive spirit waned however as the united states retreated during the 1920s into what president harding called normalcy isolationist sentiment revived with a vengeance.
blessed with a booming economy americans turned their gaze inward to baseball heroes radio jazz movies and the rst mass produced american automobile the model t ford.
presidents harding coolidge and hoover backed off from the economic regulatory zeal of their predecessors.
normalcy also had a brutal side.
thousands of suspected radicals were jailed or deported in the red scare of 1919 and 1920.
anti immigrant passions ared until immigration quotas in 1924 squeezed the ow of newcomers to a trickle.
race riots scorched several northern cities in the summer of 1919 a sign of how embittered race relations had become in the wake of the great migration of southern blacks to wartime jobs in northern industry.
a reborn ku klux klan staged a comeback not just in the south but in the north and west as well.
normalcy itself soon proved short lived a casualty of the stock market crash of 1929 and the great depression that followed.
as americans watched bound for guadalcanal 1942 these troops were headed for one of the bloodiest battles of world war ii in the southwest pacics solomon islands.
america threw some 15 million men and the full weight of its enormous economy into the struggle against german and japanese aggression.
banks fail businesses collapse and millions of people lose their jobs they asked with renewed urgency what role the government should play in rescuing the nation.
president franklin d roosevelts answer was the new deal an ambitious array of relief programs public works and economic regulations that failed to cure the depression but furnished an impressive legacy of social reforms.
most americans came to accept an expanded federal government role at home under fdrs leadership in the 1930s but they still clung stubbornly to isolationism.
the united states did little in the 1930s to check the rising military aggression of japan and germany.
by the early 1940s events forced americans to reconsider.
once hitlers germany had seized control of most of europe roosevelt who had long opposed the isolationists found ways to aid a beleaguered britain.
when japan attacked the american naval base at pearl harbor in december 1941 isolationists at last fell silent.
roosevelt led a stunned but determined nation into the second world war and victory in 1945 positioned the united states to assume a commanding position in the postwar world order.
the great depression and the second world war brought to a head a half century of debate over the role of government and the place of the united states in the world.
in the name of a struggle for justice roosevelt established a new era of government activism at home and internationalism abroad.
the new deals legacy set the terms of debate in american political life for the rest of the century.
progressivism and the republican roosevelt 1901 1912 when i say i believe in a square deal i do not mean.
to give every man the best hand.
if the cards do not come to any man or if they do come and he has not got the power to play them that is his affair.
all i mean is that there shall be no crookedness in the dealing.
theodore roosevelt 1905 n early 76 million americans greeted the new century in 1900.
almost one in seven of them was foreign born.
in the fourteen years of peace that remained before the great war of 1914 engulfed the globe 13 million more migrants would carry their bundles down the gangplanks to the land of promise.
hardly had the twentieth century dawned on the ethnically and racially mixed american people than they were convulsed by a reform movement the likes of which the nation had not seen since the 1840s.
the new crusaders who called themselves progressives waged war on many evils notably monopoly corruption inefciency and social injustice.
the progressive army was large diverse and widely deployed but it had a single battle cry strengthen the state the real heart of the movement explained one of the progressive reformers was to use government as an agency of human welfare progressive roots the groundswell of the new reformist wave went far back to the greenback labor party of the 1870s and the populists of the 1890s to the mounting unrest throughout the land as grasping industrialists concentrated more and more power in fewer and fewer hands.
an outworn philosophy of hands off individualism seemed increasingly out of place in the modern machine age.
social and economic problems were now too complex for the intentionally feeble jeffersonian organs of government.
progressive theorists were insisting that society could no longer afford the luxury of a limitless let alone laissez faire policy.
the people through government must substitute mastery for drift.
well before 1900 perceptive politicians and writers had begun to pinpoint targets for the progressive at this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website critics of social injustice melting pot in p s.
188 1910 these immigrant children from the lower east side of new york are dressed in costumes from their native lands and surround their teacher adorned as the statue of liberty.
schools like this one ooded with immigrant children who could scarcely speak english tried to respect their students ancestral cultures while also cultivating loyalty to their adopted country by teaching american civics and appreciation for patriotic symbols and rituals.
bryan altgeld and the populists loudly branded the bloated trusts with the stigma of corruption and wrongdoing.
in 1894 henry demarest lloyd charged headlong into the standard oil company with his book wealth against commonwealth.
eccentric thorstein veblen assailed the new rich with his prickly pen in the theory of the leisure class 1899 a savage attack on predatory wealth and conspicuous consumption in veblens view the parasitic leisure class engaged in wasteful business or making money for moneys sake rather than productive industry or making goods to satisfy real needs.
he urged that social leadership pass from these superuous titans to truly useful engineers.
other pen wielding knights likewise entered the fray.
the keen eyed and keen nosed danish immigrant jacob a riis a reporter for the new york sun shocked middle class americans in 1890 with how the other half lives.
his account was a damning indictment of the dirt disease vice and misery of the rat gnawed human rookeries known as new york slums.
the book deeply inuenced a future new york city police commissioner theodore roosevelt.
novelist theodore dreiser used his blunt prose to batter promoters and proteers in the financier 1912 and the titan 1914.
caustic critics of social injustice issued from several other corners.
socialists many of whom were european immigrants inspired by the strong movement for state socialism in the old world began to register appreciable strength at the ballot box see thinking globally why is there no socialism in the united states pp.
high minded messengers of the social gospel promoted a brand of progressivism based on christian teachings.
they used religious doctrine to demand better housing and living conditions for the urban poor.
university based economists urged new.
chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 age.
burly boss tweed 240 pounds of rascality employed bribery graft and fraudulent elections to milk the metropolis of as much as 200 million.
honest citizens were cowed into silence.
protesters found their tax assessments raised.
in a famous series of newspaper interviews in 1905 george washington plunkitt 1842 1924 a political boss in the same tammany hall democratic political machine that had spawned william marcy boss tweed candidly described his ethical and political principles tweeds luck nally ran out.
the new york times secured damning evidence in 1871 and courageously published it though offered 5 million not to do so.
gifted cartoonist thomas nast pilloried tweed mercilessly after spurning a heavy bribe to desist.
the portly thief reportedly complained that his illiterate followers could not help seeing them damn pictures new york attorney samuel j tilden headed the prosecution gaining fame that later paved the path to his presidential nomination.
unbailed and unwept tweed died behind bars.
everybody is talkin these days about tammany men growin rich on graft but nobody thinks of drawin the distinction between honest graft and dishonest graft.
theres all the difference in the world between the two.
yes many of our men have grown rich in politics.
i have myself.
ive made a big fortune out of the game and im gettin richer every day but ive not gone in for dishonest graft blackmailin gamblers saloonkeepers disorderly people etc and neither has any of the men who have made big fortunes in politics.
theres an honest graft and im an example of how it works.
i might sum up the whole thing by sayin i seen my opportunities and i took em just let me explain by examples.
my partys in power in the city and its goin to undertake a lot of public improvements.
well im tipped off say that theyre going to lay out a new park at a certain place.
i see my opportunity and i take it.
i go to that place and i buy up all the land i can in the neighborhood.
then the board of this or that makes its plan public and there is a rush to get my land which nobody cared particular for before.
aint it perfectly honest to charge a good price and make a prot on my investment and foresight.
of course it is.
well thats honest graft.
can the law reach him.
1872 cartoonist thomas nast attacked boss tweed in a series of cartoons like this one that appeared in harpers weekly in 1872.
here nast depicts the corrupt tweed as a powerful giant towering over a puny law force.
the stirrings of reform a carnival of corruption more serious than boss tweeds peccadilloes were the misdeeds of the federal government.
president grants cabinet was a rodents nest of grafters and incompetents.
favor seekers haunted the white house plying grant himself with cigars wines and horses.
his election was a godsend to his in laws of the dent family several dozen of whom attached themselves to the public payroll.
the easygoing grant was rst tarred by the crdit mobilier scandal which erupted in 1872.
union pacic railroad insiders had formed the crdit mobilier construction company and then cleverly hired themselves at inated prices to build the railroad line earning dividends as high as 348 percent.
fearing that congress might blow the whistle the company furtively distributed shares of its valuable stock to key congressmen.
a newspaper expos and congressional investigation of the scandal led to the formal censure of two congressmen and the revelation that the vice president of the united states had accepted payments from crdit mobilier.
the breath of scandal in washington also reeked of alcohol.
in 1874 1875 the sprawling whiskey ring robbed the treasury of millions in excise tax revenues.
let no guilty man escape declared president grant.
but when his own private secretary turned up among the culprits he volunteered a written statement to the jury that helped exonerate the thief.
further rottenness in the grant administration came to light in 1876 forcing secretary of war william belknap to resign after pocketing bribes from suppliers to the indian reservations.
grant ever loyal to his crooked cronies accepted belknaps resignation with great regret the liberal republican revolt of 1872 by 1872 a powerful wave of disgust with grantism was beginning to build up throughout the nation even before some of the worst scandals had been exposed.
reform minded citizens banded together to form the liberal republican party.
voicing the slogan turn the rascals out they urged purication of the washington administration as well as an end to military reconstruction.
the liberal republicans muffed their chance when their cincinnati nominating convention astounded the can greeley and the democrats swallow each other.
1872 this cartoon by thomas nast is a republican gibe at the forced alliance between these former foes.
general william tecumseh sherman wrote from paris to his brother i feel amazed to see the turn things have taken.
grant who never was a republican is your candidate and greeley who never was a democrat but quite the reverse is the democratic candidate country by nominating the brilliant but erratic horace greeley for the presidency.
although greeley was the fearless editor of the new york tribune he was dogmatic emotional petulant and notoriously unsound in his political judgments.
more astonishing still was the action of the ofcehungry democrats who foolishly proceeded to endorse greeleys candidacy.
in swallowing greeley the democrats ate crow in large gulps for the eccentric editor had long blasted them as traitors slave shippers saloon keepers horse thieves and idiots.
yet greeley pleased the democrats north and south when he pleaded for clasping hands across the bloody chasm the republicans dutifully renominated grant.
the voters were thus presented with a choice between two candidates who had made their careers in elds other than politics and who were both eminently unqualied by temperament and lifelong training for high political ofce.
chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 in the mud spattered campaign that followed regular republicans denounced greeley as an atheist a communist a free lover a vegetarian a brown bread eater and a cosigner of jefferson daviss bail bond.
democrats derided grant as an ignoramus a drunkard and a swindler.
but the regular republicans chanting grant us another term pulled the president through.
the count in the electoral column was 286 to 66 in the popular column 3 596 745 to 2 843 446.
liberal republican agitation frightened the regular republicans into cleaning their own house before they were thrown out of it.
the republican congress in 1872 passed a general amnesty act removing political disabilities from all but some ve hundred former confederate leaders.
congress also moved to reduce high civil war tariffs and to fumigate the grant administration with mild civil ser vice reform.
like many american third parties the liberal republicans left some enduring footprints even in defeat.
depression deation and ination grants woes deepened in the paralyzing economic panic of 1873.
bursting with startling rapidity the crash was one of those periodic plummets that rollercoastered the economy in this age of unbridled capitalist expansion.
overreaching promoters had laid more railroad track sunk more mines erected more factories and sowed more grainelds than existing markets could bear.
bankers in turn had made too many imprudent loans to nance those enterprises.
when profits failed to materialize loans went unpaid and the whole credit based house of cards uttered down.
the united states did not suffer alone.
nations worldwide underwent a similar economic collapse in 1873.
boom times became gloom times as more than fteen thousand american businesses went bankrupt.
in new york city an army of unemployed riotously battled police.
black americans were hard hit.
the freedmans savings and trust company had made unsecured loans to several companies that went under.
black depositors who had entrusted over 7 million to the bank lost their savings and black economic development and black condence in savings institutions went down with it.
hard times in icted the worst punishment on debtors who intensied their clamor for inationary policies.
proponents of ination breathed new life into the issue of greenbacks.
during the war 450 million of the folding money had been issued but it had depreciated under a cloud of popular mistrust and dubious legality.
by 1868 the treasury had already withdrawn 100 million of the battle born currency from circulation and hard money people every where looked forward to its complete disappearance.
but now af icted agrarian and debtor groups cheap money supporters clamored for a reissuance of the greenbacks.
with a crude but essentially accurate grasp of monetary theory they reasoned that more money meant cheaper money and hence rising prices and easier to pay debts.
creditors of course reasoning from the same premises advocated precisely the opposite policy.
they had no desire to see the money they had loaned repaid in depreciated dollars.
they wanted deation not ination.
the hard money advocates carried the day.
in 1874 they persuaded a confused grant to veto a bill to print more paper money.
they scored another victory in the resumption act of 1875 which pledged the government to the further withdrawal of greenbacks from circulation and to the redemption of all paper currency in gold at face value beginning in 1879.
down but not out debtors now looked for relief to another precious metal silver.
the sacred white metal they claimed had received a raw deal.
in the early 1870s the treasury stubbornly and unrealistically maintained that an ounce of silver was worth only one sixteenth as much as an ounce of gold though open market prices for silver were higher.
silver miners thus stopped offering their shiny product for sale to the federal mints.
with no silver owing into the federal coffers congress formally dropped the coinage of silver dollars in 1873.
fate then played a sly joke when new silver discoveries later in the 1870s shot production up and forced silver prices down.
westerners from silver mining states joined with debtors in assailing the crime of 73 demanding a return to the dollar of our daddies like the demand for more greenbacks the demand for the coinage of more silver was nothing more nor less than another scheme to promote ination.
the supreme court in 1870 declared the civil war legal tender act unconstitutional.
with the concurrence of the senate grant thereupon added to the bench two justices who could be counted on to help reverse that decision which happened in 1871.
this is how the court grew to its current size of nine justices.
partisan competition david a.
wells 1828 1898 a leading economist of the era described the global dimensions of the depression that struck the united states in 1873 its most noteworthy peculiarity has been its universality affecting nations that have been involved in war as well as those which have maintained peace those which have a stable currency based on gold and those which have an unstable currency based on promises which have not been kept those which live under systems of free exchange of commodities and those whose exchanges are more or less restricted.
it has been grievous in old communities like england and germany and equally so in australia south africa and california which represent the new it has been a calamity exceeding ly heavy to be borne alike by the inhabitants of sterile newfoundland and labrador and of the sunny fruitful sugar islands of the east and west indies.
hard money republicans resisted this scheme and counted on grant to hold the line against it.
he did not disappoint them.
the treasury began to accumulate gold stocks against the appointed day for resumption of metallic money payments.
coupled with the reduction of greenbacks this policy was called contraction it had a noticeable deationary effect the amount of money per capita in circulation actually decreased between 1870 and 1880 from 19 42 to 19 37.
contraction probably worsened the impact of the depression.
but the new policy did restore the governments credit rating and it brought the embattled greenbacks up to their full face value.
when redemption day came in 1879 few greenback holders bothered to exchange the lighter and more convenient bills for gold.
republican hard money policy had a political backlash.
it helped elect a democratic house of representatives in 1874 and in 1878 it spawned the greenback labor party which polled over a million votes and elected fourteen members of congress.
the contest over monetary policy was far from over.
pallid politics in the gilded age the political seesaw was delicately balanced throughout most of the gilded age a sarcastic name given to the three decade long post civil war era by mark twain in 1873.
even a slight nudge could tip the teetertotter to the advantage of the opposition party.
every presidential election was a squeaker and the majority party in the house of representatives switched six times in the eleven sessions between 1869 and 1891.
in only three sessions did the same party control the house the senate and the white house.
wobbling in such shaky equilibrium politicians tiptoed timidly producing a political record that was often trivial and petty.
few signicant economic issues separated the major parties.
democrats and republicans saw very nearly eye to eye on questions like the tariff and civil ser vice reform and majorities in both parties substantially agreed even on the much debated currency question.
yet despite their rough agreement on these national matters the two parties were ferociously competitive with each other.
they were tightly and efciently organized and they commanded erce loyalty from their members.
voter turnouts reached heights unmatched before or since.
nearly 80 percent of eligible voters cast their ballots in presidential elections in the three decades after the civil war.
on election days droves of the party faithful tramped behind marching bands to the polling places and ticket splitting or failing to vote the straight party line was as rare as a silver dollar.
how can this apparent paradox of political consensus and partisan fervor be explained.
the answer lies in the sharp ethnic and cultural differences in the membership of the two parties in distinctions of style and tone and especially of religious sentiment.
republican voters tended to adhere to those creeds that traced their lineage to puritanism.
they stressed strict codes of personal morality and believed that government should play a role in regulating both the economic and the moral affairs of society.
democrats among whom immigrant lutherans and roman catholics gured heavily were more likely to adhere to faiths that took a less stern view of human weakness.
their religions professed toleration of differences in an imperfect world and they spurned government efforts to impose a single moral standard on the entire chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 society.
these differences in temperament and religious values often produced raucous political contests at the local level where issues like prohibition and education loomed large.
democrats had a solid electoral base in the south and in the northern industrial cities teeming with immigrants and controlled by well oiled political machines.
republican strength lay largely in the midwest and the rural and small town northeast.
grateful freedmen in the south continued to vote republican in signicant numbers.
another important bloc of republican ballots came from the members of the grand army of the republic gar a politically potent fraternal orga ni zation of several hundred thousand union veterans of the civil war.
the lifeblood of both parties was patronage disbursing jobs by the bucketful in return for votes kickbacks and party ser vice.
boisterous inghting over patronage beset the republican party in the 1870s and 1880s.
a stalwart faction led by the handsome and imperious roscoe lord roscoe conkling u s senator from new york unblushingly embraced the timehonored system of swapping civil ser vice jobs for votes.
paper broadsides for the 1876 election then as now the parties printed voting instructions to encourage citizens to vote the straight party line.
opposed to the conklingites were the so called halfbreeds who irted coyly with civil ser vice reform but whose real quarrel with the stalwarts was over who should grasp the ladle that dished out the spoils.
the champion of the half breeds was james g blaine of maine a radiantly personable congressman with an elastic conscience.
but despite the color of their personalities conkling and blaine succeeded only in stalemating each other and deadlocking their party.
the hayes tilden standoff 1876 hangers on around grant like eas urging their ailing dog to live begged the old man to try for a third term in 1876.
the general blind to his own ineptitudes showed a disquieting willingness.
but the house by a lopsided bipartisan vote of 233 to 18 derailed the third term bandwagon.
it passed a resolution that sternly reminded the country and grant of the antidictator implications of the two term tradition.
the compromise of 1877 with grant out of the running and with the conklingites and blaineites neutralizing each other the republicans turned to a compromise candidate rutherford b hayes who was obscure enough to be dubbed the great unknown his foremost qualication was the fact that he hailed from the electorally doubtful but potent state of ohio where he had served three terms as governor.
so crucial were the swing votes of ohio in the cliffhanging presidential contests of the day that the state produced more than its share of presidential candidates.
a political saying of the 1870s paraphrased shakespeare some are born great some achieve greatness and some are born in ohio.
pitted against the humdrum hayes was the democratic nominee samuel j tilden who had risen to fame as the man who bagged boss tweed in new york.
campaigning against republican scandal tilden racked up 184 electoral votes of the needed 185 with 20 votes in or r 2 c 1 vt nh me 5 5 7 montana terr.
idaho terr.
nv dakota terr.
arizona terr.
co ks indian terr.
new mexico terr.
wi ia ne utah terr.
ca mn wyoming terr.
tx il mo oh ky tn ar la in ms al ma ny mi ga pa wv va 5 11 nc sc ri nj ct 4 9 6 de md fl popular vote hayes republican uncontested electoral electoral vote vote 185 50 tilden democrat 4 288 546 51 0 candidate party 184 50 four states three of them in the south doubtful because of irregular returns see map 23 1.
surely tilden could pick up at least one of these especially in view of the fact that he had polled 247 448 more popular votes than hayes 4 284 020 to 4 036 572.
both parties scurried to send visiting statesmen to the contested southern states of louisiana south carolina and florida.
all three disputed states submitted two sets of returns one democratic and one republican.
as the weeks drifted by the paralysis tightened generating a dramatic constitutional crisis.
the constitution merely species that the electoral returns from the states shall be sent to congress and in the presence of the house and senate they shall be opened by the president of the senate see the twelfth amendment in the appendix.
but who should count them.
on this point the constitution was silent.
if counted by the president of the senate a republican the republican returns would be selected.
if counted by the speaker of the house a democrat the democratic returns would be chosen.
how could the impasse be resolved.
the compromise of 1877 and the end of reconstruction wash terr.
4 034 311 48 0 contested territories map 23 1 hayes tilden disputed election of 1876 with electoral vote by state nineteen of the twenty disputed votes composed the total electoral count of louisiana south carolina and florida.
the twentieth was one of oregons three votes cast by an elector who turned out to be ineligible because he was a federal ofceholder a postmaster contrary to the constitution see art.
interactive map clash or compromise was the stark choice.
the danger loomed that there would be no president on inauguration day march 4 1877.
tilden or blood cried democratic hotheads and some of their minute men began to drill with arms.
but behind the scenes frantically laboring statesmen gradually hammered out an agreement in the henry clay tradition the compromise of 1877.
the election deadlock itself was to be broken by the electoral count act which congress passed early in 1877.
it set up an electoral commission consisting of fteen men selected from the senate the house and the supreme court see table 23 1.
in february 1877 about a month before inauguration day the senate and house met together in an electric at mosphere to settle the dispute.
the roll of the states was tolled off alphabetically.
when florida was reached the rst of the three southern states with two sets of returns the disputed documents were referred to the electoral commission which sat in a nearby chamber.
after prolonged discussion the members agreed by the partisan vote of eight republicans to seven democrats to accept the republican returns.
outraged democrats in congress smelling defeat undertook to launch a libuster until hell froze over chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 table 23 1 composition of the electoral commission 1877 members republicans democrats senate republican majority house democratic majority supreme court total renewed deadlock was avoided by the rest of the complex compromise of 1877 already partially concluded behind closed doors.
the democrats reluctantly agreed that hayes might take ofce in return for his withdrawing intrusive federal troops from the two states in which they remained louisiana and south carolina.
among various concessions the republicans assured the democrats a place at the presidential patronage trough and support for a bill subsidizing the texas and pacic railroads construction of a southern transcontinental line.
not all of these promises were kept in later years including the texas and pacic subsidy.
but the deal held together long enough to break the dangerous electoral standoff.
the democrats permitted hayes to receive the remainder of the disputed the end of reconstruction 1877 president hayess let em alone policy replaces the carpetbags and bayonets of the grant administration signifying the end of federal efforts to promote racial equality in the south until the second reconstruction of the civil rights era nearly a century later.
returns all by the partisan vote of 8 to 7.
so close was the margin of safety that the explosive issue was settled only three days before the new president was ofcially sworn into ofce.
the nation breathed a collective sigh of relief.
the compromise bought peace at a price.
partisan violence was averted by sacricing the civil rights of southern blacks.
with the hayes tilden deal the republican party quietly abandoned its commitment to racial equality.
that commitment had been weakening in any case.
many republicans had begun to question the worthiness of reconstruction and were less willing to send dollars and enlisted sons to bolster southern state governments.
the civil rights act of 1875 was in a sense the last feeble gasp of the congressional radical republicans.
the act supposedly guaranteed equal accommodations in public places and prohibited racial discrimination in jury selection but the law was born toothless and stayed that way for nearly a century.
the supreme court pronounced much of the act unconstitutional in the civil rights cases 1883.
the court declared that the fourteenth amendment prohibited only government violations of civil rights not the denial of civil rights by individuals.
when president hayes withdrew the blue clad federal troops that were propping up reconstruction governments the bayonet backed republican regimes collapsed.
the emergence of jim crow the birth of jim crow in the post reconstruction south the democratic south speedily solidied and swiftly suppressed the now friendless blacks.
reconstruction for better or worse was ofcially ended.
shamelessly relying on fraud and intimidation white democrats redeemers reassumed political power in the south and exercised it ruthlessly.
blacks who tried to assert their rights faced unemployment eviction and physical harm.
many blacks as well as poor whites were forced into sharecropping and tenant farming.
former slaves often found themselves at the mercy of former masters who were now their landlords and creditors.
through the crop lien system storekeepers extended credit to small farmers for food and supplies and in return took a lien on their harvests.
shrewd merchants manipulated the system so that farmers remained perpetually in debt to them.
for generations to come southern blacks were condemned to eke out a threadbare living under conditions scarcely better than slavery see map 23 2.
with white southerners back in the political saddle daily discrimination against blacks grew increasingly oppressive.
what had started as the informal separation of blacks and whites in the immediate postwar years developed by the 1890s into systematic state level legal codes of segregation known as jim crow laws.
southern states also enacted literacy requirements voter registration laws and poll taxes and tolerated violent intimidation of black voters to ensure fullscale disfranchisement of the souths freedmen.
the supreme court validated the souths segregationist social order in the case of plessy v ferguson 1896.
it jim crow justice in 1893 a black man named henry smith was burned at the stake in paris texas for supposedly molesting a four year old white girl.
hundreds of gawkers poured into the city from the surrounding county to watch the gruesome spectacle.
public executions like this one or the more common lynching of black men were aimed at intimidating african americans into accepting second class status in the jim crow south.
chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 tenant farmers residence roa ht s r ive br an ch d gin house masters house slave quarters hc branc k ree.
sabrina dalton lizzie dalton r ive frank maxey joe bug jim reid nancy pope cane pope gub church barrow willis bryant school lem bryant gin house lewis watson reuben barrow tom wright ben thomas granny tom omy barrow landlords thomas house peter barrow ro milly barrow ad handy old isaac barrow calvin tom parker tang little r w rig little r wooded areas beckton barrow lem douglas k rk fofr o lll sls ssyy map 23 2 a southern plantation before and after the civil war the emancipated blacks moved out of the slave quarters and into humble cabins dispersed around the plantation.
the master had now become the landlord and the employer and the slaves had become tenant farmers and sharecroppers but were they better off.
interactive map table 23 2 persons in united states lynched by race 1882 1970 year whites blacks total there were no lynchings in 1965 1970.
in every year from 1882 when records were rst kept to 1964 the number of lynchings corresponded roughly to the gures given here.
the worst year was 1892 when 161 blacks and 69 whites were lynched total 230 the next worst was 1884 when 164 whites and 51 blacks were lynched total 215.
ruled that separate but equal facilities were constitutional under the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment.
but in reality the quality of african american life was grotesquely unequal to that of whites.
segregated in inferior schools and separated from whites in virtually all public facilities including railroad cars theaters and even restrooms blacks were assaulted daily by galling reminders of their secondclass citizenship.
to ensure the stability of this political and economic new order southern whites dealt harshly with any black who dared to violate the souths racial code of conduct.
a record number of blacks were lynched during the 1890s most often for the crime of asserting themselves as equals see table 23 2.
it would take a second reconstruction nearly a century later to redress the racist imbalance of southern society.
class conicts and ethnic clashes the year 1877 marked more than the end of reconstruction.
as the curtains ofcially closed on regional warfare they opened on scenes of class struggle.
the explosive atmosphere was largely a by product of the long years of depression and deation following the panic class conicts and ethnic clashes of 1873.
railroad workers faced particularly hard times while they watched the railroads continue to rake in huge prots.
when the presidents of the nations four largest railroads collectively decided in 1877 to cut employees wages by 10 percent the workers struck back.
president hayess decision to call in federal troops to quell the unrest brought the striking laborers an outpouring of working class support.
work stoppages spread like wildre in cities from baltimore to st louis.
when the battling between workers and soldiers ended after several weeks over one hundred people were dead.
the failure of the great railroad strike exposed the weakness of the labor movement in the face of massive government intervention on the side of the railroads.
the federal courts united states army state militias and local police all lent their muscle to keeping the engines of big business operating at full throttle and the workers be damned.
meanwhile racial and ethnic ssures among workers fractured labor unity.
divisions were particularly acute between the irish and the chinese in cal i fornia see makers of america the chinese pp.
by 1880 the golden state counted seventy ve thousand asian newcomers about 9 percent of its entire population.
mostly poor uneducated single males they derived predominantly from the taishan district of kuang tung guangdong province in southern china.
they had originally come to america to dig in the goldelds and to sledgehammer the tracks of the transcontinental railroads across the west.
when the gold supply petered out and the tracks were laid many perhaps half of those who arrived before the 1880s returned home to china with their meager savings.
those who remained in america faced extraordinary hardships.
they worked at the most menial jobs often as cooks laundrymen or domestic servants.
without women or families they were deprived of the children who in other immigrant communities eased their parents assimilation through their exposure to the english language and american customs in school.
the phrase not a chinamans chance emerged in this era to describe the daunting odds against which they struggled.
in san francisco irish born demagogue denis kearney incited his followers to violent abuse of the hapless chinese.
the kearneyites many of whom were recently arrived immigrants from europe hotly resented the competition of cheap labor from the still more recently arrived chinese.
the beef eater they claimed had no chance against the rice eater in a lifeand death struggle for jobs and wages.
the present tens of thousands of chinese coolies were regarded as a menace the prospective millions as a calamity.
taking to the streets gangs of kearneyites terrorized the chinese by shearing off their precious pigtails.
some victims were murdered outright.
congress slammed the door on chinese immigrant laborers when it passed the chinese exclusion act in 1882 prohibiting nearly all further immigration from china.
the door stayed shut until 1943.
some exclusionists even tried to strip native born chinese americans of their citizenship but the supreme court ruled in u s v wong kim ark in 1898 that the fourteenth amendment guaranteed citizenship to all persons born in the united states.
this doctrine of birthright citizenship or jus soli the right of the soil as contrasted with jus sanguinis the right of blood tie which based citizenship on the parents nationality provided important protections to chinese americans as well as to other immigrant communities.
the first blow at the chinese question 1877 caucasian workers seething with economic anxiety and ethnic prejudice savagely mistreated the chinese in california in the 1870s.
makers of america theafricanthe great chinese american migration b etween 1800 and 1925 at least 3 million chinese left their homeland to labor around the globe.
the once great chinese empire was disintegrating at the same time that its population was exploding creating severe land shortages and opening up the unstable country to european imperial powers bent on unlocking the riches of a nation closed to outsiders for centuries.
chinese men faced with economic hardship and political turmoil in their homeland and lured by labor shortages as far aeld as southeast asia australia and the americas migrated by the tens of thousands to work the plantations and dig the mines that fueled a burgeoning global economy.
by 1900 more than 300 000 chinese had entered the united states to contribute their muscle to building the west wrenching minerals from stubborn rock and helping to lay the transcontinental railroads that stitched together the american nation see table 23 3.
a chinese railroad worker totes his tools to work although those who set off from china for destinations as diverse as vietnam cuba peru and the united states included a few merchants and artisans most were unskilled country folk.
in some cases families pooled their money to send out a son but most travelers desperately poor obtained their passage through chinese middlemen who advanced them ship fare in return for their promise to work off their debts after they landed.
this contracting sometimes led to conditions so cruel that the practice was ignominiously called pig selling the rst chinese arrived in spanish america as early as 1565 but few followed those earliest pioneers.
until the 1848 discovery of gold in cal i fornia there were fewer than 50 chinese living in the united states.
but by 1852 at least 25 000 chinese had arrived in cal ifornia which they dubbed the golden mountain at that decades end chinese workers made up nearly a quarter of the states manual laborers even though they were only a tenth of the population.
employers nationwide viewed the chinese as cheap labor recruiting them to cut sugar cane in the south and break strikes in new eng land shoe factories.
a treaty negotiated with china in 1868 by the american diplomat anson burlingame guaranteed important civil rights to chinese immigrants.
the chinese america of the late nineteenth century was overwhelmingly a bachelor society.
women of good repute rarely made the passage.
of the very few chinese women who ventured to cal i fornia at this time most became prostitutes.
many of them had been deceived by the false promise of honest jobs.
although a stream of workers returned to their homeland many chinese stayed.
chinatowns sprang up wherever economic opportunities presented themselves in railroad towns farming villages and cities.
chinese in these settlements spoke their own language enjoyed the fellowship of their own compatriots and sought safety from prejudice and violence never rare in american society.
many immigrant clubs american adaptations of chinese traditions of loyalty to clan or region were established in these communities.
rivaling such clubs and associations were the secret societies known as tongs.
the word tong literally meeting hall acquired a sinister reputation among non chinese butcher shop san francisco ca.
1890 chinese for the tongs counted the poorest and shadiest immigrants among their members.
these were people without ties to a clan those individuals most alienated from traditional chinese orga ni zations and from american society as well.
mounting anti chinese agitation forced the repudiation of the burlingame treaty in 1880 and in 1882 the chinese exclusion act barred nearly all chinese from the united states for six decades.
slowly however those men and the few women who remained raised families and reared a new generation of chinese americans.
they were joined by thousands more immigrants who made the journey illegally or took advantage of the few exceptions permissible under the exclusion act.
but this second generation still suffered from discrimination eking out their living in jobs despised by caucasian laborers or taking daunting risks in small entrepreneurial ventures.
yet many hard working chinese did manage to open their own restaurants laundries and other small businesses.
the enterprises formed a solid economic foundation for their small community and the much larger one that would emerge by the late twentieth century with a huge inux of new immigrants arriving from china.
table 23 3 population of chinese ancestry in the united states 1850 2000 year 1970 population 4 018 34 933 63 199 105 465 107 488 89 863 435 062 806 027 1 645 472 2 432 585 males per one female percentage u s born total chinese immigrants in preceding decade 41 397 64 301 123 201 61 711 14 799 n a.
34 764 124 326 346 747 419 114 includes chinese immigrants in hawaii after 1898 by 1970 hawaii was a state.
the passage of the chinese exclusion act in 1882 sharply reduced the chinese population in the united states.
liberalization of american immigration laws and chinese policies beginning in the 1970s however has led to a great increase in population of chinese ancestry in the united states.
sources u s census bureau relevant years u s department of homeland security statistical yearbook of the immigration and naturalization service 2000.
chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 gareld and arthur as the presidential campaign of 1880 approached rutherfraud hayes was a man without a party denounced and repudiated by the republican old guard.
the republican party sought a new standard bearer for 1880 and nally settled on a dark horse candidate james a gareld from the electorally powerful state of ohio.
his vice presidential running mate was a notorious stalwart henchman chester a arthur of new york.
energetically waving the bloody shirt gareld barely squeaked out a victory over the democratic candidate and civil war hero wineld scott hancock.
he polled only 39 213 more votes than hancock 4 453 295 to 4 414 082 but his margin in the electoral column was a comfortable 214 to 155.
the new president was energetic and able but he was immediately ensnared in a political con ict between his secretary of state james g blaine and blaines stalwart nemesis senator roscoe conkling.
then as the republican factions dueled tragedy struck.
a disappointed and mentally deranged ofce seeker charles j guiteau shot president gareld in the back in a washington railroad station.
gareld lingered in agony for eleven weeks and died on september 19 1881.
guiteau when seized reportedly cried i am a stalwart.
arthur is now president of the united states the implication was that now the conklingites would all get good jobs.
guiteaus attorneys argued that he was not guilty because of his incapacity to distinguish right from wrong an early instance of the insanity defense the defendant himself demonstrated his weak grip on reality when he asked all those who had beneted politically from the assassination to contribute to his defense fund.
these tactics availed little.
guiteau was found guilty of murder and hanged.
garelds death had one positive outcome it shocked politicians into reforming the shameful spoils system.
the unlikely instrument of reform was chester arthur.
observers at rst underestimated him.
his record of cronyism and his fondness for ne wines and elegant clothing including eighty pairs of trou theodore roosevelt 1858 1919 an ardent civilservice reformer condemned the patronage system as the ofce makes the man 1881 besieged by his former new york cronies arthur tries to assert the dignity of his new presidential ofce.
tending to degrade american politics.
the men who are in ofce only for what they can make out of it are thoroughly unwholesome citizens and their activity in politics is simply noxious.
decent private citizens must inevitably be driven out of politics if it is suffered to become a mere selsh scramble for plunder where victory rests with the most greedy the most cunning the most brazen.
the whole patronage system is inimical to american institutions it forms one of the gravest problems with which democratic and republican government has to grapple.
the election of 1884 sers suggested that he was little more than a foppish dandy.
but arthur surprised his critics by prosecuting several fraud cases and giving his former stalwart pals the cold shoulder.
disgust with garelds murder gave the republican party itself a previously undetected taste for reform.
the medicine nally applied to the long suffering federal government was the pendleton act of 1883 the so called magna carta of civil ser vice reform.
it made compulsory campaign contributions from federal employees illegal and it established the civil service commission to make appointments to federal jobs on the basis of competitive examinations rather than pull although at rst covering only about 10 percent of federal jobs civil ser vice reform did rein in the most blatant abuses.
yet like many well intentioned reforms it bred unintended problems of its own.
with the president arthur 10 mckinley 13 780 offices out of 131 208 106 205 offices out of 256 000 41 wilson 71 497 603 offices out of 691 116 roosevelt 72 662 832 offices out of 920 310 truman 87 nixon g h w.
bush 90 57 2 278 446 offices out of 2 603 267 2 393 000 offices out of 2 645 000 1 694 000 offices out of 2 940 000 clinton 49 1 351 072 offices out of 2 734 338 g w.
bush 49 1 298 263 offices out of 2 670 857 figure 23 1 civil service employment the total number of civil service jobs has remained relatively stable since the 1950s even as the government has expanded in size and budget.
the decline in classied civil service jobs those subject to competitive requirements in recent decades reects the changes mandated by the postal reorganization act of 1971 which moved u s.
postal service employees from competitive to excepted service.
excepted jobs are not subject to rigid civil service laws passed by congress.
source u s ofce of personnel management.
plum federal posts now beyond their reach politicians were forced to look elsewhere for money the mothers milk of politics increasingly they turned to the bulging coffers of the big corporations.
a new breed of boss emerged less skilled at mobilizing small armies of immigrants and other voters on election day but more adept at milking dollars from manufacturers and lobbyists.
the pendleton act partially divorced politics from patronage but it helped drive politicians into marriages of convenience with big business leaders see figure 23 1.
president arthurs surprising display of integrity offended too many powerful republicans.
his ungrateful party turned him out to pasture and in 1886 he died of a cerebral hemorrhage.
the blaine cleveland mudslingers of 1884 james g blaines persistence in pursuit of his partys presidential nomination nally paid off in 1884.
the dashing maine politician blessed with almost every political asset except a reputation for honesty was the clear choice of the republican convention in chicago.
but many reform minded republicans gagged on blaines candidacy.
blaines enemies publicized the shy smelling mulligan letters written by blaine to a boston businessman and linking the powerful politician to a corrupt deal involving federal favors to a southern railroad.
at least one of the damning documents ended with the furtive warning burn this letter some reformers unable to swallow blaine bolted to the democrats.
they were sneeringly dubbed mugwumps a word of indian derivation meant to suggest that they were sanctimonious or holier than thou victory starved democrats turned enthusiastically to a noted reformer grover cleveland.
a burly bachelor with a soup straining mustache and a taste for chewing tobacco cleveland was a solid but not brilliant lawyer of forty seven.
he had rocketed from the mayors ofce in buffalo to the governorship of new york and the presidential nomination in three short years.
known as grover the good he enjoyed a welldeserved reputation for probity in ofce.
but clevelands admirers soon got a shock.
resolute republicans digging for dirt in the past of bachelor latter day punsters gibed that the mugwumps were priggish politicians who sat on the fence with their mugs on one side and their wumps on the other.
chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 little lost mugwumps who had gone astray james g blaine depicted as little bo peep tries to woo the errant mugwump reformers back into the republican fold in 1884.
cleveland unearthed the report that he had been involved in an amorous affair with a buffalo widow.
she had an illegitimate son now eight years old for whom cleveland had made nancial provision.
democratic elders were demoralized.
they hurried to cleveland and urged him to lie like a gentleman but their ruggedly honest candidate insisted tell the truth the campaign of 1884 sank to perhaps the lowest level in american experience as the two parties grunted i want my pa malicious anti cleveland cartoon.
and shoved for the hog trough of ofce.
few fundamental differences separated them.
even the bloody shirt had faded to a pale pink.
personalities not principles claimed the headlines.
crowds of democrats surged through city streets chanting to the rhythm of left left left right left burn burn burn this letter republicans taunted in return ma ma wheres my pa deant democrats shouted back gone to the white house ha ha ha the contest hinged on the state of new york where blaine blundered badly in the closing days of the campaign.
a witless republican clergyman damned the democrats in a speech as the party of rum romanism and rebellion insulting with one swift stroke the culture the faith and the patriotism of new yorks numerous irish american voters.
blaine was present at the time but lacked the presence of mind to repudiate the statement immediately.
the pungent phrase shortened to rrr stung and stuck.
blaines silence seemed to give assent and the wavering irishmen who deserted his camp helped account for clevelands paper thin plurality of about a thousand votes in new york state enough to give him the presidency.
cleveland swept the solid south and squeaked into of neither candidate had served in the civil war.
cleveland had hired a substitute to go in his stead while he supported his widowed mother and two sisters.
blaine was the only republican presidential candidate from grant through mckinley 1868 to 1900 who had not been a civil war ofcer.
cleveland battles for a lower tariff ce with 219 to 182 electoral votes and 4 879 507 to 4 850 293 popular votes.
old grover takes over bull necked cleveland in 1885 was the rst democrat to take the oath of presidential ofce since buchanan twenty eight years earlier.
huge question marks hung over his ample frame 5 feet 11 inches 250 pounds.
could the party of disunion be trusted to govern the union.
would desperate democrats ravenously hungry after twenty four years of exile trample the frail sprouts of civil ser vice reform in a stampede to the patronage trough.
could cleveland restore a mea sure battling over lowering the tariff in the 1880s advocates for both higher and lower tariffs claimed to be protecting american workers.
in fact workers were affected differently depending on their jobs.
some u s manufacturing rms beneted from a protective tariff that shielded them from foreign competition while others suffered from high duties on raw materials.
recognizing this tension the american federation of labor declared neutrality on the tariff question in 1882 of respect and power to the maligned and enfeebled presidency.
cleveland was a man of principles most of them safely orthodox by the standards of his day.
a staunch apostle of the hands off creed of laissez faire the new president caused the hearts of businesspeople and bankers to throb with contentment.
he summed up his political philosophy in 1887 when he vetoed a bill to provide seeds for drought ravaged texas farmers.
though the people support the government he declared the government should not support the people as tactless as a mirror and as direct as a bulldozer he was outspoken unbending and profanely hot tempered.
at the outset cleveland narrowed the north south chasm by naming to his cabinet two former confederates.
as for the civil ser vice cleveland was whipsawed between the demands of the democratic faithful for jobs and the demands of the mugwumps who had helped elect him for reform.
believing in the merit system cleveland at rst favored the cause of the reformers but he eventually caved in to the carpings of democratic bosses and red almost two thirds of the 120 000 federal employees including 40 000 incumbent republican postmasters to make room for deserving democrats military pensions gave cleveland some of his most painful political headaches.
the politically powerful grand army of the republic gar routinely lobbied hundreds of private pension bills through a compliant congress.
benets were granted to deserters to bounty jumpers to men who never served and to former soldiers who in later years had incurred disabilities in no way connected with war ser vice.
a democrat and a nonveteran cleveland was in an awkward position when it came to ghting the pension grabbers.
but the conscience driven president read each bill carefully vetoed several hundred of them and then laboriously penned individual veto messages for congress.
cleveland battles for a lower tariff cleveland also risked his political neck by prodding the hornets nest of the tariff issue.
during the civil war tariff schedules had been jacked up to new high levels partly to raise revenues for the insatiable military machine.
american industry which was preponderantly in republican hands had proted from this protection and hated to see the sheltering benets reduced in chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 peacetime.
but the high duties continued to pile up revenue at the customshouses and by 1881 the treasury was running an annual surplus amounting to an embarrassing 145 million.
most of the governments income in those pre income tax days came from the tariff.
congress could reduce the vexatious surplus in two ways.
one was to squander it on pensions and porkbarrel bills and thus curry favor with veterans and other self seeking groups.
the other was to lower the tariff something the big industrialists vehemently opposed.
grover cleveland the rustic buffalo attorney had known little and cared less about the tariff before entering the white house.
but as he studied the subject he was much impressed by the arguments for downward revision of the tariff schedules.
lower barriers would mean lower prices for consumers and less protection for monopolies.
most important they would mean an end to the treasury surplus a standing mockery of clevelands professed belief in scal orthodoxy and small government frugality.
after much hesitation cleveland saw his duty and overdid it.
with his characteristic bluntness cleveland tossed an appeal for lower tariffs like a bombshell into the lap of congress in late 1887.
the response was electric.
cleveland succeeded admirably in smoking the issue out into the open.
democrats were deeply frustrated by the obstinacy of their chief.
republicans rejoiced at his apparent recklessness bellowing loudly that lower tariffs would mean higher taxes lower wages and increased unemployment.
the old warrior blaine gloated theres one more president for us in tariff protection for the rst time in years a real issue divided the two parties as the 1888 presidential election loomed.
dismayed democrats seeing no alternative somewhat dejectedly renominated grover cleveland in their st louis convention.
eager republicans turned to benjamin harrison whose grandfather was former president william henry tippecanoe harrison.
the tariff was the prime issue.
the two parties ooded the country with some 10 million pamphlets on the subject.
the specter of a lowered tariff spurred the republicans to frantic action.
in an impressive demonstration of the post pendleton act politics of alliances with big business they raised a war chest of some 3 million the heftiest yet largely by frying the fat out of nervous industrialists.
the money was widely used to line up corrupt voting cattle known as repeaters and oaters in indiana always a crucial swing state votes were shamelessly purchased for as much as 20 each.
on election day harrison nosed out cleveland 233 to 168 electoral votes.
a change of about 7 000 ballots in new york would have reversed the outcome.
cleveland actually polled more popular votes 5 537 857 to 5 447 129 but he nevertheless became the rst sitting president to be voted out of his chair since martin van buren in 1840.
the billion dollar congress weighing the candidates 1888 novelties like this were widely distributed in late nineteenth century political campaigns.
this miniature scale could be adjusted in either candidates favor.
here the republican harrison rather improbably outweighs the corpulent democratic candidate grover cleveland.
after a four year famine the republicans under harrison licked their lips hungrily for the bounty of federal ofces.
they yearned to lavish upon the party faithful the fat surpluses produced by the high tariffs.
but in the house of representatives they had only three more votes than the necessary quorum of 163 members and the democrats were preparing to obstruct all house business by refusing to answer roll calls demanding roll calls to determine the presence of a quorum and employing other delaying tactics.
into this tense cockpit stepped the new republican speaker of the house thomas b reed of maine.
a hulking gure who towered six feet three inches he was renowned as a master debater.
he spoke with a harsh nasal drawl and wielded a verbal harpoon of sarcasm.
to one congressman who quoted henry clay that populist protest boosting rates to their highest peacetime level ever an average of 48 4 percent on dutiable goods.
sponsored in the house by rising republican star william mckinley of ohio the new tariff act brought fresh woes to farmers.
debt burdened farmers had no choice but to buy manufactured goods from highpriced protected american industrialists but were compelled to sell their own agricultural products into highly competitive unprotected world markets.
mounting discontent against the mckinley tariff caused many rural voters to rise in wrath.
in the congressional elections of 1890 the republicans lost their precarious majority and were reduced to just 88 seats as compared with 235 democrats.
even the muchtouted mckinley went down to defeat.
ominously for conser vatives the new congress also included nine members of the farmers alliance a militant orga ni zation of southern and western farmers.
the drumbeat of discontent thomas b reed of maine republican speaker of the house 1890 sometimes referred to as czar reed he served as speaker for six years dramatically increasing the power of the ofce in line with his dictum that the best system is to have one party govern and the other party watch he would rather be right than be president reed caustically retorted that he would never be either opponents cringed at the crack of his quip.
reed soon bent the intimidated house to his imperious will.
he counted as present democrats who had not answered the roll and who rule book in hand furiously denied that they were legally there.
by such tactics czar reed utterly dominated the billion dollar congress the rst in history to appropriate that sum.
congress showered pensions on civil war veterans and increased government purchases of silver.
to keep the revenues owing in and to protect republican industrialists from foreign competition the billion dollar congress also passed the mckinley tariff act of 1890 politics was no longer as usual in 1892 when the newly formed peoples party or populists burst upon the scene.
rooted in the farmers alliance of frustrated farmers in the great agricultural belts of the west and south the populists met in omaha and adopted a scorching platform that denounced the prolic womb of governmental injustice they demanded ination through free and unlimited coinage of silver at the rate of sixteen ounces of silver to one ounce of gold.
they further called for a graduated income tax government ownership of the railroads telegraph and telephone the direct election of u s senators a one term limit on the presidency the adoption of the initiative and referendum to allow citizens to shape legislation more directly a shorter workday and immigration restriction.
as their presidential candidate the populists uproariously nominated the eloquent old greenbacker general james b weaver.
an epidemic of nationwide strikes in the summer of 1892 raised the prospect that the populists could weld together a coalition of aggrieved workers and indebted farmers in a revolutionary joint assault on the capitalist order.
at andrew carnegies homestead steel plant near pittsburgh company ofcials called in three hundred armed pinkerton detectives in july to crush the deant homestead strike by steelworkers angry over pay cuts.
strikers armed with ries and dynamite forced their assailants to surrender after a vicious battle chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 minnesota farmers loading a husker shredder 1890s the purchase of technologically advanced farm equipment increased the productivity of farmers but also saddled them with debt.
many sought debt relief in the 1890s by clamoring for inationary schemes including the monetization of silver.
that left ten people dead and some sixty wounded.
troops were eventually summoned and both the strike and the union were broken.
that same month federal troops bloodily smashed a strike among silver miners in idahos fabled coeur dalene district.
the populists made a remarkable showing in the 1892 presidential election see map 23 3.
singing good by party bosses they rolled up 1 029 846 popular votes and 22 electoral votes for general weaver.
they thus became one of the few third parties in u s history to break into the electoral column.
but they fell far short of an electoral majority.
industrial laborers especially in the urban east did not rally to the populist banner in appreciable numbers.
populist electoral votes came from only six midwestern and western states four of which kansas colorado idaho and nevada fell completely into the populist basket.
the south although a hotbed of agrarian agitation proved especially unwilling to throw in its lot with the new party.
race was the reason.
the more than one million southern black farmers orga nized in the colored farmers national alliance shared a host of complaints with poor white farmers and for a time their common economic goals promised to overcome their the homestead strike 1892 three hundred armed pinkerton detectives oated on barges down the monongahela river to the site of the carnegie steel plant at homestead pennsylvania.
met by a deant and disciplined force of strikers they were compelled to surrender.
here the pinkerton men are shown disembarking from their barges after their capitulation while the jeering strikers ashore exult in their victory.
the election of 1892 racial differences.
recognizing the crucial edge that black votes could give them in the south populist leaders like georgias tom watson reached out to the black community.
watson was a wiry redhead who could talk like the thrust of a bowie knife he declared there is no reason why the black man should not understand that the law that hurts me as a farmer hurts him as a farmer many blacks were disillusioned enough with the republican party to respond.
alarmed the conser vative white bourbon elite in the south played cynically upon historic racial antagonisms to counter the populists appeal for interracial solidarity and woo back poor whites.
southern blacks were heavy losers.
the populistinspired reminder of potential black political strength led to the near total extinction of what little african american suffrage remained in the south.
white southerners more aggressively than ever used literacy tests a popular protest song of the 1890s among western farmers was titled the hayseed one stanza ran i once was a tool of oppression and as green as a sucker could be and monopolies banded together to beat a poor hayseed like me.
and poll taxes to deny blacks the ballot.
the notorious grandfather clause exempted from those requirements anyone whose forebear had voted in 1860 when of course black slaves had not voted at all.
more than half a century would pass before southern blacks could again vote in considerable numbers.
accompanying this disfranchisement were more severe jim crow laws map 23 3 presidential election of 1892 showing vote by county note the concentration of populist strength in the semiarid farming regions of the western half of the country.
compare this with map 26 4 showing average annual precipitation with major agricultural products as of 1900 on p 647.
interactive map wash n h vt r 4 r 4 mont.
r 3 r 6 d 1 r 1 p 1 oregon minn r 3 p 1 mass.
r 9 idaho s dak.
d 12 r 3 r 13 r 8 utah terr.
calif ill d 24 colo p 4 okla terr.
new mexico terr.
d 15 r 32 ohio d 12 d 13 d 8 d 11 d 12 s c ark.
d 9 d 8 miss.
d 9 texas md.
n c tenn ind.
n j d 6 d 10 d 3 va d 6 ky d 17 conn del.
d 1 r 22 w va mo.
kansas p 10 arizona terr.
r i r 4 pa iowa neb.
d 8 r 1 d 36 mich d 5 r 9 nev p 3 r 15 n y ala d 11 ga d 13 la.
d 15 d 8 fla d 4 candidate party electoral vote popular vote cleveland democrat 62 5 555 426 46 1 harrison republican 33 5 182 690 43 0 5 1 029 846 8 5 weaver peoples territories indian reservations unsettled etc.
chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 the kansas legislature 1893 rie bearing populists seized the kansas capitol after the election of 1892 to make good their claim that they had won at the polls.
republicans disagreed and eventually prevailed when sergeants at arms shown here restored order.
designed to enforce racial segregation in public places including hotels and restaurants and backed up by atrocious lynchings and other forms of intimidation.
the conser vative crusade to eliminate the black vote also had dire consequences for the populist party itself.
even tom watson abandoned his interracial appeals and in time became a vociferous racist himself.
after 1896 the populist party lapsed increasingly into vile racism and staunchly advocated black disfranchisement.
such were the bitterly ironic fruits of the populist campaign in the south.
cleveland and depression with the populists divided and the republicans discredited grover cleveland took ofce once again in 1893 the only president ever reelected after defeat.
he was the same old bull necked and bullheaded cleveland with a little more weight polish conservatism and self assertiveness.
but though it was the same old thomas edward watson 1865 1922 populist leader tom watson of georgia began his public career promoting interracial political cooperation though he sometimes despaired that many poor white farmers preferred to hug the chains of.
wretchedness rather than do any experimenting on the race question watson himself eventually succumbed to racism.
in 1913 he proclaimed that the negro has no comprehension of virtue honesty truth gratitude and principle.
the south has to lynch him occasionally and og him now and then to keep him from blaspheming the almighty by his conduct.
and color the return of cleveland cleveland it was not the same old country.
debtors were up in arms workers were restless and the advance shadows of panic were falling.
hardly had cleveland seated himself in the presidential chair when the devastating depression of 1893 burst about his burly frame.
lasting for about four years it was the most punishing economic downturn of the nineteenth century.
contributing causes were the splurge of overbuilding and speculation labor disorders and the ongoing agricultural depression.
free silver agitation the cry to expand the money supply with unlimited coinage of silver had also damaged american credit abroad and the usual pinch on american nances had come when european banking houses began to call in loans from the united states.
distress ran deep and far.
about eight thousand american businesses collapsed in six months.
dozens of railroad lines went into the hands of receivers.
soup kitchens fed the unemployed while gangs of hoboes tramps wandered aimlessly about the country.
local charities did their feeble best but the federal government bound by the let nature take its course philosophy of the times saw no legitimate way to relieve the suffering masses.
cleveland who had earlier been bothered by a surplus was now burdened with a deepening decit.
the treasury was required to issue legal tender notes for the silver bullion that it bought.
owners of the paper currency would then present it for gold and by law the notes had to be reissued.
new holders would repeat the process thus draining away precious gold in an endless chain operation.
alarmingly the gold reserve in the treasury dropped below 100 million which was popularly regarded as the safe minimum for supporting about 350 million in outstanding paper money.
cleveland saw no alternative but to halt the bleeding away of gold by engineering a repeal of the sherman silver purchase act of 1890.
for this purpose he summoned congress into an extra session in the summer of 1893.
unknown to the country complications threatened from another quarter.
a malignant growth had developed on the roof of clevelands mouth and it had to be removed on a private yacht with extreme secrecy.
if the president had died under the surgeons knife his place would have been taken by the softmoney vice president adlai e stevenson an eventuality that would have deepened the crisis.
in congress the debate over the repeal of the silver act was meanwhile running its heated course.
a silver tongued young democratic congressman from nebraska thirty three year old william jennings bryan held the galleries spellbound for three hours as he championed the cause of free silver.
the friends of silver announced that hell would freeze over before congress would pass the repeal mea sure.
but an angered cleveland used his job granting power to break the libuster in the senate.
he thus alienated the democratic silverites like bryan and disrupted his party at the very outset of his administration.
repeal of the sherman silver purchase act only partially stopped the hemorrhaging of gold from the treasury.
in february 1894 the gold reserve sank to a dismaying 41 million.
the united states was now in grave danger of going off the gold standard a move that would render the nations currency volatile and unreliable as a mea sure of value and that would also mortally cripple americas international trade.
cleveland oated two treasury bond issues in 1894 totaling over 100 million but the endless chain operations continued relentlessly.
early in 1895 cleveland turned in desperation to j p morgan the bankers banker and the head of a wall street syndicate.
after tense negotiations at the white house the bankers agreed to lend the government 65 million in gold.
they were obviously in business for prot so they charged a commission amounting to about 7 million.
but they did make a signicant concession when they agreed to obtain one half of the gold abroad and take the necessary steps to dam it up in the leaky treasury.
the loan at least temporarily helped restore condence in the nations nances.
cleveland breeds a backlash the bond deal stirred up a storm.
the wall street ogre especially in the eyes of the silverites and other debtors symbolized all that was wicked and grasping in american politics.
president clevelands secretive dealings with the mighty jupiter morgan were savagely condemned as a sellout of the national government.
but cleveland was certain that he had done no wrong.
sarcastically denying that he was morgans errand boy cleveland asserted without shame and without repentance i confess my share of the guilt cleveland suffered further embarrassment with the passage of the wilson gorman tariff in 1894.
the democrats had pledged to lower tariffs but by the time their tariff bill made it through congress it had been so loaded with special interest protection that it made scarcely a dent in the high mckinley tariff rates.
an chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 outraged cleveland grudgingly allowed the bill which also contained a 2 percent tax on incomes over 4 000 to become law without his signature.
when the supreme court struck down the income tax provision in 1895 the populists and other disaffected groups found proof that the courts were only the tools of the plutocrats.
democratic political fortunes naturally suffered in the face of these several setbacks.
the tariff dynamite that had blasted the republicans out of the house in 1890 now dislodged the democrats with a strong helping hand from the depression.
the revitalized republicans singing times are mighty hard won the congressional elections of 1894 in a landslide 244 seats to 105 for the democrats.
the republicans be it violated the direct tax clause.
4 in the appendix.
the sixteenth amendment to the constitution adopted in 1913 permitted an income tax.
gan to look forward to the presidential race of 1896 with unconcealed glee.
despite his gruff integrity and occasional courage grover cleveland failed utterly to cope with the serious economic crisis that befell the country in 1893.
he was tied down in ofce by the same threads that held all the politicians of the day to lilliputian levels.
grant hayes gareld arthur harrison and cleveland are often referred to as the forgettable presidents bewhiskered and bland in person they left mostly blanks or blots on the nations political record as issues like the tariff the money question and the rights of labor continued to fester.
what little political vitality existed in gilded age america was to be found in local settings or in congress which overshadowed the white house for most of this period.
but before the century ended down and out debtors and disgruntled workers would make one last titanic effort to wring reform out of the political system in the momentous election of 1896.
chronology grant defeats seymour for presidency fisk and gould corner gold market tweed scandal in new york crdit mobilier scandal exposed liberal republicans break with grant grant defeats greeley for presidency panic of 1873 whiskey ring scandal civil rights act of 1875 resumption act hayes tilden election standoff and crisis compromise of 1877 reconstruction ends railroad strikes paralyze nation gareld defeats hancock for presidency gareld assassinated arthur assumes presidency chinese exclusion act civil rights cases pendleton act sets up civil service commission cleveland defeats blaine for presidency harrison defeats cleveland for presidency billion dollar congress mckinley tariff act sherman silver purchase act repealed 1893 homestead steel strike coeur dalene idaho silver miners strike peoples party candidate james b weaver wins twenty two electoral votes cleveland defeats harrison and weaver to regain presidency depression of 1893 begins republicans regain house of representatives j p morgans banking syndicate loans 65 million in gold to federal government plessy v ferguson legitimizes separate but equal doctrine varying viewpoints key terms waving the bloody shirt 539 tweed ring 539 crdit mobilier scandal 541 panic of 1873 542 gilded age 543 patronage 544 compromise of 1877 545 people to know civil rights act of 1875 546 sharecropping 547 jim crow 547 plessy v ferguson 547 chinese exclusion act 549 pendleton act 553 homestead strike 557 grandfather clause 559 jay gould horace greeley rutherford b hayes james a gareld chester arthur grover cleveland thomas b reed tom watson william jennings bryan j p morgan the populists radicals or reactionaries.
t aking their cue from contemporary satirical commentaries like mark twain and charles dudley warners the gilded age 1873 the rst historians who wrote about the post civil war era judged it harshly.
they condemned its politicians as petty and corrupt lamented the emergence of a new plutocratic class and railed against the arrogance of corporate power.
such a view is conspicuous in charles and mary beards the rise of american civilization 4 vols 1927 1942 perhaps the most inuential american history textbook ever written.
the beards were leaders of the so called progressive school of historical writing that ourished in the early years of the twentieth century.
progressive historians many of whom grew up in the gilded age shared in a widespread disillusionment that the civil war had failed to generate a rebirth of american idealism.
their political sympathies were chillingly antibusiness and warmly pro labor pro farmer and pro reform.
historians of the progressive persuasion identied populism as virtually the only orga nized opposition to the social economic and political order that took shape in the last decades of the nineteenth century.
the populists thus became heroes to several generations of writers who bemoaned that order and looked back longingly at americans agrarian past.
john d hicks the populist revolt 1931 is the classic portrayal of the populists as embattled farmers hurling deance at wall street and the robber barons in a last ditch defense of their simple honest way of life.
bowed but unbroken by the defeat of their great champion william jennings bryan in the presidential election of 1896 the populists hicks claimed left a reforming legacy that ourished again in the progressive era and the new deal.
hickss point of view was the dominant one until the 1950s when it was sharply criticized by richard hofstadter in the age of reform 1955.
hofstadter charged that the progressive historians had romanticized the populists who were best understood not as picturesque protesters but as harassed little country businessmen bristling with provincial prejudices.
the city born and bred hofstadter argued that the populist revolt was aimed not just at big business and the money power but also somewhat irrationally at urbanism immigrants the east and modernity itself.
hofstadter thus exposed a dark side of populism which contained elements of backwoods antiintellectualism paranoia and even anti semitism.
in the 1960s several scholars inspired by the work of c vann woodward as well as by sympathy with the protest movements of that turbulent decade began to rehabilitate the populists as authentic reformers with genuine grievances.
especially notable in this vein was lawrence goodwyns democratic promise chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 the populist movement in america 1976.
goodwyn depicted the populists as reasonable radicals who were justiably resentful of their eclipse by urban industrialism and nance capitalism.
he also portrayed populism as the last gasp of popular political participation a democratic moment in american history that expired with the populists absorption into the democratic party.
two subsequent works edward l ayerss promise of the new south 1992 and robert c mcmaths american populism 1993 synthesized many of the older perspectives and presented a balanced view of the populists as radical in many ways but also limited by their nostalgia for a lost agrarian past.
recently eric rauchways blessed among nations 2006 argued that populism was a reaction to americas increased reliance on foreign investment.
farmers in southern and western states resented control by foreign capitalists particularly the british.
although hofstadter made a similar point fty years earlier the impact of the international economy on domestic politics is reemerging as a direction for new research.
to learn more william gillette retreat from reconstruction 1869 1879 1979 steven hahn a nation under our feet black political struggles in the rural south from slavery to the great migration 2003 paul krause the battle for homestead 1880 1892 politics culture and steel 1992 roy morris jr fraud of the century rutherford b hayes samuel tilden and the stolen election of 1876 2003 heather cox richardson the death of reconstruction race labor and politics in the post civil war north 1865 1901 2001 mark w summers the era of good stealings 1993 alan trachtenberg the incorporation of america culture and society in the gilded age 1982 robert wiebe the search for order 1877 1920 1967 c vann woodward origins of the new south 1877 1913 1951 the strange career of jim crow rev.
ed 1974 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at industry comes of age 1865 1900 the wealthy class is becoming more wealthy but the poorer class is becoming more dependent.
the gulf between the employed and the employer is growing wider social contrasts are becoming sharper as liveried carriages appear so do barefooted children.
a s the nineteenth century drew to a close observers were asking why are the best men not in politics one answer was that they were being lured away from public life by the lusty attractions of the booming private economy.
as americas industrial revolution slipped into high gear talented men ached for prots not the presidency.
they dreamed of controlling corporations not the congress.
what the nation lost in civic leadership it gained in an astounding surge of economic growth.
as late as 1870 agriculture was the nations biggest business.
by 1900 its share of the economy was half that.
until the end of the civil war the united states imported more merchandise than it exported.
by 1900 it annually delivered more than 600 million worth of manufactured goods to the worlds marketplace.
americans did not achieve this economic transformation all by themselves.
foreign investment labor trade and technology made it possible.
although in many ways still a political dwarf the united states was about to stand up before the world as an industrial colossus and the lives of millions of working americans would be transformed in the process.
the iron colt becomes an iron horse the government business entanglements that increasingly shaped politics after the civil war also undergirded the industrial development of the nation.
the unparalleled outburst of railroad construction was a crucial case.
when lincoln was shot in 1865 there were only 35 000 miles of steam railways in the united states mostly east of the mississippi.
by 1900 the gure had this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 charleston south carolina in ruins april 1865 rebel troops evacuating charleston blew up military supplies to deny them to general william tecumseh shermans forces.
the explosions ignited res that all but destroyed the city.
the moonlight and magnolia old south largely imaginary in any case had forever gone with the wind.
handsome cities of yesteryear such as charleston and richmond were rubble strewn and weed choked.
an atlantan returned to his once fair hometown and remarked hell has laid her egg and right here it hatched economic life had creaked to a halt.
banks and businesses had locked their doors ruined by runaway ination.
factories were smokeless silent dismantled.
the transportation system had broken down completely.
before the war ve different railroad lines had converged on columbia south carolina now the nearest connected track was twenty nine miles away.
efforts to untwist the rails corkscrewed by shermans soldiers proved bumpily unsatisfactory.
agriculture the economic lifeblood of the south was almost hopelessly crippled.
once white cotton elds now yielded a lush harvest of nothing but green weeds.
the slave labor system had collapsed seed was scarce and livestock had been driven off by plundering yankees.
pathetic instances were reported of men hitching themselves to plows while women and children gripped the handles.
not until 1870 did the se ceded states produce as large a cotton crop as that of the fateful year 1860 and much of that yield came from new acreage in the southwest.
the princely planter aristocrats were humbled by the war at least temporarily.
reduced to proud poverty they faced charred and gutted mansions lost investments and almost worthless land.
their investments of more than 2 billion in slaves their primary form of wealth had evaporated with emancipation.
beaten but unbent many high spirited white southerners remained dangerously deant.
they cursed the damnyankees and spoke of your government in washington instead of our government one southern bishop refused to pray for president andrew johnson though johnson proved to be in sore need of divine guidance.
conscious of no crime these former confederates continued to believe that their view of secession was correct and that the lost cause was still a just war.
one popular anti union song ran im glad i fought agin her i only wish wed won and i aint axed any pardon for anything ive done.
such attitudes boded ill for the prospects of painlessly binding up the republics wounds.
from slavery to freedom freedmen dene freedom confusion abounded in the still smoldering south about the precise meaning of freedom for blacks.
emancipation took effect haltingly and unevenly in different parts of the conquered confederacy.
as union armies marched in and out of various localities many blacks found themselves emancipated and then reenslaved.
a north carolina slave estimated that he had celebrated freedom about twelve times.
blacks from one texas county eeing to the free soil of the liberated county next door were attacked by slaveowners as they swam across the river that marked the county line.
the next day trees along the riverbank were bent with swinging corpses a grisly warning to others dreaming of liberty.
other planters resisted emancipation more legalistically stubbornly protesting that slavery was lawful until state legislatures or the supreme court declared otherwise.
for many slaves the shackles of bondage were not struck off in a single mighty blow long suffering blacks often had to wrench free of their chains link by link.
the variety of responses to emancipation by whites as well as blacks illustrated the sometimes startling complexity of the master slave relationship.
loyalty to the plantation master prompted some slaves to resist the liberating union armies while other slaves pentup bitterness burst forth violently on the day of liberation.
many newly emancipated slaves for example joined union troops in pillaging their masters possessions.
in one instance a group of virginia slaves laid twenty lashes on the back of their former master a painful dose of his own favorite medicine.
prodded by the bayonets of yankee armies of occupation all masters were eventually forced to recognize their slaves permanent freedom.
the oncecommanding planter would assemble his former human chattels in front of the porch of the big house and announce their liberty.
though some blacks initially responded to news of their emancipation with suspicion and uncertainty they soon celebrated their newfound freedom.
many took new names in place of the ones given by their masters and demanded that whites formally address them as mr or mrs others abandoned the coarse cottons that had been their only clothing as slaves and sought silks satins and other nery.
though many whites perceived such behavior as insubordinate they were forced to recognize the realities of emancipation.
never before had i a word of impudence from any of our black folk wrote one white southerner but they are not ours any longer the day of jubilo this french illustration of emancipated negroes celebrating the emancipation proclamation may have been somewhat fanciful but it captured well the exhilaration that came with freedom.
chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 educating young freedmen and freedwomen 1870s freed slaves in the south regarded schooling as the key to improving their childrens lives and the fulllment of a long sought right that had been denied blacks in slavery.
these well dressed schoolchildren are lined up outside their rural one room schoolhouse alongside their teachers both black and white.
houston h holloway age twenty at the time of his emancipation recalled his feelings upon hearing of his freedom i felt like a bird out of a cage.
i could hardly ask to feel any better than i did that day.
the week passed off in a blaze of glory.
the reunion of long lost relatives also inspired joy one union ofcer wrote home men are taking their wives and children families which had been for a long time broken up are united and oh.
such happiness.
i am glad i am here.
tens of thousands of emancipated blacks took to the roads some to test their freedom others to search for long lost spouses parents and children.
emancipation thus strengthened the black family and many newly freed men and women formalized slave marriages for personal and pragmatic reasons including the desire to make their children legal heirs.
other blacks left their former masters to work in towns and cities where existing black communities provided protection and mutual assistance.
whole communities sometimes moved together in search of opportunity.
from 1878 to 1880 some twenty ve thousand blacks from louisiana texas and mississippi surged in a mass exodus to kansas.
the westward ood of these exodusters was stemmed only when steamboat captains refused to transport more black migrants across the mississippi river.
the church became the focus of black community life in the years following emancipation.
as slaves blacks had worshiped alongside whites but now they formed their own churches pastored by their own ministers.
black churches grew robustly.
the 150 000member black baptist church of 1850 reached 500 000 by 1870 while the african methodist episcopal church letter from a freedman to his old master 1865 hat was it like to experience the transition from slavery to freedom.
four million southern blacks faced this exhilarating and formidable prospect with the end of the war.
for historians recovering the african american perspective on emancipation is challenging.
unlike their white masters freed blacks left few written records.
but one former slave captured in a letter to his old master whose surname he bore the heroic determination of many blacks to build new independent and dignied lives for themselves and their families.
during the war jourdon anderson escaped slavery in tennessee with his wife and two daughters.
after relocating to the relative safety of ohio he received a communication from his former owner asking him to return.
in his bold reply reportedly dictated by the old servant himself anderson expressed his familys new expectations for life as free people and an uneasiness about his former masters intentions.
he made reference to his comfortable home his daughters schooling the church that he and his wife were free to attend regularly and the peace of mind that came with knowing that my girls would not be brought to shame by the violence and wickedness of their young masters to test the white mans sincerity anderson and his wife asked for the astronomical gure of 11 680 in back wages from decades as slaves.
he closed by reiterating that the great desire of my life is to give my children an education and have them form virtuous habits this rare letter demonstrates that many black correspondents may have been illiterate but they were hardly inarticulate.
and they asserted themselves as parents workers and citizens not only from the distance of a former free state like ohio but also deep within the former slave states of the south.
was the tone of andersons letter and postscript serious or tonguein cheek.
what did freedom mean for anderson and other blacks in the months following emancipation.
how did the eventual accomplishments of reconstruction correspond with the initial expectations of people like anderson and his former owner.
w chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 quadrupled in size from 100 000 to 400 000 in the rst decade after emancipation.
these churches formed the bedrock of black community life and they soon gave rise to other benevolent fraternal and mutual aid societies.
all these orga ni zations helped blacks protect their newly won freedom.
emancipation also meant education for many blacks.
learning to read and write had been a privilege generally denied to them under slavery.
freedmen wasted no time establishing societies for self improvement which undertook to raise funds to purchase land build schoolhouses and hire teachers.
one member of a north carolina education society asserted that a schoolhouse would be the rst proof of their independence southern blacks soon found however that the demand outstripped the supply of qualied black teachers.
they accepted the aid of northern white women sent by the american missionary association who volunteered their ser vices as teachers.
they also turned to the federal government for help.
the freed blacks were going to need all the friends and power they could muster in washington.
the freedmens bureau abolitionists had long preached that slavery was a degrading institution.
now the emancipators were faced with the brutal reality that the freedmen were overwhelmingly unskilled unlettered without property or money and with scant knowledge of how to survive as free people.
to cope with this problem throughout the conquered south congress created the freedmens bureau on march 3 1865.
on paper at least the bureau was intended to be a kind of primitive welfare agency.
it was to provide food clothing medical care and education both to freedmen and to white refugees.
heading the bureau was a women from the north enthusiastically embraced the opportunity to go south and teach in freedmens bureau schools for emancipated blacks.
one volunteer explained her motives i thought i must do something not having money at my command what could i do but give myself to the work.
i would go to them and give them my life if necessary.
warmly sympathetic friend of blacks union general oliver o howard who later founded and served as president of howard university in washington d c.
the bureau achieved its greatest successes in education.
it taught an estimated 200 000 blacks how to read.
many former slaves had a passion for learning partly because they wanted to close the gap between themselves and whites and partly because they longed to read the word of god.
in one elementary class in north carolina sat four generations of the same family ranging from a six year old child to a seventy ve yearold grandmother.
but in other areas the bureaus accomplishments were meager or even mischievous.
although the bureau was authorized to settle former slaves on forty acre tracts conscated from the confederates little land actually made it into blacks hands.
instead local administrators often collaborated with planters in expelling blacks from towns and cajoling them into signing labor contracts to work for their former masters.
still the white south resented the bureau as a meddlesome federal interloper that threatened to upset white racial dominance.
president andrew johnson who shared the white supremacist views of most white southerners repeatedly tried to kill it and it expired in 1872.
johnson the tailor president few presidents have ever been faced with a more perplexing sea of troubles than that confronting andrew johnson.
what manner of man was this medium built dark eyed black haired tennessean now chief executive by virtue of the bullet that killed lincoln.
no citizen not even lincoln has ever reached the white house from humbler beginnings.
born to impoverished parents in north carolina and orphaned early johnson never attended school but was apprenticed to a tailor at age ten.
ambitious to get ahead he taught himself to read and later his wife taught him to write and do simple arithmetic.
like many another self made man he was inclined to overpraise his maker.
johnson early became active in politics in tennessee where he had moved when seventeen years old.
he shone as an impassioned champion of poor whites against the planter aristocrats although he himself ultimately owned a few slaves.
he excelled as a two sted stump speaker before angry and heckling crowds who on occasion greeted his political oratory with cocked pistols not just cocked ears.
elected to congress he attracted much favorable attention in the johnson s plans for the south crushed by the constitution president andrew johnson revered the u s constitution but eventually felt its awesome weight in his impeachment trial.
north but not the south when he refused to secede with his own state.
after tennessee was partially redeemed by union armies he was appointed war governor and served courageously in an at mosphere of danger.
political exigency next thrust johnson into the vice presidency.
lincolns union party in 1864 needed to attract support from the war democrats and other prosouthern elements and johnson a democrat seemed to be the ideal man.
unfortunately he appeared at the vice presidential inaugural ceremonies the following march in a scandalous condition.
he had recently been af icted with typhoid fever and although not known as a heavy drinker he was urged by his friends to take a stiff bracer of whiskey.
this he did with unfortunate results.
old andy johnson was no doubt a man of parts unpolished parts.
he was intelligent able forceful and gifted with homespun honesty.
steadfastly devoted to duty and to the people he was a dogmatic champion of states rights and the constitution.
he would often present a copy of the document to visitors and he was buried with one as a pillow.
yet the man who had raised himself from the tailors bench to the presidents chair was a mist.
a southerner who did not understand the north a tennessean who had earned the distrust of the south a democrat who had never been accepted by the republicans a president who had never been elected to the ofce he was not at home in a republican white house.
hotheaded contentious and stubborn he was the wrong man in the wrong place at the wrong time.
a reconstruction policy devised by angels might well have failed in his tactless hands.
presidential reconstruction even before the shooting war had ended the political war over reconstruction had begun.
abraham lincoln believed that the southern states had never legally withdrawn from the union.
their formal restoration to the union would therefore be relatively simple.
accordingly lincoln in 1863 proclaimed his 10 percent reconstruction plan.
it decreed that a state could be reintegrated into the union when 10 percent of its voters in the presidential election of 1860 had taken an oath of allegiance to the united states and pledged to abide by emancipation.
the next step would be formal erection of a state government.
lincoln would then recognize the puried regime.
lincolns proclamation provoked a sharp reaction in congress where republicans feared the restoration of the planter aristocracy to power and the possible reenslavement of blacks.
republicans therefore rammed through congress in 1864 the wade davis bill.
the bill required that 50 percent of a states voters take the oath of allegiance and demanded stronger safeguards for chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 emancipation than lincolns as the price of readmission to the union.
lincoln pocket vetoed this bill by refusing to sign it after congress had adjourned.
republicans were outraged.
they refused to seat delegates from louisiana after that state had reorga nized its government in accordance with lincolns 10 percent plan in 1864.
the controversy surrounding the wade davis bill had revealed deep differences between the president and congress.
unlike lincoln many in congress insisted that the seceders had indeed left the union had committed suicide as republican states and had therefore forfeited all their rights.
they could be readmitted only as conquered provinces on such conditions as congress should decree.
this episode further revealed differences among republicans.
two factions were emerging.
the majority moderate group tended to agree with lincoln that the seceded states should be restored to the union as simply and swiftly as reasonable though on congresss terms not the presidents.
the minority radical group believed that the south should atone more painfully for its sins.
before the south should be restored the radicals wanted its social structure uprooted the haughty planters punished and the newly emancipated blacks protected by federal power.
some of the radicals were secretly pleased when the assassins bullet felled lincoln for the martyred president had shown tenderness toward the south.
spiteful andy johnson who shared their hatred for the planter aristocrats would presumably also share their desire to reconstruct the south with a rod of iron.
johnson soon disillusioned them.
he agreed with lincoln that the seceded states had never legally been outside the union.
thus he quickly recognized several of lincolns 10 percent governments and on may 29 1865 he issued his own reconstruction proclamation see table 22 1.
it disfranchised certain leading con before president andrew johnson 1808 1875 softened his southern policy his views were radical.
speaking on april 21 1865 he declared it is not promulgating anything that i have not heretofore said to say that traitors must be made odious that treason must be made odious that traitors must be punished and impoverished.
they must not only be punished but their social power must be destroyed.
if not they will still maintain an ascendancy and may again become numerous and powerful for in the words of a former senator of the united states when traitors become numerous enough treason becomes respectable federates including those with taxable property worth more than 20 000 though they might petition him for personal pardons.
it called for special state conventions which were required to repeal the ordinances of secession repudiate all confederate debts and ratify the slave freeing thirteenth amendment.
states that complied with these conditions johnson declared would be swiftly readmitted to the union.
johnson savoring his dominance over the hightoned aristocrats who now begged his favor granted pardons in abundance.
bolstered by the political resurrection of the planter elite the recently rebellious states moved rapidly in the second half of 1865 to organize governments.
but as the pattern of the new governments became clear republicans of all stripes grew furious.
table 22 1 principal reconstruction proposals and plans year proposal or plan 1864 1865 1865 1866 1866 1867 1867 1877 lincolns 10 percent proposal johnsons version of lincolns proposal congressional plan 10 percent plan with fourteenth amendment congressional plan of military reconstruction fourteenth amendment plus black suffrage later established nationwide by fifteenth amendment the black codes the baleful black codes among the rst acts of the new southern regimes sanctioned by johnson was the passage of the iron toothed black codes.
these laws were designed to regulate the affairs of the emancipated blacks much as the slave statutes had done in pre civil war days.
mississippi passed the rst such law in november 1865 and other southern states soon followed suit.
the black codes varied in severity from state to state mississippis was the harshest and georgias the most lenient but they had much in common.
the black codes aimed rst of all to ensure a stable and subservient labor force.
the crushed cotton kingdom could not rise from its weeds until the elds were once again put under hoe and plow and many whites wanted to make sure that they retained the tight control they had exercised over black eld hands and plow drivers in the days of slavery.
dire penalties were therefore imposed by the codes on blacks who jumped their labor contracts which usually committed them to work for the same employer for one year and generally at pittance wages.
violators could be made to forfeit back wages or could be forcibly dragged back to work by a paid negro catcher in mississippi the captured freedmen could be ned and then hired out to pay their nes an arrangement that closely resembled slavery itself.
early in 1866 one congressman quoted a georgian the blacks eat sleep move live only by the tolerance of the whites who hate them.
the blacks own absolutely nothing but their bodies their former masters own everything and will sell them nothing.
if a black man draws even a bucket of water from a well he must rst get the permission of a white man his enemy.
if he asks for work to earn his living he must ask it of a white man and the whites are determined to give him no work except on such terms as will make him a serf and impair his liberty.
the codes also sought to restore as nearly as possible the pre emancipation system of race relations.
freedom was legally recognized as were some other privileges such as the right to marry.
but all the codes forbade a black to serve on a jury some even barred blacks from renting or leasing land.
a black could be punished for idleness by being sentenced to work on a chain gang.
nowhere were blacks allowed to vote.
these oppressive laws mocked the ideal of freedom so recently purchased by buckets of blood.
the sharecroppers picking cotton although many freed slaves found themselves picking cotton on their former masters plantations they took comfort that they were at least paid wages and could work as a family unit.
in time however they became ensnared in the web of debt that their planter bosses spun to keep a free labor force tightly bound to them.
chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 black codes imposed terrible burdens on the unfettered blacks struggling against mistreatment and poverty to make their way as free people.
the worst features of the black codes would eventually be repealed but their revocation could not by itself lift the liberated blacks into economic independence.
lacking capital and with little to offer but their labor thousands of impoverished former slaves slipped into the status of sharecropper farmers as did many landless whites.
luckless sharecroppers gradually sank into a morass of virtual peonage and remained there for generations.
formerly slaves to masters countless blacks as well as poorer whites in effect became slaves to the soil and to their creditors.
yet the dethroned planter aristocracy resented even this pitiful concession to freedom.
sharecropping was the wrong policy said one planter.
it makes the laborer too independent he becomes a partner and has a right to be consulted the black codes made an ugly impression in the north.
if the former slaves were being re enslaved people asked one another had not the boys in blue spilled their blood in vain.
had the north really won the war.
congressional reconstruction these questions grew more insistent when the congressional delegations from the newly reconstituted southern states presented themselves in the capitol in december 1865.
to the shock and disgust of the republicans many former confederate leaders were on hand to claim their seats.
the appearance of these ex rebels was a natural but costly blunder.
voters of the south seeking able representatives had turned instinctively to their experienced statesmen.
but most of the southern leaders were tainted by active association with the lost cause among them were four former confederate generals ve colonels and various members of the richmond cabinet and congress.
worst of all there was the shrimpy but brainy alexander stephens ex vice president of the confederacy still under indictment for treason.
the presence of these whitewashed rebels infuriated the republicans in congress.
the war had been fought to restore the union but not on these kinds of terms.
the republicans were in no hurry to embrace their former enemies virtually all of them democrats in the chambers of the capitol.
while the south had been out from 1861 to 1865 the republicans in congress had enjoyed a relatively free hand.
they had passed much legislation that favored the north such as the morrill tariff the pacic railroad act and the homestead act.
now many republicans balked at giving up this political advantage.
on the rst day of the congressional session december 4 1865 they banged shut the door in the face of the newly elected southern delegations.
looking to the future the republicans were alarmed to realize that a restored south would be stronger than ever in national politics.
before the war a black slave had counted as three fths of a person in apportioning congressional representation.
now the slave was ve fths of a person.
eleven southern states had seceded and been subdued by force of arms.
but now owing to full counting of free blacks the rebel states were entitled to twelve more votes in congress and twelve more presidential electoral votes than they had previously enjoyed.
again angry voices in the north raised the cry who won the war.
republicans had good reason to fear that ultimately they might be elbowed aside.
southerners might join hands with democrats in the north and win control of congress or maybe even the white house.
if this happened they could perpetuate the black codes virtually re enslaving blacks.
they could dismantle the economic program of the republican party by lowering tariffs rerouting the transcontinental railroad repealing the free farm homestead act and possibly even repudiating the national debt.
president johnson thus deeply disturbed the congressional republicans when he announced on december 6 1865 that the recently rebellious states had satised his conditions and that in his view the union was now restored.
johnson clashes with congress a clash between president and congress was now inevitable.
it exploded into the open in february 1866 when the president vetoed a bill later repassed extending the life of the controversial freedmens bureau.
aroused the republicans swiftly struck back.
in march 1866 they passed the civil rights bill which conferred on blacks the privilege of american citizenship and struck at the black codes.
president johnson resolutely vetoed this forward looking mea sure on constitutional grounds but in april congressmen steamrollered it over his veto something they repeat johnson versus congressional republicans edly did henceforth.
the hapless president dubbed sir veto and andy veto had his presidential wings clipped as congress increasingly assumed the dominant role in running the government.
one critic called johnson the dead dog of the white house the republicans now undertook to rivet the principles of the civil rights bill into the constitution as the fourteenth amendment.
they feared that the southerners might one day win control of congress and repeal the hated law.
the proposed amendment approved by congress and sent to the states in june 1866 and ratied in 1868 was sweeping.
it 1 conferred civil rights including citizenship but excluding the fran chise on the freedmen 2 reduced proportionately the representation of a state in congress and in the electoral college if it denied blacks the ballot 3 disqualied from federal and state ofce former confederates who as federal ofceholders had once sworn to support the constitution of the united states and 4 guaranteed the federal debt while repudiating all confederate debts.
see the text of the fourteenth amendment in the appendix.
the radical faction was disappointed that the fourteenth amendment did not grant the right to vote but all republicans were agreed that no state should be welcomed back into the union fold without rst ratifying the fourteenth amendment.
yet president johnson advised the southern states to reject it and all of the sinful eleven except tennessee deantly spurned the amendment.
their spirit was reected in a southern song and i dont want no pardon for what i was or am i wont be reconstructed and i dont give a damn.
swinging round the circle with johnson an inexible president 1866 this republican cartoon shows johnson knocking blacks out of the freedmens bureau by his veto.
as 1866 lengthened the battle grew between the congress and the president.
the root of the controversy was johnsons 10 percent governments that had passed the most stringent black codes.
congress had tried to temper the worst features of the codes by extending the life of the embattled freedmens bureau and passing the civil rights bill.
both mea sures johnson had vetoed.
now the issue was whether reconstruction was to be carried on with or without the fourteenth amendment.
the republicans would settle for nothing less.
the crucial congressional elections of 1866 more crucial than some presidential elections were fast approaching.
johnson was naturally eager to escape from the clutch of congress by securing a majority favorable to his soft on the south policy.
invited to dedicate a chicago monument to stephen a douglas he undertook to speak at various cities en route in support of his views.
johnsons famous swing round the circle beginning in the late summer of 1866 was a seriocomedy of errors.
the president delivered a series of give em hell speeches in which he accused the radicals in congress of having planned large scale antiblack riots and murder in the south.
as he spoke hecklers hurled insults at chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 him.
reverting to his stump speaking days in tennessee he shouted back angry retorts amid cries of you be damned and dont get mad andy the dignity of his high ofce sank to a new low as the old charges of drunkenness were revived.
as a vote getter johnson was highly successful for the opposition.
his inept speechmaking heightened the cry stand by congress against the tailor of the potomac when the ballots were counted the republicans had rolled up more than a two thirds majority in both houses of congress.
republican principles and programs the republicans now had a veto proof congress and virtually unlimited control of reconstruction policy.
but moderates and radicals still disagreed over the best course to pursue in the south.
republicans campaigning in baton rouge louisiana 1868 the soldiers caps and regimental ags demonstrate the continuing federal military presence in the reconstruction south.
radical republican congressman thaddeus stevens said that reconstruction must revolutionize southern institutions habits and manners.
the foundation of their institutions.
must be broken up and relaid or all our blood and treasure have been spent in vain the radicals in the senate were led by the courtly and principled idealist charles sumner long since recovered from his prewar caning on the senate oor who tirelessly labored not only for black freedom but for racial equality.
in the house the most powerful radical was thaddeus stevens crusty and vindictive congressman from pennsylvania.
seventy four years old in 1866 he was a curious gure with a protruding lower lip a heavy black wig covering his bald head and a deformed foot.
an unswerving friend of blacks he had defended runaway slaves in court without fee and before dying insisted on burial in a black cemetery.
his affectionate devotion to blacks was matched by his vitriolic hatred of rebellious white southerners.
a masterly parliamentarian with a razor sharp mind and withering wit stevens was a leading gure on the joint house senate committee on reconstruction.
still opposed to rapid restoration of the southern states the radicals wanted to keep them out as long as possible and apply federal power to bring about a dras military reconstruction though the moderates as the majority faction had the upper hand.
and one thing both groups had come to agree on by 1867 was the necessity to enfranchise black voters even if it took federal troops to do it.
representative thaddeus stevens 1792 1868 in a congressional speech on january 3 1867 urged the ballot for blacks out of concern for them and out of bitterness against southern whites i am for negro suffrage in every rebel state.
if it be just it should not be denied if it be necessary it should be adopted if it be a punishment to traitors they deserve it.
reconstruction by the sword tic social and economic transformation in the south.
but moderate republicans more attuned to the timehonored principles of states rights and self government recoiled from the full implications of the radical program.
they preferred policies that restrained the states from abridging citizens rights rather than policies that directly involved the federal government in individual lives.
the actual policies adopted by congress showed the inuence of both these schools of thought against a backdrop of vicious and bloody race riots that had erupted in several southern cities congress passed the reconstruction act on march 2 1867 see map 22 1.
supplemented by later mea sures this drastic legislation divided the south into ve military districts each commanded by a union general and policed by blue clad soldiers about twenty thousand all told.
the act also temporarily disfranchised tens of thousands of former confederates.
congress additionally laid down stringent conditions for the readmission of the seceded states.
the wayward states were required to ratify the fourteenth amendment giving the former slaves their rights as citizens.
the bitterest pill of all to white southerners map 22 1 military reconstruction 1867 ve districts and commanding generals for many white southerners military reconstruction amounted to turning the knife in the wound of defeat.
an often repeated story of later years had a southerner remark i was sixteen years old before i discovered that damnyankee was two words boundaries of the five military districts va interactive map military district 1 tennessee escaped military regime.
1870 date refers to year of readmission to the union general schofield n c tennessee arkansas military district 4 general ord texas miss.
military district 5 general sheridan alabama military district 2 general sickles georgia s c military district 3 general pope louisiana florida years redeemer governments established established 1869 1871 established 1873 1874 established 1876 1877 presidential electoral vote by party independent democratic republican democratic chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 was the stipulation that they guarantee in their state constitutions full suffrage for their former adult male slaves.
yet the act reecting moderate sentiment stopped short of giving the freedmen land or education at federal expense.
the overriding purpose of the moderates was to create an electorate in southern states that would vote those states back into the union on acceptable terms and thus free the federal government from direct responsibility for the protection of black rights.
as later events would demonstrate this approach proved woefully inadequate to the cause of justice for blacks.
the radical republicans were still worried.
the danger loomed that once the unrepentant states were readmitted they would amend their constitutions so as to withdraw the ballot from blacks.
the only ironclad safeguard was to incorporate black suffrage in the federal constitution.
this goal was nally achieved by the fifteenth amendment passed by congress in 1869 and ratied by the required number of states in 1870 see the appendix.
military reconstruction of the south not only usurped certain functions of the president as commander in chief but set up a martial regime of dubious legality.
the supreme court had already ruled in the at a constitutional convention in alabama freed people afrmed their rights in the following declaration we claim exactly the same rights privileges and immunities as are enjoyed by white men we ask nothing more and will be content with nothing less.
the law no longer knows white nor black but simply men and consequently we are entitled to ride in public conveyances hold ofce sit on juries and do everything else which we have in the past been prevented from doing solely on the ground of color.
case ex parte milligan 1866 that military tribunals could not try civilians even during wartime in areas where the civil courts were open.
peacetime military rule seemed starkly contrary to the spirit of the constitution.
but the circumstances were extraordinary in the republics history and for the time being the supreme court avoided offending the republican congress.
table 22 2 southern reconstruction by state state readmitted to representation in congress home rule democratic or redeemer regime reestablished tennessee july 24 1866 arkansas north carolina alabama florida june 22 1868 june 25 1868 june 25 1868 june 25 1868 louisiana south carolina virginia mississippi texas georgia june 25 1868 june 25 1868 january 26 1870 february 23 1870 march 30 1870 june 25 1868 july 15 1870 comments ratied fourteenth amendment in 1866 and hence avoided military reconstruction federal troops restationed in 1877 as result of hayes tilden electoral bargain same as florida same as florida readmitted june 25 1868 but returned to military control after expulsion of blacks from legislature for many years tennessee was the only state of the secession to observe lincolns birthday as a legal holiday.
many states in the south still observe the birthdays of jefferson davis and robert e lee.
amending the constitution prodded into line by federal bayonets the southern states got on with the task of constitution making.
by 1870 all of them had reorga nized their governments and had been accorded full rights see table 22 2.
the hated bluebellies remained until the new republican regimes usually called radical regimes appeared to be rmly entrenched.
yet when the federal troops nally left a state its government swiftly passed back into the hands of white redeemers or home rule regimes which were inevitably democratic.
finally in 1877 the last federal muskets were removed from state politics and the solid democratic south congealed.
no women voters the passage of the three reconstruction era amendments the thirteenth fourteenth and fifteenth delighted former abolitionists but deeply disappointed advocates of womens rights.
women had played a prominent part in the prewar abolitionist movement and had often pointed out that both women and blacks lacked basic civil rights especially the crucial right to vote.
the struggle for black freedom and the crusade for womens rights therefore were one and the same in the eyes of many women.
yet during the war feminist leaders such as elizabeth cady stanton and susan b anthony had temporarily suspended their own demands and worked wholeheartedly for the cause of black emancipation.
the womans loyal league had gathered nearly 400 000 signatures on petitions asking congress to pass a constitutional amendment prohibiting slavery.
now with the war ended and the thirteenth amendment passed feminist leaders believed that their time had come.
they reeled with shock however the prominent suffragist and abolitionist susan b anthony 1820 1906 was outraged over the proposed exclusion of women from the fourteenth amendment.
in a conversation with her former male allies wendell phillips and theodore tilton she reportedly held out her arm and declared look at this all of you.
and hear me swear that i will cut off this right arm of mine before i will ever work for or demand the ballot for the negro and not the woman.
when the wording of the fourteenth amendment which de ned equal national citizenship for the rst time inserted the word male into the constitution in referring to a citizens right to vote.
both stanton and anthony campaigned actively against the fourteenth amendment despite the pleas of frederick douglass who had long supported woman suffrage but believed that this was the negros hour when the fifteenth amendment proposed to prohibit denial of the vote on the basis of race color or previous condition of servitude stanton and anthony wanted the word sex added to the list.
they lost this battle too.
fifty years would pass before the constitution granted women the right to vote.
the realities of radical reconstruction in the south blacks now had freedom of a sort.
their friends in congress had only haltingly and somewhat belatedly secured the franchise for them.
both presidents lincoln and johnson had proposed to give the ballot gradually to selected blacks who qualied for it through education property ownership or military ser vice.
moderate republicans and even many radicals at rst hesitated to bestow suffrage on the freedmen.
the fourteenth amendment in many ways the heart of the republican program for reconstruction had fallen short of guaranteeing the right to vote.
it envisioned for blacks the same status as that of women citizenship without voting rights.
but by 1867 hesitation had given way to a hard determination to enfranchise the former slaves wholesale and immediately while thousands of white southerners were being denied the vote.
by glaring contrast most of the northern states before ratication of the fifteenth amendment in 1870 withheld the ballot from their tiny black minorities.
white southerners naturally concluded that the republicans were hypocritical in insisting that blacks in the south be allowed to vote.
having gained their right to suffrage southern black men seized the initiative and began to organize politically.
their primary vehicle became the union league originally a pro union orga ni zation based in the north.
assisted by northern blacks freedmen turned the league into a network of political clubs that educated members in their civic duties and campaigned for republican candidates.
the leagues mission soon expanded to include building black churches and schools representing black grievances before local chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 freedmen voting richmond virginia 1871 the exercise of democratic rights by former slaves constituted a political and social revolution in the south and was bitterly resented by whites.
employers and government and recruiting militias to protect black communities from white retaliation.
though african american women did not obtain the right to vote they too assumed new political roles.
black women faithfully attended the parades and rallies common in black communities during the early years of reconstruction and helped assemble mass meetings in the newly constructed black churches.
they even showed up at the constitutional conventions held throughout the south in 1867 monitoring the proceedings and participating in informal votes outside the convention halls.
but black men elected as delegates to the state constitutional conventions held the greater political authority.
they formed the backbone of the black political community.
at the conventions they sat down with whites to hammer out new state constitutions which most importantly provided for universal male suffrage.
though the subsequent elections produced no black governors or majorities in state senates black political participation expanded exponentially during reconstruction.
between 1868 and 1876 fourteen black congressmen and two black senators hiram revels and blanche k bruce both of mississippi served in washington d c.
blacks also served in state governments as lieutenant governors and representatives and in local governments as mayors magistrates sheriffs and justices of the peace.
the sight of former slaves holding ofce deeply offended their onetime masters who lashed out with particular fury at the freedmens white allies labeling them scalawags and carpetbaggers.
the so called scalawags were southerners often former unionists and whigs.
the former confederates accused them often with wild exaggeration of plundering the treasuries of the southern states through their political inuence in the radical governments.
the carpetbaggers on the other hand were supposedly sleazy northerners who had packed all their worldly goods into a carpetbag suitcase at wars end and had come south to seek personal power and prot.
in fact most were former union soldiers and northern businessmen and professionals who wanted to play a role in modernizing the new south how well did the radical regimes rule.
the radical legislatures passed much desirable legislation and introduced many badly needed reforms.
for the rst time in southern history steps were taken toward establishing adequate public schools.
tax systems were streamlined public works were launched and property rights radical reconstruction black reconstruction a composite portrait of the rst black senators and representatives in the forty rst and forty second congresses.
senator hiram revels on the left was elected in 1870 to the seat that had been occupied by jefferson davis when the south seceded.
were guaranteed to women.
many welcome reforms were retained by the all white redeemer governments that later returned to power.
despite these achievements graft ran rampant in many radical governments.
this was especially true in south carolina and louisiana where conscienceless promoters and other pocket padders used politically inexperienced blacks as pawns.
the worst black andwhite legislatures purchased as legislative supplies such stationery as hams perfumes suspenders bonnets corsets champagne and a cof n one thrifty carpetbag governor in a single year saved 100 000 from a salary of 8 000.
yet this sort of corruption was by no means con ned to the south in these postwar years.
the crimes of the reconstruction governments were no more outrageous than the scams and felonies being perpetrated in the north at the same time especially in boss tweeds new york.
the ku klux klan deeply embittered some southern whites resorted to savage mea sures against radical rule.
many whites resented the success and ability of black legislators as much as they resented alleged corruption a number of secret orga ni zations mushroomed forth the most notorious of which was the invisible empire of the south or ku klux klan founded in tennessee in 1866.
besheeted nightriders their horses hooves mufed would approach the cabin of an upstart black and hammer on the door.
in ghoulish tones one thirsty horseman would demand a bucket of water.
then under pretense of drinking he would pour it into a rubber attachment concealed beneath his mask and gown smack his lips and declare that this was the rst water he had tasted since he was killed at the battle of shiloh.
if fright did not produce the desired effect force was employed.
such tomfoolery and terror proved partially effective.
many ex bondsmen and white carpetbaggers quick to take a hint shunned the polls.
those stubborn souls who persisted in their upstart ways were ogged mutilated or even murdered.
in one louisiana parish in 1868 whites in two days killed or wounded two hundred victims a pile of twenty ve bodies was found half buried in the woods.
by such atrocious practices were blacks kept in their place that is down.
the klan became a refuge for numerous bandits and cutthroats.
any scoundrel could don a sheet.
chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 congress outraged by this night riding lawlessness passed the harsh force acts of 1870 and 1871.
federal troops were able to stamp out much of the lash law but by this time the invisible empire had already done its work of intimidation.
many of the outlawed groups continued their tactics in the guise of dancing clubs missionary societies and rie clubs white resistance undermined attempts to empower blacks politically.
the white south for many decades openly outed the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments.
wholesale disfranchisement of blacks starting conspicuously about 1890 was achieved by the following excerpt is part of a heartrending appeal to congress in 1871 by a group of kentucky blacks we believe you are not familiar with the description of the ku klux klans riding nightly over the country going from county to county and in the county towns spreading terror wherever they go by robbing whipping ravishing and killing our people without provocation compelling colored people to break the ice and bathe in the chilly waters of the kentucky river.
the state legislature has adjourned.
they refused to enact any laws to suppress ku klux disorder.
we regard them the kukluxers as now being licensed to continue their dark and bloody deeds under cover of the dark night.
they refuse to allow us to testify in the state courts where a white man is concerned.
we nd their deeds are perpetrated only upon colored men and white republicans.
we also nd that for our services to the government and our race we have become the special object of hatred and persecution at the hands of the democratic party.
our people are driven from their homes in great numbers having no redress only except the united states court which is in many cases unable to reach them.
the ku klux klan tennessee 1868 this night riding terrorist has even masked the identity of his horse.
intimidation fraud and trickery.
among various underhanded schemes were literacy tests unfairly administered by whites to the advantage of illiterate whites.
in the eyes of white southerners the goal of white supremacy fully justied these dishonorable devices.
a black leader protested to whites in 1868 it is extraordinary that a race such as yours professing gallantry chivalry education and superiority living in a land where ringing chimes call child and sire to the gospel of god that with all these advantages on your side you can make war upon the poor defenseless black man.
the impeachment crisis impeachment drama the impeachment proceedings against president andrew johnson among the most severe constitutional crises in the republics history were high political theater and tickets were in sharp demand.
johnson walks the impeachment plank radicals meanwhile had been sharpening their hatchets for president johnson.
annoyed by the obstruction of the drunken tailor in the white house they falsely accused him of maintaining there a harem of dissolute women not content with curbing his authority they decided to remove him altogether by constitutional processes.
as an initial step congress in 1867 passed the tenure of ofce act as usual over johnsons veto.
contrary to precedent the new law required the president to secure the consent of the senate before he could remove his appointees once they had been approved by that body.
one purpose was to freeze into the cabinet the secretary of war edwin m stanton a holdover from the lincoln administration.
although outwardly loyal to johnson he was secretly serving as a spy and informer for the radicals.
johnson provided the radicals with a pretext to begin impeachment proceedings when he abruptly dismissed stanton early in 1868.
the house of representatives immediately voted 126 to 47 to impeach for impeachment see art.
iv in the appendix.
johnson for high crimes and misdemeanors as required by the constitution charging him with various violations of the tenure of ofce act.
two additional articles related to johnsons verbal assaults on the congress involving disgrace ridicule hatred contempt and reproach a not guilty verdict for johnson with evident zeal the radical led senate now sat as a court to try johnson on the dubious impeachment charges.
the house conducted the prosecution.
the trial aroused intense public interest and with one thousand tickets printed proved to be the biggest show of 1868.
johnson kept his dignity and sobriety and maintained a discreet silence.
his battery of attorneys argued that the president convinced that the tenure of ofce act was unconstitutional had red stanton merely to put a test case before the supreme court.
that slow moving tribunal nally ruled indirectly in johnsons favor fty eight years later.
house prosecutors including oily tongued benjamin f butler and embittered thaddeus stevens had a harder time building a compelling case for impeachment.
on may 16 1868 the day for the rst voting in the senate the tension was electric and heavy breathing could be heard in the galleries.
by a margin of only one chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 vote the radicals failed to muster the two thirds majority for johnsons removal.
seven independentminded republican senators courageously putting country above party voted not guilty several factors shaped the outcome.
fears of creating a destabilizing precedent played a role as did principled opposition to abusing the constitutional mechanism of checks and balances.
political considerations also gured conspicuously.
as the vice presidency remained vacant under johnson his successor would have been radical republican benjamin wade the president pro tempore of the senate.
wade was disliked by many members of the business community for his high tariff soft money pro labor views and was distrusted by moderate republicans.
meanwhile johnson indicated through his attorney that he would stop obstructing republican policies in return for remaining in ofce.
diehard radicals were infuriated by their failure to muster a two thirds majority for johnsons removal.
the country is going to the devil cried the crippled stevens as he was carried from the hall.
but the nation though violently aroused accepted the verdict with a good temper that did credit to its political maturity.
in a less stable republic an armed uprising might have erupted against the president.
the nation thus narrowly avoided a dangerous precedent that would have gravely weakened one of the three branches of the federal government.
johnson was clearly guilty of bad speeches bad judgment and bad temper but not of high crimes and misdemeanors from the standpoint of the radicals his greatest crime had been to stand inexibly in their path.
the purchase of alaska johnsons administration though largely reduced to a gurehead achieved its most enduring success in the eld of foreign relations.
the russians by 1867 were in a mood to sell the vast and chilly expanse of land now known as alaska.
they had already overextended themselves in north america and they saw that in the likely event of another war with britain they probably would lose their defenseless northern province to the sea dominant british.
alaska moreover had been ruthlessly furred out and was a growing economic liability.
the russians were therefore quite eager to unload their frozen asset on the americans and they put out seductive feelers in washington.
they preferred the united states to any map 22 2 alaska and the lower forty eight states a size comparison interactive map other purchaser primarily because they wanted to strengthen further the republic as a barrier against their ancient enemy britain.
in 1867 secretary of state william seward an ardent expansionist signed a treaty with russia that transferred alaska to the united states for the bargain price of 7 2 million see map 22 2.
but sewards enthusiasm for these frigid wastes was not shared by his ignorant or uninformed countrymen who jeered at sewards folly sewards icebox frigidia and walrussia the american people still preoccupied with reconstruction and other internal vexations were economy minded and anti expansionist.
then why did congress and the american public sanction the purchase.
for one thing russia alone among the powers had been conspicuously friendly to the north during the recent civil war.
americans did not feel that they could offend their great and good friend the tsar by hurling his walrus covered icebergs back into his face.
besides the territory was rumored to be teeming with furs sh and gold and it might yet pan out protably as it later did with natural resources including oil and gas.
so congress and the country accepted sewards polar bear garden somewhat derisively but nevertheless hopefully.
the heritage of reconstruction many white southerners regarded reconstruction as a more grievous wound than the war itself.
it left a fes reconstruction s legacy the republicans acted from a mixture of idealism and political expediency.
they wanted both to protect the freed slaves and to promote the fortunes of the republican party.
in the end their efforts back red badly.
reconstruction conferred only eeting benets on blacks and virtually extinguished the republican party in the south for nearly one hundred years.
moderate republicans never fully appreciated the extensive effort necessary to make the freed slaves completely independent citizens nor the lengths to which southern whites would go to preserve their system of racial dominance.
had thaddeus stevenss radical program of drastic economic reforms and heftier protection of political rights been enacted things might well have been different.
but deep seated racism ingrained american resistance to tampering with property rights and rigid loyalty to the principle of local self government combined with spreading indifference in the north to the plight of blacks formed too formidable an obstacle.
despite good intentions by republicans the old south was in many ways more resurrected than reconstructed.
the remarkable ex slave frederick douglass 1817 1895 wrote in 1882 is this a republican form of government.
by thomas nast harpers weekly 1876 the nations most prominent political cartoonist expressed his despair at the tragic way that reconstruction had ended with few real gains for the former slaves.
tering scar that would take generations to heal.
they resented the upending of their social and racial system the political empowerment of blacks and the insult of federal intervention in their local affairs.
yet few rebellions have ended with the victors sitting down to a love feast with the vanquished.
given the explosiveness of the issues that had caused the war and the bitterness of the ghting the wonder is that reconstruction was not far harsher than it was.
the fact is that lincoln johnson and most republicans had no clear picture at wars end of what federal policy toward the south should be.
policymakers groped for the right policies inuenced as much by southern responses to defeat and emancipation as by any plans of their own to impose a specic program on the south.
though slavery was abolished the wrongs of my people were not ended.
though they were not slaves they were not yet quite free.
no man can be truly free whose liberty is dependent upon the thought feeling and action of others and who has himself no means in his own hands for guarding protecting defending and maintaining that liberty.
yet the negro after his emancipation was precisely in this state of destitution.
he was free from the individual master but the slave of society.
he had neither money property nor friends.
he was free from the old plantation but he had nothing but the dusty road under his feet.
he was free from the old quarter that once gave him shelter but a slave to the rains of summer and the frosts of winter.
he was in a word literally turned loose naked hungry and destitute to the open sky.
chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 chronology lincoln announces 10 percent reconstruction plan lincoln vetoes wade davis bill lincoln assassinated johnson issues reconstruction proclamation congress refuses to seat southern congressmen freedmens bureau established southern states pass black codes congress passes civil rights bill over johnsons veto congress passes fourteenth amendment johnson backed candidates lose congressional election ex parte milligan case ku klux klan founded key terms freedmens bureau 518 10 percent reconstruction plan 519 wade davis bill 519 black codes 521 pacic railroad act 522 civil rights bill 522 fourteenth amendment 523 reconstruction act 525 fifteenth amendment 526 reconstruction act tenure of ofce act united states purchases alaska from russia johnson impeached and acquitted johnson pardons confederate leaders fifteenth amendment ratied 1870 force acts freedmens bureau ended reconstruction ends people to know ex parte milligan 526 redeemers 527 womans loyal league 527 union league 527 scalawags 528 carpetbaggers 528 ku klux klan 529 force acts 530 tenure of ofce act 531 sewards folly 532 oliver o howard andrew johnson thaddeus stevens hiram revels edwin m stanton benjamin wade william seward how radical was reconstruction.
f ew topics have triggered as much intellectual warfare as the dark and bloody ground of reconstruction.
the period provoked questions sectional racial and constitutional about which people felt deeply and remain deeply divided even today.
scholarly argument goes back conspicuously to a columbia university historian william a dunning whose students in the early 1900s published a series of histories varying viewpoints of the reconstruction south.
dunning and his disciples were inuenced by the turn of the century spirit of sectional conciliation as well as by current theories about black racial inferiority.
sympathizing with the white south they wrote about the reconstruction period as a kind of national disgrace foisted upon a prostrate region by vindictive and self seeking radical republican politicians.
if the south had wronged the north by seceding the north had wronged the south by reconstructing.
a second cycle of scholarship in the 1920s was impelled by a widespread suspicion that the civil war itself had been a tragic and unnecessary blunder.
attention now shifted to northern politicians.
scholars like howard beale further questioned the motives of the radical republicans.
to beale and others the radicals had masked a ruthless desire to exploit southern labor and resources behind a false front of concern for the freed slaves.
moreover northern advocacy of black voting rights was merely a calculated attempt to ensure a republican political presence in the defeated south.
the unfortunate andrew johnson in this view had valiantly tried to uphold constitutional principles in the face of this cynical northern onslaught.
although ignored by his contemporaries scholar black nationalist and founder of the national association for the advancement of colored people w e b.
du bois wrote a sympathetic history of reconstruction in 1935 that became the basis for historians interpretations ever since.
following world war ii kenneth stampp and others inuenced by the modern civil rights movement built on du boiss argument and claimed that reconstruction had been a noble though ultimately failed attempt to extend american principles of equity and justice.
the radical republicans and the carpetbaggers were now heroes whereas andrew johnson was castigated for his obsti nate racism.
by the early 1970s this view had become orthodoxy and it generally holds sway today.
yet some scholars such as michael benedict and leon litwack disillusioned with the inability to achieve full racial justice in the 1960s and 1970s began once more to scrutinize the motives of northern politicians immediately after the civil war.
they claimed to discover that reconstruction had never been very radical and that the freedmens bureau and other agencies had merely allowed white planters to maintain their dominance over local politics as well as over the local economy.
more recently eric foner has powerfully reasserted the argument that reconstruction was a truly radical and noble attempt to establish an interracial democracy.
drawing upon the work of du bois foner has emphasized the comparative approach to american reconstruction.
clearly foner has admitted reconstruction did not create full equality but it did allow blacks to form political orga ni zations and churches to vote and to establish some mea sure of economic independence.
in south africa the caribbean and other areas once marked by slavery these opportunities were much harder to come by.
many of the benets of reconstruction were erased by whites in the south during the gilded age but in the twentieth century the constitutional principles and organizations developed during reconstruction provided the focus and foundation for the modern civil rights movement which some have called the second reconstruction.
steven hahns a nation under our feet black political struggles in the rural south from slavery to the great migration 2003 is the latest contribution to the literature on reconstruction.
hahn emphasizes the assertiveness and ingenuity of african americans in creating new political opportunities for themselves after emancipation.
to learn more richard n current those terrible carpetbaggers 1988 eric foner forever free the story of emancipation and reconstruction 2005 nothing but freedom 1983 dewey w grantham life and death of the solid south 1988 steven hahn a nation under our feet black political struggles in the rural south from slavery to the great migration 2003 james m mcpherson ordeal by fire the civil war and reconstruction 1981 michael perman emancipation and reconstruction rev.
ed 2003 lawrence powell new masters northern planters during the civil war and reconstruction 1980 julie saville the work of reconstruction 1994 booker t washington up from slavery 1901 heather andrea williams self taught african american education in slavery and freedom 2005 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at sail sail thy best ship of democracy of value is thy freight tis not the present only the past is also stored in thee thou holdest not the venture of thyself alone not of the western continent alone earths rsum entire floats on thy keel o ship is steadied by thy spars with thee time voyages in trust the antecedent nations sink or swim with thee with all their ancient struggles martyrs heroes epics wars thou bearst the other continents theirs theirs as much as thine the destination port triumphant.
walt whitman thou mother with thy equal brood 1872 t he american pageant this page intentionally left blank the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 with malice toward none with charity for all with rmness in the right as god gives us to see the right let us strive on to nish the work we are in to bind up the nations wounds to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his widow and orphan to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations.
t he battle was done the buglers silent.
bone weary and bloodied the american people north and south now faced the staggering challenges of peace.
four questions loomed large.
how would the south physically devastated by war and socially revolutionized by emancipation be rebuilt.
how would liberated blacks fare as free men and women.
how would the southern states be reintegrated into the union.
and who would direct the process of reconstruction the southern states themselves the president or congress.
the problems of peace other questions also clamored for answers.
what should be done with the captured confederate ringleaders all of whom were liable to charges of treason.
during the war a popular northern song had been hang jeff davis to a sour apple tree and even innocent children had lisped it.
davis was temporarily clapped into irons during the early days of his two year imprisonment.
but he and his fellow conspirators were nally released partly because the odds were that no virginia jury would convict them.
all rebel leaders were nally pardoned by president johnson as a sort of christmas present in 1868.
but congress did not remove all remaining civil disabilities until thirty years later and only posthumously restored daviss citizenship more than a century later.
dismal indeed was the picture presented by the war racked south when the rattle of musketry faded.
not only had an age perished but a civilization had collapsed in both its economic and its social structure.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 charleston south carolina in ruins april 1865 rebel troops evacuating charleston blew up military supplies to deny them to general william tecumseh shermans forces.
the explosions ignited res that all but destroyed the city.
the moonlight and magnolia old south largely imaginary in any case had forever gone with the wind.
handsome cities of yesteryear such as charleston and richmond were rubble strewn and weed choked.
an atlantan returned to his once fair hometown and remarked hell has laid her egg and right here it hatched economic life had creaked to a halt.
banks and businesses had locked their doors ruined by runaway ination.
factories were smokeless silent dismantled.
the transportation system had broken down completely.
before the war ve different railroad lines had converged on columbia south carolina now the nearest connected track was twenty nine miles away.
efforts to untwist the rails corkscrewed by shermans soldiers proved bumpily unsatisfactory.
agriculture the economic lifeblood of the south was almost hopelessly crippled.
once white cotton elds now yielded a lush harvest of nothing but green weeds.
the slave labor system had collapsed seed was scarce and livestock had been driven off by plundering yankees.
pathetic instances were reported of men hitching themselves to plows while women and children gripped the handles.
not until 1870 did the se ceded states produce as large a cotton crop as that of the fateful year 1860 and much of that yield came from new acreage in the southwest.
the princely planter aristocrats were humbled by the war at least temporarily.
reduced to proud poverty they faced charred and gutted mansions lost investments and almost worthless land.
their investments of more than 2 billion in slaves their primary form of wealth had evaporated with emancipation.
beaten but unbent many high spirited white southerners remained dangerously deant.
they cursed the damnyankees and spoke of your government in washington instead of our government one southern bishop refused to pray for president andrew johnson though johnson proved to be in sore need of divine guidance.
conscious of no crime these former confederates continued to believe that their view of secession was correct and that the lost cause was still a just war.
one popular anti union song ran im glad i fought agin her i only wish wed won and i aint axed any pardon for anything ive done.
such attitudes boded ill for the prospects of painlessly binding up the republics wounds.
from slavery to freedom freedmen dene freedom confusion abounded in the still smoldering south about the precise meaning of freedom for blacks.
emancipation took effect haltingly and unevenly in different parts of the conquered confederacy.
as union armies marched in and out of various localities many blacks found themselves emancipated and then reenslaved.
a north carolina slave estimated that he had celebrated freedom about twelve times.
blacks from one texas county eeing to the free soil of the liberated county next door were attacked by slaveowners as they swam across the river that marked the county line.
the next day trees along the riverbank were bent with swinging corpses a grisly warning to others dreaming of liberty.
other planters resisted emancipation more legalistically stubbornly protesting that slavery was lawful until state legislatures or the supreme court declared otherwise.
for many slaves the shackles of bondage were not struck off in a single mighty blow long suffering blacks often had to wrench free of their chains link by link.
the variety of responses to emancipation by whites as well as blacks illustrated the sometimes startling complexity of the master slave relationship.
loyalty to the plantation master prompted some slaves to resist the liberating union armies while other slaves pentup bitterness burst forth violently on the day of liberation.
many newly emancipated slaves for example joined union troops in pillaging their masters possessions.
in one instance a group of virginia slaves laid twenty lashes on the back of their former master a painful dose of his own favorite medicine.
prodded by the bayonets of yankee armies of occupation all masters were eventually forced to recognize their slaves permanent freedom.
the oncecommanding planter would assemble his former human chattels in front of the porch of the big house and announce their liberty.
though some blacks initially responded to news of their emancipation with suspicion and uncertainty they soon celebrated their newfound freedom.
many took new names in place of the ones given by their masters and demanded that whites formally address them as mr or mrs others abandoned the coarse cottons that had been their only clothing as slaves and sought silks satins and other nery.
though many whites perceived such behavior as insubordinate they were forced to recognize the realities of emancipation.
never before had i a word of impudence from any of our black folk wrote one white southerner but they are not ours any longer the day of jubilo this french illustration of emancipated negroes celebrating the emancipation proclamation may have been somewhat fanciful but it captured well the exhilaration that came with freedom.
chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 educating young freedmen and freedwomen 1870s freed slaves in the south regarded schooling as the key to improving their childrens lives and the fulllment of a long sought right that had been denied blacks in slavery.
these well dressed schoolchildren are lined up outside their rural one room schoolhouse alongside their teachers both black and white.
houston h holloway age twenty at the time of his emancipation recalled his feelings upon hearing of his freedom i felt like a bird out of a cage.
i could hardly ask to feel any better than i did that day.
the week passed off in a blaze of glory.
the reunion of long lost relatives also inspired joy one union ofcer wrote home men are taking their wives and children families which had been for a long time broken up are united and oh.
such happiness.
i am glad i am here.
tens of thousands of emancipated blacks took to the roads some to test their freedom others to search for long lost spouses parents and children.
emancipation thus strengthened the black family and many newly freed men and women formalized slave marriages for personal and pragmatic reasons including the desire to make their children legal heirs.
other blacks left their former masters to work in towns and cities where existing black communities provided protection and mutual assistance.
whole communities sometimes moved together in search of opportunity.
from 1878 to 1880 some twenty ve thousand blacks from louisiana texas and mississippi surged in a mass exodus to kansas.
the westward ood of these exodusters was stemmed only when steamboat captains refused to transport more black migrants across the mississippi river.
the church became the focus of black community life in the years following emancipation.
as slaves blacks had worshiped alongside whites but now they formed their own churches pastored by their own ministers.
black churches grew robustly.
the 150 000member black baptist church of 1850 reached 500 000 by 1870 while the african methodist episcopal church letter from a freedman to his old master 1865 hat was it like to experience the transition from slavery to freedom.
four million southern blacks faced this exhilarating and formidable prospect with the end of the war.
for historians recovering the african american perspective on emancipation is challenging.
unlike their white masters freed blacks left few written records.
but one former slave captured in a letter to his old master whose surname he bore the heroic determination of many blacks to build new independent and dignied lives for themselves and their families.
during the war jourdon anderson escaped slavery in tennessee with his wife and two daughters.
after relocating to the relative safety of ohio he received a communication from his former owner asking him to return.
in his bold reply reportedly dictated by the old servant himself anderson expressed his familys new expectations for life as free people and an uneasiness about his former masters intentions.
he made reference to his comfortable home his daughters schooling the church that he and his wife were free to attend regularly and the peace of mind that came with knowing that my girls would not be brought to shame by the violence and wickedness of their young masters to test the white mans sincerity anderson and his wife asked for the astronomical gure of 11 680 in back wages from decades as slaves.
he closed by reiterating that the great desire of my life is to give my children an education and have them form virtuous habits this rare letter demonstrates that many black correspondents may have been illiterate but they were hardly inarticulate.
and they asserted themselves as parents workers and citizens not only from the distance of a former free state like ohio but also deep within the former slave states of the south.
was the tone of andersons letter and postscript serious or tonguein cheek.
what did freedom mean for anderson and other blacks in the months following emancipation.
how did the eventual accomplishments of reconstruction correspond with the initial expectations of people like anderson and his former owner.
w chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 quadrupled in size from 100 000 to 400 000 in the rst decade after emancipation.
these churches formed the bedrock of black community life and they soon gave rise to other benevolent fraternal and mutual aid societies.
all these orga ni zations helped blacks protect their newly won freedom.
emancipation also meant education for many blacks.
learning to read and write had been a privilege generally denied to them under slavery.
freedmen wasted no time establishing societies for self improvement which undertook to raise funds to purchase land build schoolhouses and hire teachers.
one member of a north carolina education society asserted that a schoolhouse would be the rst proof of their independence southern blacks soon found however that the demand outstripped the supply of qualied black teachers.
they accepted the aid of northern white women sent by the american missionary association who volunteered their ser vices as teachers.
they also turned to the federal government for help.
the freed blacks were going to need all the friends and power they could muster in washington.
the freedmens bureau abolitionists had long preached that slavery was a degrading institution.
now the emancipators were faced with the brutal reality that the freedmen were overwhelmingly unskilled unlettered without property or money and with scant knowledge of how to survive as free people.
to cope with this problem throughout the conquered south congress created the freedmens bureau on march 3 1865.
on paper at least the bureau was intended to be a kind of primitive welfare agency.
it was to provide food clothing medical care and education both to freedmen and to white refugees.
heading the bureau was a women from the north enthusiastically embraced the opportunity to go south and teach in freedmens bureau schools for emancipated blacks.
one volunteer explained her motives i thought i must do something not having money at my command what could i do but give myself to the work.
i would go to them and give them my life if necessary.
warmly sympathetic friend of blacks union general oliver o howard who later founded and served as president of howard university in washington d c.
the bureau achieved its greatest successes in education.
it taught an estimated 200 000 blacks how to read.
many former slaves had a passion for learning partly because they wanted to close the gap between themselves and whites and partly because they longed to read the word of god.
in one elementary class in north carolina sat four generations of the same family ranging from a six year old child to a seventy ve yearold grandmother.
but in other areas the bureaus accomplishments were meager or even mischievous.
although the bureau was authorized to settle former slaves on forty acre tracts conscated from the confederates little land actually made it into blacks hands.
instead local administrators often collaborated with planters in expelling blacks from towns and cajoling them into signing labor contracts to work for their former masters.
still the white south resented the bureau as a meddlesome federal interloper that threatened to upset white racial dominance.
president andrew johnson who shared the white supremacist views of most white southerners repeatedly tried to kill it and it expired in 1872.
johnson the tailor president few presidents have ever been faced with a more perplexing sea of troubles than that confronting andrew johnson.
what manner of man was this medium built dark eyed black haired tennessean now chief executive by virtue of the bullet that killed lincoln.
no citizen not even lincoln has ever reached the white house from humbler beginnings.
born to impoverished parents in north carolina and orphaned early johnson never attended school but was apprenticed to a tailor at age ten.
ambitious to get ahead he taught himself to read and later his wife taught him to write and do simple arithmetic.
like many another self made man he was inclined to overpraise his maker.
johnson early became active in politics in tennessee where he had moved when seventeen years old.
he shone as an impassioned champion of poor whites against the planter aristocrats although he himself ultimately owned a few slaves.
he excelled as a two sted stump speaker before angry and heckling crowds who on occasion greeted his political oratory with cocked pistols not just cocked ears.
elected to congress he attracted much favorable attention in the johnson s plans for the south crushed by the constitution president andrew johnson revered the u s constitution but eventually felt its awesome weight in his impeachment trial.
north but not the south when he refused to secede with his own state.
after tennessee was partially redeemed by union armies he was appointed war governor and served courageously in an at mosphere of danger.
political exigency next thrust johnson into the vice presidency.
lincolns union party in 1864 needed to attract support from the war democrats and other prosouthern elements and johnson a democrat seemed to be the ideal man.
unfortunately he appeared at the vice presidential inaugural ceremonies the following march in a scandalous condition.
he had recently been af icted with typhoid fever and although not known as a heavy drinker he was urged by his friends to take a stiff bracer of whiskey.
this he did with unfortunate results.
old andy johnson was no doubt a man of parts unpolished parts.
he was intelligent able forceful and gifted with homespun honesty.
steadfastly devoted to duty and to the people he was a dogmatic champion of states rights and the constitution.
he would often present a copy of the document to visitors and he was buried with one as a pillow.
yet the man who had raised himself from the tailors bench to the presidents chair was a mist.
a southerner who did not understand the north a tennessean who had earned the distrust of the south a democrat who had never been accepted by the republicans a president who had never been elected to the ofce he was not at home in a republican white house.
hotheaded contentious and stubborn he was the wrong man in the wrong place at the wrong time.
a reconstruction policy devised by angels might well have failed in his tactless hands.
presidential reconstruction even before the shooting war had ended the political war over reconstruction had begun.
abraham lincoln believed that the southern states had never legally withdrawn from the union.
their formal restoration to the union would therefore be relatively simple.
accordingly lincoln in 1863 proclaimed his 10 percent reconstruction plan.
it decreed that a state could be reintegrated into the union when 10 percent of its voters in the presidential election of 1860 had taken an oath of allegiance to the united states and pledged to abide by emancipation.
the next step would be formal erection of a state government.
lincoln would then recognize the puried regime.
lincolns proclamation provoked a sharp reaction in congress where republicans feared the restoration of the planter aristocracy to power and the possible reenslavement of blacks.
republicans therefore rammed through congress in 1864 the wade davis bill.
the bill required that 50 percent of a states voters take the oath of allegiance and demanded stronger safeguards for chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 emancipation than lincolns as the price of readmission to the union.
lincoln pocket vetoed this bill by refusing to sign it after congress had adjourned.
republicans were outraged.
they refused to seat delegates from louisiana after that state had reorga nized its government in accordance with lincolns 10 percent plan in 1864.
the controversy surrounding the wade davis bill had revealed deep differences between the president and congress.
unlike lincoln many in congress insisted that the seceders had indeed left the union had committed suicide as republican states and had therefore forfeited all their rights.
they could be readmitted only as conquered provinces on such conditions as congress should decree.
this episode further revealed differences among republicans.
two factions were emerging.
the majority moderate group tended to agree with lincoln that the seceded states should be restored to the union as simply and swiftly as reasonable though on congresss terms not the presidents.
the minority radical group believed that the south should atone more painfully for its sins.
before the south should be restored the radicals wanted its social structure uprooted the haughty planters punished and the newly emancipated blacks protected by federal power.
some of the radicals were secretly pleased when the assassins bullet felled lincoln for the martyred president had shown tenderness toward the south.
spiteful andy johnson who shared their hatred for the planter aristocrats would presumably also share their desire to reconstruct the south with a rod of iron.
johnson soon disillusioned them.
he agreed with lincoln that the seceded states had never legally been outside the union.
thus he quickly recognized several of lincolns 10 percent governments and on may 29 1865 he issued his own reconstruction proclamation see table 22 1.
it disfranchised certain leading con before president andrew johnson 1808 1875 softened his southern policy his views were radical.
speaking on april 21 1865 he declared it is not promulgating anything that i have not heretofore said to say that traitors must be made odious that treason must be made odious that traitors must be punished and impoverished.
they must not only be punished but their social power must be destroyed.
if not they will still maintain an ascendancy and may again become numerous and powerful for in the words of a former senator of the united states when traitors become numerous enough treason becomes respectable federates including those with taxable property worth more than 20 000 though they might petition him for personal pardons.
it called for special state conventions which were required to repeal the ordinances of secession repudiate all confederate debts and ratify the slave freeing thirteenth amendment.
states that complied with these conditions johnson declared would be swiftly readmitted to the union.
johnson savoring his dominance over the hightoned aristocrats who now begged his favor granted pardons in abundance.
bolstered by the political resurrection of the planter elite the recently rebellious states moved rapidly in the second half of 1865 to organize governments.
but as the pattern of the new governments became clear republicans of all stripes grew furious.
table 22 1 principal reconstruction proposals and plans year proposal or plan 1864 1865 1865 1866 1866 1867 1867 1877 lincolns 10 percent proposal johnsons version of lincolns proposal congressional plan 10 percent plan with fourteenth amendment congressional plan of military reconstruction fourteenth amendment plus black suffrage later established nationwide by fifteenth amendment the black codes the baleful black codes among the rst acts of the new southern regimes sanctioned by johnson was the passage of the iron toothed black codes.
these laws were designed to regulate the affairs of the emancipated blacks much as the slave statutes had done in pre civil war days.
mississippi passed the rst such law in november 1865 and other southern states soon followed suit.
the black codes varied in severity from state to state mississippis was the harshest and georgias the most lenient but they had much in common.
the black codes aimed rst of all to ensure a stable and subservient labor force.
the crushed cotton kingdom could not rise from its weeds until the elds were once again put under hoe and plow and many whites wanted to make sure that they retained the tight control they had exercised over black eld hands and plow drivers in the days of slavery.
dire penalties were therefore imposed by the codes on blacks who jumped their labor contracts which usually committed them to work for the same employer for one year and generally at pittance wages.
violators could be made to forfeit back wages or could be forcibly dragged back to work by a paid negro catcher in mississippi the captured freedmen could be ned and then hired out to pay their nes an arrangement that closely resembled slavery itself.
early in 1866 one congressman quoted a georgian the blacks eat sleep move live only by the tolerance of the whites who hate them.
the blacks own absolutely nothing but their bodies their former masters own everything and will sell them nothing.
if a black man draws even a bucket of water from a well he must rst get the permission of a white man his enemy.
if he asks for work to earn his living he must ask it of a white man and the whites are determined to give him no work except on such terms as will make him a serf and impair his liberty.
the codes also sought to restore as nearly as possible the pre emancipation system of race relations.
freedom was legally recognized as were some other privileges such as the right to marry.
but all the codes forbade a black to serve on a jury some even barred blacks from renting or leasing land.
a black could be punished for idleness by being sentenced to work on a chain gang.
nowhere were blacks allowed to vote.
these oppressive laws mocked the ideal of freedom so recently purchased by buckets of blood.
the sharecroppers picking cotton although many freed slaves found themselves picking cotton on their former masters plantations they took comfort that they were at least paid wages and could work as a family unit.
in time however they became ensnared in the web of debt that their planter bosses spun to keep a free labor force tightly bound to them.
chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 black codes imposed terrible burdens on the unfettered blacks struggling against mistreatment and poverty to make their way as free people.
the worst features of the black codes would eventually be repealed but their revocation could not by itself lift the liberated blacks into economic independence.
lacking capital and with little to offer but their labor thousands of impoverished former slaves slipped into the status of sharecropper farmers as did many landless whites.
luckless sharecroppers gradually sank into a morass of virtual peonage and remained there for generations.
formerly slaves to masters countless blacks as well as poorer whites in effect became slaves to the soil and to their creditors.
yet the dethroned planter aristocracy resented even this pitiful concession to freedom.
sharecropping was the wrong policy said one planter.
it makes the laborer too independent he becomes a partner and has a right to be consulted the black codes made an ugly impression in the north.
if the former slaves were being re enslaved people asked one another had not the boys in blue spilled their blood in vain.
had the north really won the war.
congressional reconstruction these questions grew more insistent when the congressional delegations from the newly reconstituted southern states presented themselves in the capitol in december 1865.
to the shock and disgust of the republicans many former confederate leaders were on hand to claim their seats.
the appearance of these ex rebels was a natural but costly blunder.
voters of the south seeking able representatives had turned instinctively to their experienced statesmen.
but most of the southern leaders were tainted by active association with the lost cause among them were four former confederate generals ve colonels and various members of the richmond cabinet and congress.
worst of all there was the shrimpy but brainy alexander stephens ex vice president of the confederacy still under indictment for treason.
the presence of these whitewashed rebels infuriated the republicans in congress.
the war had been fought to restore the union but not on these kinds of terms.
the republicans were in no hurry to embrace their former enemies virtually all of them democrats in the chambers of the capitol.
while the south had been out from 1861 to 1865 the republicans in congress had enjoyed a relatively free hand.
they had passed much legislation that favored the north such as the morrill tariff the pacic railroad act and the homestead act.
now many republicans balked at giving up this political advantage.
on the rst day of the congressional session december 4 1865 they banged shut the door in the face of the newly elected southern delegations.
looking to the future the republicans were alarmed to realize that a restored south would be stronger than ever in national politics.
before the war a black slave had counted as three fths of a person in apportioning congressional representation.
now the slave was ve fths of a person.
eleven southern states had seceded and been subdued by force of arms.
but now owing to full counting of free blacks the rebel states were entitled to twelve more votes in congress and twelve more presidential electoral votes than they had previously enjoyed.
again angry voices in the north raised the cry who won the war.
republicans had good reason to fear that ultimately they might be elbowed aside.
southerners might join hands with democrats in the north and win control of congress or maybe even the white house.
if this happened they could perpetuate the black codes virtually re enslaving blacks.
they could dismantle the economic program of the republican party by lowering tariffs rerouting the transcontinental railroad repealing the free farm homestead act and possibly even repudiating the national debt.
president johnson thus deeply disturbed the congressional republicans when he announced on december 6 1865 that the recently rebellious states had satised his conditions and that in his view the union was now restored.
johnson clashes with congress a clash between president and congress was now inevitable.
it exploded into the open in february 1866 when the president vetoed a bill later repassed extending the life of the controversial freedmens bureau.
aroused the republicans swiftly struck back.
in march 1866 they passed the civil rights bill which conferred on blacks the privilege of american citizenship and struck at the black codes.
president johnson resolutely vetoed this forward looking mea sure on constitutional grounds but in april congressmen steamrollered it over his veto something they repeat johnson versus congressional republicans edly did henceforth.
the hapless president dubbed sir veto and andy veto had his presidential wings clipped as congress increasingly assumed the dominant role in running the government.
one critic called johnson the dead dog of the white house the republicans now undertook to rivet the principles of the civil rights bill into the constitution as the fourteenth amendment.
they feared that the southerners might one day win control of congress and repeal the hated law.
the proposed amendment approved by congress and sent to the states in june 1866 and ratied in 1868 was sweeping.
it 1 conferred civil rights including citizenship but excluding the fran chise on the freedmen 2 reduced proportionately the representation of a state in congress and in the electoral college if it denied blacks the ballot 3 disqualied from federal and state ofce former confederates who as federal ofceholders had once sworn to support the constitution of the united states and 4 guaranteed the federal debt while repudiating all confederate debts.
see the text of the fourteenth amendment in the appendix.
the radical faction was disappointed that the fourteenth amendment did not grant the right to vote but all republicans were agreed that no state should be welcomed back into the union fold without rst ratifying the fourteenth amendment.
yet president johnson advised the southern states to reject it and all of the sinful eleven except tennessee deantly spurned the amendment.
their spirit was reected in a southern song and i dont want no pardon for what i was or am i wont be reconstructed and i dont give a damn.
swinging round the circle with johnson an inexible president 1866 this republican cartoon shows johnson knocking blacks out of the freedmens bureau by his veto.
as 1866 lengthened the battle grew between the congress and the president.
the root of the controversy was johnsons 10 percent governments that had passed the most stringent black codes.
congress had tried to temper the worst features of the codes by extending the life of the embattled freedmens bureau and passing the civil rights bill.
both mea sures johnson had vetoed.
now the issue was whether reconstruction was to be carried on with or without the fourteenth amendment.
the republicans would settle for nothing less.
the crucial congressional elections of 1866 more crucial than some presidential elections were fast approaching.
johnson was naturally eager to escape from the clutch of congress by securing a majority favorable to his soft on the south policy.
invited to dedicate a chicago monument to stephen a douglas he undertook to speak at various cities en route in support of his views.
johnsons famous swing round the circle beginning in the late summer of 1866 was a seriocomedy of errors.
the president delivered a series of give em hell speeches in which he accused the radicals in congress of having planned large scale antiblack riots and murder in the south.
as he spoke hecklers hurled insults at chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 him.
reverting to his stump speaking days in tennessee he shouted back angry retorts amid cries of you be damned and dont get mad andy the dignity of his high ofce sank to a new low as the old charges of drunkenness were revived.
as a vote getter johnson was highly successful for the opposition.
his inept speechmaking heightened the cry stand by congress against the tailor of the potomac when the ballots were counted the republicans had rolled up more than a two thirds majority in both houses of congress.
republican principles and programs the republicans now had a veto proof congress and virtually unlimited control of reconstruction policy.
but moderates and radicals still disagreed over the best course to pursue in the south.
republicans campaigning in baton rouge louisiana 1868 the soldiers caps and regimental ags demonstrate the continuing federal military presence in the reconstruction south.
radical republican congressman thaddeus stevens said that reconstruction must revolutionize southern institutions habits and manners.
the foundation of their institutions.
must be broken up and relaid or all our blood and treasure have been spent in vain the radicals in the senate were led by the courtly and principled idealist charles sumner long since recovered from his prewar caning on the senate oor who tirelessly labored not only for black freedom but for racial equality.
in the house the most powerful radical was thaddeus stevens crusty and vindictive congressman from pennsylvania.
seventy four years old in 1866 he was a curious gure with a protruding lower lip a heavy black wig covering his bald head and a deformed foot.
an unswerving friend of blacks he had defended runaway slaves in court without fee and before dying insisted on burial in a black cemetery.
his affectionate devotion to blacks was matched by his vitriolic hatred of rebellious white southerners.
a masterly parliamentarian with a razor sharp mind and withering wit stevens was a leading gure on the joint house senate committee on reconstruction.
still opposed to rapid restoration of the southern states the radicals wanted to keep them out as long as possible and apply federal power to bring about a dras military reconstruction though the moderates as the majority faction had the upper hand.
and one thing both groups had come to agree on by 1867 was the necessity to enfranchise black voters even if it took federal troops to do it.
representative thaddeus stevens 1792 1868 in a congressional speech on january 3 1867 urged the ballot for blacks out of concern for them and out of bitterness against southern whites i am for negro suffrage in every rebel state.
if it be just it should not be denied if it be necessary it should be adopted if it be a punishment to traitors they deserve it.
reconstruction by the sword tic social and economic transformation in the south.
but moderate republicans more attuned to the timehonored principles of states rights and self government recoiled from the full implications of the radical program.
they preferred policies that restrained the states from abridging citizens rights rather than policies that directly involved the federal government in individual lives.
the actual policies adopted by congress showed the inuence of both these schools of thought against a backdrop of vicious and bloody race riots that had erupted in several southern cities congress passed the reconstruction act on march 2 1867 see map 22 1.
supplemented by later mea sures this drastic legislation divided the south into ve military districts each commanded by a union general and policed by blue clad soldiers about twenty thousand all told.
the act also temporarily disfranchised tens of thousands of former confederates.
congress additionally laid down stringent conditions for the readmission of the seceded states.
the wayward states were required to ratify the fourteenth amendment giving the former slaves their rights as citizens.
the bitterest pill of all to white southerners map 22 1 military reconstruction 1867 ve districts and commanding generals for many white southerners military reconstruction amounted to turning the knife in the wound of defeat.
an often repeated story of later years had a southerner remark i was sixteen years old before i discovered that damnyankee was two words boundaries of the five military districts va interactive map military district 1 tennessee escaped military regime.
1870 date refers to year of readmission to the union general schofield n c tennessee arkansas military district 4 general ord texas miss.
military district 5 general sheridan alabama military district 2 general sickles georgia s c military district 3 general pope louisiana florida years redeemer governments established established 1869 1871 established 1873 1874 established 1876 1877 presidential electoral vote by party independent democratic republican democratic chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 was the stipulation that they guarantee in their state constitutions full suffrage for their former adult male slaves.
yet the act reecting moderate sentiment stopped short of giving the freedmen land or education at federal expense.
the overriding purpose of the moderates was to create an electorate in southern states that would vote those states back into the union on acceptable terms and thus free the federal government from direct responsibility for the protection of black rights.
as later events would demonstrate this approach proved woefully inadequate to the cause of justice for blacks.
the radical republicans were still worried.
the danger loomed that once the unrepentant states were readmitted they would amend their constitutions so as to withdraw the ballot from blacks.
the only ironclad safeguard was to incorporate black suffrage in the federal constitution.
this goal was nally achieved by the fifteenth amendment passed by congress in 1869 and ratied by the required number of states in 1870 see the appendix.
military reconstruction of the south not only usurped certain functions of the president as commander in chief but set up a martial regime of dubious legality.
the supreme court had already ruled in the at a constitutional convention in alabama freed people afrmed their rights in the following declaration we claim exactly the same rights privileges and immunities as are enjoyed by white men we ask nothing more and will be content with nothing less.
the law no longer knows white nor black but simply men and consequently we are entitled to ride in public conveyances hold ofce sit on juries and do everything else which we have in the past been prevented from doing solely on the ground of color.
case ex parte milligan 1866 that military tribunals could not try civilians even during wartime in areas where the civil courts were open.
peacetime military rule seemed starkly contrary to the spirit of the constitution.
but the circumstances were extraordinary in the republics history and for the time being the supreme court avoided offending the republican congress.
table 22 2 southern reconstruction by state state readmitted to representation in congress home rule democratic or redeemer regime reestablished tennessee july 24 1866 arkansas north carolina alabama florida june 22 1868 june 25 1868 june 25 1868 june 25 1868 louisiana south carolina virginia mississippi texas georgia june 25 1868 june 25 1868 january 26 1870 february 23 1870 march 30 1870 june 25 1868 july 15 1870 comments ratied fourteenth amendment in 1866 and hence avoided military reconstruction federal troops restationed in 1877 as result of hayes tilden electoral bargain same as florida same as florida readmitted june 25 1868 but returned to military control after expulsion of blacks from legislature for many years tennessee was the only state of the secession to observe lincolns birthday as a legal holiday.
many states in the south still observe the birthdays of jefferson davis and robert e lee.
amending the constitution prodded into line by federal bayonets the southern states got on with the task of constitution making.
by 1870 all of them had reorga nized their governments and had been accorded full rights see table 22 2.
the hated bluebellies remained until the new republican regimes usually called radical regimes appeared to be rmly entrenched.
yet when the federal troops nally left a state its government swiftly passed back into the hands of white redeemers or home rule regimes which were inevitably democratic.
finally in 1877 the last federal muskets were removed from state politics and the solid democratic south congealed.
no women voters the passage of the three reconstruction era amendments the thirteenth fourteenth and fifteenth delighted former abolitionists but deeply disappointed advocates of womens rights.
women had played a prominent part in the prewar abolitionist movement and had often pointed out that both women and blacks lacked basic civil rights especially the crucial right to vote.
the struggle for black freedom and the crusade for womens rights therefore were one and the same in the eyes of many women.
yet during the war feminist leaders such as elizabeth cady stanton and susan b anthony had temporarily suspended their own demands and worked wholeheartedly for the cause of black emancipation.
the womans loyal league had gathered nearly 400 000 signatures on petitions asking congress to pass a constitutional amendment prohibiting slavery.
now with the war ended and the thirteenth amendment passed feminist leaders believed that their time had come.
they reeled with shock however the prominent suffragist and abolitionist susan b anthony 1820 1906 was outraged over the proposed exclusion of women from the fourteenth amendment.
in a conversation with her former male allies wendell phillips and theodore tilton she reportedly held out her arm and declared look at this all of you.
and hear me swear that i will cut off this right arm of mine before i will ever work for or demand the ballot for the negro and not the woman.
when the wording of the fourteenth amendment which de ned equal national citizenship for the rst time inserted the word male into the constitution in referring to a citizens right to vote.
both stanton and anthony campaigned actively against the fourteenth amendment despite the pleas of frederick douglass who had long supported woman suffrage but believed that this was the negros hour when the fifteenth amendment proposed to prohibit denial of the vote on the basis of race color or previous condition of servitude stanton and anthony wanted the word sex added to the list.
they lost this battle too.
fifty years would pass before the constitution granted women the right to vote.
the realities of radical reconstruction in the south blacks now had freedom of a sort.
their friends in congress had only haltingly and somewhat belatedly secured the franchise for them.
both presidents lincoln and johnson had proposed to give the ballot gradually to selected blacks who qualied for it through education property ownership or military ser vice.
moderate republicans and even many radicals at rst hesitated to bestow suffrage on the freedmen.
the fourteenth amendment in many ways the heart of the republican program for reconstruction had fallen short of guaranteeing the right to vote.
it envisioned for blacks the same status as that of women citizenship without voting rights.
but by 1867 hesitation had given way to a hard determination to enfranchise the former slaves wholesale and immediately while thousands of white southerners were being denied the vote.
by glaring contrast most of the northern states before ratication of the fifteenth amendment in 1870 withheld the ballot from their tiny black minorities.
white southerners naturally concluded that the republicans were hypocritical in insisting that blacks in the south be allowed to vote.
having gained their right to suffrage southern black men seized the initiative and began to organize politically.
their primary vehicle became the union league originally a pro union orga ni zation based in the north.
assisted by northern blacks freedmen turned the league into a network of political clubs that educated members in their civic duties and campaigned for republican candidates.
the leagues mission soon expanded to include building black churches and schools representing black grievances before local chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 freedmen voting richmond virginia 1871 the exercise of democratic rights by former slaves constituted a political and social revolution in the south and was bitterly resented by whites.
employers and government and recruiting militias to protect black communities from white retaliation.
though african american women did not obtain the right to vote they too assumed new political roles.
black women faithfully attended the parades and rallies common in black communities during the early years of reconstruction and helped assemble mass meetings in the newly constructed black churches.
they even showed up at the constitutional conventions held throughout the south in 1867 monitoring the proceedings and participating in informal votes outside the convention halls.
but black men elected as delegates to the state constitutional conventions held the greater political authority.
they formed the backbone of the black political community.
at the conventions they sat down with whites to hammer out new state constitutions which most importantly provided for universal male suffrage.
though the subsequent elections produced no black governors or majorities in state senates black political participation expanded exponentially during reconstruction.
between 1868 and 1876 fourteen black congressmen and two black senators hiram revels and blanche k bruce both of mississippi served in washington d c.
blacks also served in state governments as lieutenant governors and representatives and in local governments as mayors magistrates sheriffs and justices of the peace.
the sight of former slaves holding ofce deeply offended their onetime masters who lashed out with particular fury at the freedmens white allies labeling them scalawags and carpetbaggers.
the so called scalawags were southerners often former unionists and whigs.
the former confederates accused them often with wild exaggeration of plundering the treasuries of the southern states through their political inuence in the radical governments.
the carpetbaggers on the other hand were supposedly sleazy northerners who had packed all their worldly goods into a carpetbag suitcase at wars end and had come south to seek personal power and prot.
in fact most were former union soldiers and northern businessmen and professionals who wanted to play a role in modernizing the new south how well did the radical regimes rule.
the radical legislatures passed much desirable legislation and introduced many badly needed reforms.
for the rst time in southern history steps were taken toward establishing adequate public schools.
tax systems were streamlined public works were launched and property rights radical reconstruction black reconstruction a composite portrait of the rst black senators and representatives in the forty rst and forty second congresses.
senator hiram revels on the left was elected in 1870 to the seat that had been occupied by jefferson davis when the south seceded.
were guaranteed to women.
many welcome reforms were retained by the all white redeemer governments that later returned to power.
despite these achievements graft ran rampant in many radical governments.
this was especially true in south carolina and louisiana where conscienceless promoters and other pocket padders used politically inexperienced blacks as pawns.
the worst black andwhite legislatures purchased as legislative supplies such stationery as hams perfumes suspenders bonnets corsets champagne and a cof n one thrifty carpetbag governor in a single year saved 100 000 from a salary of 8 000.
yet this sort of corruption was by no means con ned to the south in these postwar years.
the crimes of the reconstruction governments were no more outrageous than the scams and felonies being perpetrated in the north at the same time especially in boss tweeds new york.
the ku klux klan deeply embittered some southern whites resorted to savage mea sures against radical rule.
many whites resented the success and ability of black legislators as much as they resented alleged corruption a number of secret orga ni zations mushroomed forth the most notorious of which was the invisible empire of the south or ku klux klan founded in tennessee in 1866.
besheeted nightriders their horses hooves mufed would approach the cabin of an upstart black and hammer on the door.
in ghoulish tones one thirsty horseman would demand a bucket of water.
then under pretense of drinking he would pour it into a rubber attachment concealed beneath his mask and gown smack his lips and declare that this was the rst water he had tasted since he was killed at the battle of shiloh.
if fright did not produce the desired effect force was employed.
such tomfoolery and terror proved partially effective.
many ex bondsmen and white carpetbaggers quick to take a hint shunned the polls.
those stubborn souls who persisted in their upstart ways were ogged mutilated or even murdered.
in one louisiana parish in 1868 whites in two days killed or wounded two hundred victims a pile of twenty ve bodies was found half buried in the woods.
by such atrocious practices were blacks kept in their place that is down.
the klan became a refuge for numerous bandits and cutthroats.
any scoundrel could don a sheet.
chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 congress outraged by this night riding lawlessness passed the harsh force acts of 1870 and 1871.
federal troops were able to stamp out much of the lash law but by this time the invisible empire had already done its work of intimidation.
many of the outlawed groups continued their tactics in the guise of dancing clubs missionary societies and rie clubs white resistance undermined attempts to empower blacks politically.
the white south for many decades openly outed the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments.
wholesale disfranchisement of blacks starting conspicuously about 1890 was achieved by the following excerpt is part of a heartrending appeal to congress in 1871 by a group of kentucky blacks we believe you are not familiar with the description of the ku klux klans riding nightly over the country going from county to county and in the county towns spreading terror wherever they go by robbing whipping ravishing and killing our people without provocation compelling colored people to break the ice and bathe in the chilly waters of the kentucky river.
the state legislature has adjourned.
they refused to enact any laws to suppress ku klux disorder.
we regard them the kukluxers as now being licensed to continue their dark and bloody deeds under cover of the dark night.
they refuse to allow us to testify in the state courts where a white man is concerned.
we nd their deeds are perpetrated only upon colored men and white republicans.
we also nd that for our services to the government and our race we have become the special object of hatred and persecution at the hands of the democratic party.
our people are driven from their homes in great numbers having no redress only except the united states court which is in many cases unable to reach them.
the ku klux klan tennessee 1868 this night riding terrorist has even masked the identity of his horse.
intimidation fraud and trickery.
among various underhanded schemes were literacy tests unfairly administered by whites to the advantage of illiterate whites.
in the eyes of white southerners the goal of white supremacy fully justied these dishonorable devices.
a black leader protested to whites in 1868 it is extraordinary that a race such as yours professing gallantry chivalry education and superiority living in a land where ringing chimes call child and sire to the gospel of god that with all these advantages on your side you can make war upon the poor defenseless black man.
the impeachment crisis impeachment drama the impeachment proceedings against president andrew johnson among the most severe constitutional crises in the republics history were high political theater and tickets were in sharp demand.
johnson walks the impeachment plank radicals meanwhile had been sharpening their hatchets for president johnson.
annoyed by the obstruction of the drunken tailor in the white house they falsely accused him of maintaining there a harem of dissolute women not content with curbing his authority they decided to remove him altogether by constitutional processes.
as an initial step congress in 1867 passed the tenure of ofce act as usual over johnsons veto.
contrary to precedent the new law required the president to secure the consent of the senate before he could remove his appointees once they had been approved by that body.
one purpose was to freeze into the cabinet the secretary of war edwin m stanton a holdover from the lincoln administration.
although outwardly loyal to johnson he was secretly serving as a spy and informer for the radicals.
johnson provided the radicals with a pretext to begin impeachment proceedings when he abruptly dismissed stanton early in 1868.
the house of representatives immediately voted 126 to 47 to impeach for impeachment see art.
iv in the appendix.
johnson for high crimes and misdemeanors as required by the constitution charging him with various violations of the tenure of ofce act.
two additional articles related to johnsons verbal assaults on the congress involving disgrace ridicule hatred contempt and reproach a not guilty verdict for johnson with evident zeal the radical led senate now sat as a court to try johnson on the dubious impeachment charges.
the house conducted the prosecution.
the trial aroused intense public interest and with one thousand tickets printed proved to be the biggest show of 1868.
johnson kept his dignity and sobriety and maintained a discreet silence.
his battery of attorneys argued that the president convinced that the tenure of ofce act was unconstitutional had red stanton merely to put a test case before the supreme court.
that slow moving tribunal nally ruled indirectly in johnsons favor fty eight years later.
house prosecutors including oily tongued benjamin f butler and embittered thaddeus stevens had a harder time building a compelling case for impeachment.
on may 16 1868 the day for the rst voting in the senate the tension was electric and heavy breathing could be heard in the galleries.
by a margin of only one chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 vote the radicals failed to muster the two thirds majority for johnsons removal.
seven independentminded republican senators courageously putting country above party voted not guilty several factors shaped the outcome.
fears of creating a destabilizing precedent played a role as did principled opposition to abusing the constitutional mechanism of checks and balances.
political considerations also gured conspicuously.
as the vice presidency remained vacant under johnson his successor would have been radical republican benjamin wade the president pro tempore of the senate.
wade was disliked by many members of the business community for his high tariff soft money pro labor views and was distrusted by moderate republicans.
meanwhile johnson indicated through his attorney that he would stop obstructing republican policies in return for remaining in ofce.
diehard radicals were infuriated by their failure to muster a two thirds majority for johnsons removal.
the country is going to the devil cried the crippled stevens as he was carried from the hall.
but the nation though violently aroused accepted the verdict with a good temper that did credit to its political maturity.
in a less stable republic an armed uprising might have erupted against the president.
the nation thus narrowly avoided a dangerous precedent that would have gravely weakened one of the three branches of the federal government.
johnson was clearly guilty of bad speeches bad judgment and bad temper but not of high crimes and misdemeanors from the standpoint of the radicals his greatest crime had been to stand inexibly in their path.
the purchase of alaska johnsons administration though largely reduced to a gurehead achieved its most enduring success in the eld of foreign relations.
the russians by 1867 were in a mood to sell the vast and chilly expanse of land now known as alaska.
they had already overextended themselves in north america and they saw that in the likely event of another war with britain they probably would lose their defenseless northern province to the sea dominant british.
alaska moreover had been ruthlessly furred out and was a growing economic liability.
the russians were therefore quite eager to unload their frozen asset on the americans and they put out seductive feelers in washington.
they preferred the united states to any map 22 2 alaska and the lower forty eight states a size comparison interactive map other purchaser primarily because they wanted to strengthen further the republic as a barrier against their ancient enemy britain.
in 1867 secretary of state william seward an ardent expansionist signed a treaty with russia that transferred alaska to the united states for the bargain price of 7 2 million see map 22 2.
but sewards enthusiasm for these frigid wastes was not shared by his ignorant or uninformed countrymen who jeered at sewards folly sewards icebox frigidia and walrussia the american people still preoccupied with reconstruction and other internal vexations were economy minded and anti expansionist.
then why did congress and the american public sanction the purchase.
for one thing russia alone among the powers had been conspicuously friendly to the north during the recent civil war.
americans did not feel that they could offend their great and good friend the tsar by hurling his walrus covered icebergs back into his face.
besides the territory was rumored to be teeming with furs sh and gold and it might yet pan out protably as it later did with natural resources including oil and gas.
so congress and the country accepted sewards polar bear garden somewhat derisively but nevertheless hopefully.
the heritage of reconstruction many white southerners regarded reconstruction as a more grievous wound than the war itself.
it left a fes reconstruction s legacy the republicans acted from a mixture of idealism and political expediency.
they wanted both to protect the freed slaves and to promote the fortunes of the republican party.
in the end their efforts back red badly.
reconstruction conferred only eeting benets on blacks and virtually extinguished the republican party in the south for nearly one hundred years.
moderate republicans never fully appreciated the extensive effort necessary to make the freed slaves completely independent citizens nor the lengths to which southern whites would go to preserve their system of racial dominance.
had thaddeus stevenss radical program of drastic economic reforms and heftier protection of political rights been enacted things might well have been different.
but deep seated racism ingrained american resistance to tampering with property rights and rigid loyalty to the principle of local self government combined with spreading indifference in the north to the plight of blacks formed too formidable an obstacle.
despite good intentions by republicans the old south was in many ways more resurrected than reconstructed.
the remarkable ex slave frederick douglass 1817 1895 wrote in 1882 is this a republican form of government.
by thomas nast harpers weekly 1876 the nations most prominent political cartoonist expressed his despair at the tragic way that reconstruction had ended with few real gains for the former slaves.
tering scar that would take generations to heal.
they resented the upending of their social and racial system the political empowerment of blacks and the insult of federal intervention in their local affairs.
yet few rebellions have ended with the victors sitting down to a love feast with the vanquished.
given the explosiveness of the issues that had caused the war and the bitterness of the ghting the wonder is that reconstruction was not far harsher than it was.
the fact is that lincoln johnson and most republicans had no clear picture at wars end of what federal policy toward the south should be.
policymakers groped for the right policies inuenced as much by southern responses to defeat and emancipation as by any plans of their own to impose a specic program on the south.
though slavery was abolished the wrongs of my people were not ended.
though they were not slaves they were not yet quite free.
no man can be truly free whose liberty is dependent upon the thought feeling and action of others and who has himself no means in his own hands for guarding protecting defending and maintaining that liberty.
yet the negro after his emancipation was precisely in this state of destitution.
he was free from the individual master but the slave of society.
he had neither money property nor friends.
he was free from the old plantation but he had nothing but the dusty road under his feet.
he was free from the old quarter that once gave him shelter but a slave to the rains of summer and the frosts of winter.
he was in a word literally turned loose naked hungry and destitute to the open sky.
chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 chronology lincoln announces 10 percent reconstruction plan lincoln vetoes wade davis bill lincoln assassinated johnson issues reconstruction proclamation congress refuses to seat southern congressmen freedmens bureau established southern states pass black codes congress passes civil rights bill over johnsons veto congress passes fourteenth amendment johnson backed candidates lose congressional election ex parte milligan case ku klux klan founded key terms freedmens bureau 518 10 percent reconstruction plan 519 wade davis bill 519 black codes 521 pacic railroad act 522 civil rights bill 522 fourteenth amendment 523 reconstruction act 525 fifteenth amendment 526 reconstruction act tenure of ofce act united states purchases alaska from russia johnson impeached and acquitted johnson pardons confederate leaders fifteenth amendment ratied 1870 force acts freedmens bureau ended reconstruction ends people to know ex parte milligan 526 redeemers 527 womans loyal league 527 union league 527 scalawags 528 carpetbaggers 528 ku klux klan 529 force acts 530 tenure of ofce act 531 sewards folly 532 oliver o howard andrew johnson thaddeus stevens hiram revels edwin m stanton benjamin wade william seward how radical was reconstruction.
f ew topics have triggered as much intellectual warfare as the dark and bloody ground of reconstruction.
the period provoked questions sectional racial and constitutional about which people felt deeply and remain deeply divided even today.
scholarly argument goes back conspicuously to a columbia university historian william a dunning whose students in the early 1900s published a series of histories varying viewpoints of the reconstruction south.
dunning and his disciples were inuenced by the turn of the century spirit of sectional conciliation as well as by current theories about black racial inferiority.
sympathizing with the white south they wrote about the reconstruction period as a kind of national disgrace foisted upon a prostrate region by vindictive and self seeking radical republican politicians.
if the south had wronged the north by seceding the north had wronged the south by reconstructing.
a second cycle of scholarship in the 1920s was impelled by a widespread suspicion that the civil war itself had been a tragic and unnecessary blunder.
attention now shifted to northern politicians.
scholars like howard beale further questioned the motives of the radical republicans.
to beale and others the radicals had masked a ruthless desire to exploit southern labor and resources behind a false front of concern for the freed slaves.
moreover northern advocacy of black voting rights was merely a calculated attempt to ensure a republican political presence in the defeated south.
the unfortunate andrew johnson in this view had valiantly tried to uphold constitutional principles in the face of this cynical northern onslaught.
although ignored by his contemporaries scholar black nationalist and founder of the national association for the advancement of colored people w e b.
du bois wrote a sympathetic history of reconstruction in 1935 that became the basis for historians interpretations ever since.
following world war ii kenneth stampp and others inuenced by the modern civil rights movement built on du boiss argument and claimed that reconstruction had been a noble though ultimately failed attempt to extend american principles of equity and justice.
the radical republicans and the carpetbaggers were now heroes whereas andrew johnson was castigated for his obsti nate racism.
by the early 1970s this view had become orthodoxy and it generally holds sway today.
yet some scholars such as michael benedict and leon litwack disillusioned with the inability to achieve full racial justice in the 1960s and 1970s began once more to scrutinize the motives of northern politicians immediately after the civil war.
they claimed to discover that reconstruction had never been very radical and that the freedmens bureau and other agencies had merely allowed white planters to maintain their dominance over local politics as well as over the local economy.
more recently eric foner has powerfully reasserted the argument that reconstruction was a truly radical and noble attempt to establish an interracial democracy.
drawing upon the work of du bois foner has emphasized the comparative approach to american reconstruction.
clearly foner has admitted reconstruction did not create full equality but it did allow blacks to form political orga ni zations and churches to vote and to establish some mea sure of economic independence.
in south africa the caribbean and other areas once marked by slavery these opportunities were much harder to come by.
many of the benets of reconstruction were erased by whites in the south during the gilded age but in the twentieth century the constitutional principles and organizations developed during reconstruction provided the focus and foundation for the modern civil rights movement which some have called the second reconstruction.
steven hahns a nation under our feet black political struggles in the rural south from slavery to the great migration 2003 is the latest contribution to the literature on reconstruction.
hahn emphasizes the assertiveness and ingenuity of african americans in creating new political opportunities for themselves after emancipation.
to learn more richard n current those terrible carpetbaggers 1988 eric foner forever free the story of emancipation and reconstruction 2005 nothing but freedom 1983 dewey w grantham life and death of the solid south 1988 steven hahn a nation under our feet black political struggles in the rural south from slavery to the great migration 2003 james m mcpherson ordeal by fire the civil war and reconstruction 1981 michael perman emancipation and reconstruction rev.
ed 2003 lawrence powell new masters northern planters during the civil war and reconstruction 1980 julie saville the work of reconstruction 1994 booker t washington up from slavery 1901 heather andrea williams self taught african american education in slavery and freedom 2005 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at part four forging an industrial society 1865 1909 a nation of farmers fought the civil war in the 1860s.
by the time the spanish american war broke out in 1898 america was an industrial nation.
for generations americans had plunged into the wilderness and plowed their elds.
now they settled in cities and toiled in factories.
between the civil war and the centurys end economic and technological change came so swiftly and massively that it seemed to many americans that a whole new civilization had emerged.
in some ways it had.
the sheer scale of the new industrial society was dazzling.
transcontinental railroads knit the country together from sea to sea.
new industries like oil and steel grew to staggering size and made megamillionaires out of entrepreneurs like oilman john d rockefeller and steel maker andrew carnegie.
drawn by the allure of industrial employment americans moved to the city much like their counterparts in industrializing europe russia and japan.
in 1860 only about 20 percent of the population were city dwellers.
by 1900 that proportion doubled as rural americans and european immigrants alike ocked to mill town and metropolis in search of steady jobs.
these sweeping changes challenged the spirit of individualism that americans had celebrated since the seventeenth century.
even on the western frontier that historic bastion of rugged loners the hand of government was increasingly felt as large armies were dispatched to subdue the plains indians and federal authority was invoked to regulate the use of natural resources.
the rise of powerful monopolies called into question the governments traditional hands off policy factory workers with railroad spikes harrisburg pennsylvania 1898 immigrant and native born workers alike bent their backs to build industrial america.
forging an industrial society toward business and a growing band of reformers increasingly clamored for government regulation of private enterprise.
the mushrooming cities with their need for transport systems schools hospitals sanitation and re and police protection required bigger governments and budgets than an earlier generation could have imagined.
as never before americans struggled to adapt old ideals of private autonomy to the new realities of industrial civilization.
with economic change came social and political turmoil.
labor violence brought bloodshed to places such as chicago and homestead pennsylvania.
small farmers squeezed by debt and foreign competition rallied behind the peoples or populist party a radical movement of the 1880s and 1890s that attacked the power of wall street big business and the banks.
antiimmigrant sentiment swelled.
bitter disputes over tariffs and monetary policy deeply divided the country setting debtors against lenders farmers against manufacturers the west and south against the northeast.
and in this unfamiliar era of big money and expanding government corruption ourished from town hall to congress fueling loud cries for political reform.
the bloodiest con ict of all pitted plains indians against the relentless push of westward expansion.
as railroads drove their iron arrows through the heart of the west the indians lost their land and life sustaining buffalo herds.
by the 1890s after three decades of erce ghting with the u s army the indians who had once roamed across the vast rolling prairies were struggling to preserve their shattered cultures within the con nement of reservations.
the south remained the one region largely untouched by the industrial revolution sweeping the rest of america.
a few sleepy southern hamlets did become boomtowns but for the most part the souths rural way of life remained unperturbed.
the post emancipation era in icted new forms of racial injustice on african americans the vast majority of whom continued to live in the old south.
state legislatures systematically deprived black americans of their political rights including the right to vote.
segregation of schools housing and all kinds of public facilities made a mockery of african americans reconstruction era hopes for equality before the law.
the new wealth and power of industrial america nurtured a growing sense of national self condence.
literature owered and a golden age of philanthropy dawned.
the reform spirit spread.
so did a restless appetite for overseas expansion.
in a brief war against spain in 1898 the united states born in a revolutionary war of independence and long the champion of democratic rights seized control of the philippines and itself became an imperial power.
uncle sams venture into empire touched off a bitter national debate about americas role in the world and ushered in a long period of argument over the responsibilities at home as well as abroad of a modern industrial state.
dearborn street chicago loop around 1900 america is energetic but chicago is in a fever marveled a visiting englishman about turn of thecentury chicago.
street scenes like this were common in americas booming new cities especially in the lord of the midwest political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 grant.
had no right to exist.
he should have been extinct for ages.
that two thousand years after alexander the great and julius caesar a man like grant should be called and should actually and truly be the highest product of the most advanced evolution made evolution ludicrous.
the progress of evolution from president washington to president grant was alone evidence enough to upset darwin.
should have lived in a cave and worn skins.
henry adams the education of henry adams 1907 t he population of the post civil war republic continued to vault upward by vigorous leaps despite the awful bloodletting in both union and confederate ranks.
census takers reported over 39 million people in 1870 a gain of 26 6 percent over the preceding decade as the immigrant tide surged again.
the united states was now the third largest nation in the western world ranking behind russia and france.
but the civic health of the united states did not keep pace with its physical growth.
the civil war and its aftermath spawned waste extravagance speculation and graft.
disillusionment ran deep among idealistic americans in the postwar era.
they had spilled their blood for the union emancipation and abraham lincoln who had promised a new birth of freedom instead they got a bitter dose of corruption and political stalemate beginning with ulysses s grant a great soldier but an utterly inept politician.
the bloody shirt elects grant wrangling between congress and president andrew johnson had soured the people on professional politicians in the reconstruction era and the notion still prevailed that a good general would make a good president.
stubbly bearded general grant was by far the this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the stain of corruption most popular northern hero to emerge from the war.
grateful citizens of philadelphia washington and his hometown of galena illinois passed the hat and in each place presented him with a house.
new yorkers tendered him a check for 105 000.
the general silently puf ng on his cigar unapologetically accepted these gifts as his just deserts for having rescued the union.
grant was a hapless greenhorn in the political arena.
his one presidential vote had been cast for the democratic ticket in 1856.
a better judge of horseesh than of humans his cultural background was breathtakingly narrow.
he once reportedly remarked that venice italy would be a ne city if only it were drained.
the republicans freed from the union party coalition of war days enthusiastically nominated grant for the presidency in 1868.
the partys platform sounded a clarion call for continued reconstruction of the south under the glinting steel of federal bayonets.
yet grant always a man of few words struck a highly popular note in his letter of acceptance when he said let us have peace this noble sentiment became a leading campaign slogan and was later engraved on his tomb beside the hudson river.
expectant democrats meeting in their own nominating convention denounced military reconstruction but could agree on little else.
wealthy eastern delegates demanded a plank promising that federal war bonds be redeemed in gold even though many of the bonds had been purchased with badly depreciated paper greenbacks.
poorer midwestern delegates answered with the ohio idea which called for redemption in greenbacks.
debt burdened agrarian democrats thus hoped to keep more money in circulation and keep interest rates lower.
this dispute introduced a bitter contest over monetary policy that continued to convulse the republic until the centurys end.
midwestern delegates got the platform but not the candidate.
the nominee former new york governor horatio seymour scuttled the democrats faint hope for success by repudiating the ohio idea.
republicans whipped up enthusiasm for grant by energetically waving the bloody shirt that is reviving gory memories of the civil war which became for the rst time a prominent feature of a presidential campaign.
vote the expression is said to have derived from a speech by representative benjamin f butler of massachusetts who allegedly waved before the house the bloodstained nightshirt of a klan ogged carpetbagger.
as you shot was a powerful republican slogan aimed at union army veterans.
grant won with 214 electoral votes to 80 for seymour.
but the former general scored a majority of only 300 000 in the popular vote 3 013 421 to 2 706 829.
most white voters apparently supported seymour and the ballots of three still unreconstructed southern states mississippi texas and virginia were not counted at all.
an estimated 500 000 former slaves gave grant his margin of victory.
to remain in power the republican party somehow had to continue to control the south and to keep the ballot in the hands of the grateful freedmen.
republicans could not take future victories for granted the era of good stealings a few skunks can pollute a large area.
although the great majority of businesspeople and government ofcials continued to conduct their affairs with decency and honor the whole postwar at mosphere stunk of corruption.
the man in the moon it was said had to hold his nose when passing over america.
freewheeling railroad promoters sometimes left gullible bond buyers with only two streaks of rust and a right of way unethical stock market manipulators were a cinder in the public eye.
too many judges and legislators put their power up for hire.
cynics de ned an honest politician as one who when bought would stay bought.
notorious in the nancial world were two millionaire partners jubilee jim fisk and jay gould.
the corpulent and unscrupulous fisk provided the brass while the undersized and cunning gould provided the brains.
the crafty pair concocted a plot in 1869 to corner the gold market.
their slippery game would work only if the federal treasury refrained from selling gold.
the conspirators worked on president grant directly and also through his brother in law who received 25 000 for his complicity.
for weeks fisk and gould madly bid the price of gold skyward so they could later prot from its heightened value.
but on black friday september 24 1869 the bubble broke when the treasury contrary to grants supposed assurances was compelled to release gold.
the price of gold plunged and scores of honest businesspeople were driven to the wall.
a congressional probe concluded that grant had done nothing crooked though he had acted stupidly and indiscreetly.
the infamous tweed ring in new york city vividly displayed the ethics or lack of ethics typical of the.
chapter 20 girding for war the north and the south 1861 1865 fort sumter south carolina april 1861 the interior of fort sumter in charleston harbor shortly after the unions beleaguered force surrendered and ed.
confederate soldiers pose in front of the forts bombarded walls while their ag ies victoriously above them.
the call for troops in turn aroused the south much as the attack on fort sumter had aroused the north.
lincoln was now waging war from the southern view an aggressive war on the confederacy.
virginia arkansas and tennessee all of which had earlier voted down secession reluctantly joined their embattled sister states as did north carolina see map 20 1.
thus the seven states became eleven as the submissionists and union shriekers were overcome.
richmond virginia replaced montgomery alabama as the confederate capital too near washington for strategic comfort on either side.
and increase by nearly half its supply of horses and mules.
the strategic prize of the ohio river owed along the northern border of kentucky and west virginia.
two of its navigable tributaries the cumberland and tennessee rivers penetrated deep into the heart of dixie where much of the confederacys grain gunpowder and iron was produced.
small wonder that lincoln reportedly said he hoped to have god on his side but he had to have kentucky.
in dealing with the border states president lincoln did not rely solely on moral suasion but successfully used methods of dubious legality.
in maryland he de brothers blood and border blood the only slave states left were the crucial border states.
this group consisted of missouri kentucky maryland delaware and later west virginia the mountain white area that somewhat illegally tore itself from the side of virginia in mid 1861.
if the north had red the rst shot some or all of these doubtful states probably would have seceded and the south might well have succeeded.
the border group actually contained a white population more than half that of the entire confederacy.
maryland kentucky and missouri would almost double the manufacturing capacity of the south abraham lincoln 1809 1865 kentucky born like jefferson davis was aware of kentuckys crucial importance.
in september 1861 he remarked i think to lose kentucky is nearly the same as to lose the whole game.
kentucky gone we cannot hold missouri nor i think maryland.
these all against us and the job on our hands is too large for us.
we would as well consent to separation at once including the surrender of this capital washington.
the crucial border states 90w minn l seceded after fall of fort sumter an l michig iowa illinois n ohio md.
w va n j r i conn del.
1863 virginia miss.
jan 9 south carolina alabama jan 11 jan 26 washington d c north 10 carolina may 20 1861 june 8 1861 feb 1 1861 apr.
17 1861 tennessee 11 may 6 kentucky arkansas tex a s 30n e ic indian territory mass.
n y pa 1861 missouri 1861 ind.
kansas 1861 n mex.
ri l e n h o georgia dec 20 1860 nt colorado territory nt ar i l o mich la 40n ro n map 20 1 seceding states with dates and order of secession note the long interval nearly six months between the secession of south carolina the rst state to go and that of tennessee the last state to leave the union.
these six months were a time of terrible trial for moderate southerners.
when a georgia statesman pleaded for restraint and negotiations with washington he was rebuffed with the cry throw the bloody spear into this den of incendiaries wis order and date of secession hu free state or territory me.
vt l slave state loyal to the union 70w british north america c a n a da an seceded before fall of fort sumter 80w superior oce 100w at 110w jan 19 fla gulf of mexico m exico 400 km.
jan 10 400 mi.
interactive map clared martial law where needed and sent in troops because this state threatened to cut off washington from the north.
lincoln also deployed union soldiers in western virginia and notably in missouri where they fought beside unionists in a local civil war within the larger civil war.
any ofcial statement of the norths war aims was profoundly inuenced by the teetering border states.
at the very outset lincoln was obliged to declare publicly that he was not ghting to free the blacks.
an antislavery declaration would no doubt have driven the border states into the welcoming arms of the south.
an antislavery war was also extremely unpopular in the so called butternut region of southern ohio indiana and illinois.
that area had been settled largely by southerners who had carried their racial prejudices with them when they had crossed the ohio river see makers of america settlers of the old northwest pp.
it was to be a hotbed of pro southern sentiment throughout the war.
sensitive to this delicate political calculus lincoln insisted repeatedly even though undercutting his moral high ground that his paramount purpose was to save the union at all costs.
thus the war began not as one between slave soil and free soil but one for the union with slaveholders on both sides and many proslavery sympathizers in the north.
slavery also colored the character of the war in the west.
in indian territory present day oklahoma most of the five civilized tribes the cherokees creeks choctaws chickasaws and seminoles sided with the confederacy.
some of these indians notably the cherokees owned slaves and thus felt themselves to be making common cause with the slaveowning south.
to secure their loyalty the confederate government lincoln wrote to the antislavery editor horace greeley in august 1862 even as he was about to announce the emancipation proclamation if i could save the union without freeing any slave i would do it and if i could save it by freeing all the slaves i would do it and if i could do it by freeing some and leaving others alone i would also do that.
chapter 20 girding for war the north and the south 1861 1865 north to ght with the blue another south to ght with the gray.
senator crittenden of kentucky who had fathered the abortive crittenden compromise also had fathered two sons one became a general in the union army the other a general in the confederate army.
lincolns own kentucky born wife had four brothers who fought for the confederacy.
the balance of forces friendly enemies the man on the right is george armstrong custer.
the youngest general in the union army this brilliant young ofcer survived the civil war only to lose his life and that of every soldier under his command to sioux warriors at the battle of the little bighorn in 1876 custers last stand the man on the left is a southern soldier and prisoner of war.
he and custer had been classmates at west point.
agreed to take over federal payments to the tribes and invited the native americans to send delegates to the confederate congress.
in return the tribes supplied troops to the confederate army.
meanwhile a rival faction of cherokees and most of the plains indians sided with the union only to be rewarded after the war with a relentless military campaign to herd them onto reservations or into oblivion.
unhappily the con ict between billy yank and johnny reb was a brothers war see makers of america billy yank and johnny reb pp.
there were many northern volunteers from the southern states and many southern volunteers from the northern states.
the mountain whites of the south sent north some 50 000 men and the loyal slave states contributed some 300 000 soldiers to the union.
in many a family of the border states one brother rode when war broke out the south seemed to have great advantages.
the confederacy could ght defensively behind interior lines.
the north had to invade the vast territory of the confederacy conquer it and drag it bodily back into the union.
in fact the south did not have to win the war in order to win its independence.
if it merely fought the invaders to a draw and stood rm confederate independence would be won.
fighting on their own soil for self determination and preservation of their way of life southerners at rst enjoyed an advantage in morale as well.
militarily the south from the opening volleys of the war had the most talented ofcers.
most conspicuous among a dozen or so rst rate commanders was gray haired general robert e lee whose knightly bearing and chivalric sense of honor embodied the southern ideal.
lincoln had unofcially offered him command of the northern armies but when virginia seceded lee felt honor bound to go with his native state.
lees chief lieutenant for much of the war was black bearded thomas j.
stonewall jackson a gifted tactical theorist and a master of speed and deception.
besides their brilliant leaders ordinary southerners were also bred to ght.
accustomed to managing horses and bearing arms from boyhood they made excellent cavalrymen and foot soldiers.
their highpitched rebel yell yeeeahhh was designed to strike terror into the hearts of fuzz chinned yankee recruits.
there is nothing like it on this side of the infernal region one northern soldier declared.
the peculiar corkscrew sensation that it sends down your backbone can never be told.
you have to feel it as one immense farm the south seemed to be handicapped by the scarcity of factories.
yet by seizing federal weapons running union blockades and developing their own ironworks southerners managed to obtain sufcient weaponry.
yankee ingenuity was not con ned to yankees.
nevertheless as the war dragged on grave shortages of shoes uniforms and blankets disabled the the confederate balance sheet the technology of war one of the new machines of destruction that made the civil war the rst mechanized war this eight and a half ton federal mortar sat on a railroad atcar in petersburg virginia ready to hurl two hundred pound missiles as far as two and a half miles.
this powerful artillery piece rode on the tracks of a captured southern railroad itself another artifact of modern technology that gured heavily in the war.
of the 31 256 miles of railroad track in the united states in 1861 less than 30 percent or 9 283 miles were in the confederate states soon reduced by union capture and destruction to 6 000 miles.
the confederate governments failure to understand the military importance of railroads contributed substantially to its defeat.
even with immense stores of food on southern farms civilians and soldiers often went hungry because of supply problems.
forward men.
they have cheese in their haversacks cried one southern ofcer as he attacked the yankees.
much of the hunger was caused by a breakdown of the souths rickety transportation system especially where the railroad tracks were cut or destroyed by the yankee invaders.
the economy was the greatest southern weakness it was the norths greatest strength.
the north was not only a huge farm but a sprawling factory as well see table 20 1.
yankees boasted about three fourths of the nations wealth including three fourths of the thirty thousand miles of railroads.
the north also controlled the sea.
with its vastly superior navy it established a blockade that though a sieve at rst soon choked off southern supplies and eventually shattered southern morale.
its sea power also enabled the north to exchange huge quantities of grain for munitions and supplies from europe thus adding the output from the factories of europe to its own.
makers of america yank thebilly great africanand johnny reb american migration t he prussian general helmuth von moltke 1800 1891 allegedly remarked that the american civil war was merely a contest waged by armed mobs whether he meant it or not the prussians famous insult actually contains an important insight.
unlike the professional standing armies of nineteenth century europe the civil war armies were overwhelmingly amateur and volunteer.
taken from all walks of life citizen soldiers gave the civil war drama its uniquely plebeian cast.
with 2 million men in union blue and 1 million men in confederate gray civil war soldiers represented a vast cross section of american society.
at nearly 10 percent of the 1860 population the same rate of mobilization would amount to more than 27 million troops today.
most soldiers had been farmers or farm laborers.
poor unskilled workers despite vehement antidraft rhetoric to the contrary were actually underrepresented.
most troops were native born but immigrants did serve in rough proportion to their presence in the general population.
black ghting men accounted for about 10 percent of union enlistments by wars end see blacks battle bondage pp.
perhaps onethird of the soldiers were married.
nearly 40 percent were under twenty two years of age at the time of enlistment.
a union private inheritors of the values of jacksonian mass democracy and victorian sentiments civil war citizen soldiers brought strong ideological commitments to the struggle.
neither army regulars nor reluctant conscripts these men fought in the name of country duty honor manhood and righteousness.
though enemies union and confederate soldiers shared a common commitment to the patriotic spirit of 76 and the cause of liberty independence and republican government.
a mans moral obligation to defend his country and preserve his personal reputation provided added motivation.
many interpreted the war as a religious crusade.
in short convictions not coercion created civil war armies.
despite their similarities billy yank the ordinary union soldier and johnny reb the typical confederate were not necessarily cut from the same cloth.
both armies reected the societies from which they came.
billy yank tended to be more literate intellectual practical and efcient while johnny reb was often more jocular emotional religious and personally concerned about the war.
defense of home and hearth meant more to confederate troops for the simple reason that most of the ghting occurred on southern soil.
above all else the men in gray maintained a distinctive rural individualism and homegrown disrespect for authority.
their counterparts in blue often familiar with the strict regimen of northern cities and factories adapted more quickly to army discipline.
one aspect of soldiering johnny reb and billy yank shared was the dull routine of camp life.
for all its promises of adventure the life of a civil war soldier could be downright boring and unpleasant.
men spent fty days in camp for every one in battle.
reveille roll call and drill were daily chores.
a soldiers rst concern was usually his stomach even when pork sowbelly beef salt horse coffee and bread or its unwelcome substitute hardtack were in abundance.
food shortages plagued both armies especially the confederates as the war progressed.
uniforms deteriorated from nery to tatters as did moral standards.
gambling drinking stealing swearing and sabbath breaking proliferated even widespread religious revivals could not keep up.
the gravest hardship of all however was disease.
germs especially camp and campaign maladies like dysentery diarrhea typhoid and malaria took twice a confederate soldier as many lives as bullets.
by modern standards the mortality rates of wounded soldiers were appallingly high.
world war ii marked the rst time in american warfare that more soldiers died from combat wounds than from sickness and disease.
without proper medical understanding of sterilization or sanitation the risk of sepsis bacterial infection accompanied every wound.
head chest and stomach wounds were usually considered fatal arm and leg injuries often resulted in amputation.
only the presence of nurses made life in eld hospitals tolerable.
overcoming the vocal hostility of male army doctors and the lth stench and agony of these hospitals some twenty thousand women volunteered as nurses during the war.
working with the maimed and the dying was never pleasant but female nurses earned the respect of countless wounded soldiers for their dedicated ser vice.
yet for all its brutality not even the eld hospital could match the traumatic experience of combat.
tension mounted in the nal moments before battle as ofcers strove to maintain close order ranks in the face of harrowing enemy gun re.
artillery shells blanketed the battleeld with a smoky haze.
bullets zinged through the air like a driv ing rain.
once soldiers joined the action a rush of adrenaline could transform frightened civilians into frenzied and ferocious ghters.
first timers likened the experience to seeing the elephant an antebellum expression of awe.
one sight of mangled limbs or one whiff of decaying esh was often enough to push men over the edge.
even when i sleep a massachusetts soldier moaned i hear the whistling of the shells and the shouts and groans and to sum it up in two sic words it is horrible given the extraordinary stress of battle many men avoided combat as much as they could.
shell shocked and weary most soldiers returned home from the war utterly transformed.
for nearly a decade and a half silence reigned as veterans and civilians entered into a tacit agreement to put the ordeal behind them.
by 1880 interest revived in the war and a new battle over its proper meaning commenced.
ignoring the con icts original signicance as a moral victory for slave emancipation many americans embraced a new reconciliationist and white supremacist script.
in the interest of sectional harmony and national prosperity northerners abandoned earlier commitments to black rights.
a reunion of sections spelled a division of races.
casting aside their original ideological convictions many americans came to regard the con ict as a tragic brothers war meaningful only for its show of martial valor.
principles that had compelled 3 million men to enlist and caused 620 000 to die were largely forgotten.
instead a sentimental sanitized and whitened version of the civil war became commonplace by the late nineteenth century.
von moltkes armed mobs came to be remembered as the noblest of knights.
leg amputation on the battleelds of virginia a surgeon wearing a hat and a sword amputates the leg of a wounded soldier while an anesthetist facing the camera holds a sponge dipped in chloroform over the patients nose.
a surgical assistant ties a tourniquet to stem the ow of blood.
other soldiers dressed in zouave uniforms modeled on north african designs which were popular among some northern and southern regiments watch closely likely aware of the dangers accompanying such crude surgery.
an estimated 30 percent of amputees died from postoperative complications most often infections.
chapter 20 girding for war the north and the south 1861 1865 table 20 1 manufacturing by sections 1860 section new eng land middle states western states southern states pacic states territories total number of establishments capital invested average number of laborers annual value of products 20 671 53 387 36 785 20 631 8 777 140 533 257 477 783 435 061 964 194 212 543 95 975 185 23 380 334 3 747 906 1 009 855 715 391 836 546 243 209 909 110 721 50 204 2 333 1 311 246 468 599 287 802 338 392 384 606 530 155 531 281 71 229 989 3 556 197 1 885 861 676 recruiting immigrants for the union army this poster in several languages appeals to immigrants to enlist.
immigrant manpower provided the union with both industrial and military muscle.
percentage of total value 24 8 42 5 20 4 8 3 3 8 0 2 the union also enjoyed a much larger reserve of manpower.
the loyal states had a population of some 22 million the seceding states had 9 million people including about 3 5 million slaves.
adding to the norths overwhelming supply of soldiery were ever more immigrants from europe who continued to pour into the north even during the war see table 20 2.
over 800 000 newcomers arrived between 1861 and 1865 most of them british irish and german.
large numbers of them were induced to enlist in the union army.
altogether about one fth of the union forces were foreignborn and in some units military commands were given in four different languages.
whether immigrant or native ordinary northern boys were much less prepared than their southern counterparts for military life.
yet the northern clodhoppers and shopkeepers eventually adjusted themselves to soldiering and became known for their discipline and determination.
the north was much less fortunate in its higher commanders.
lincoln was forced to use a costly trialand error method to sort out effective leaders from the many incompetent political ofcers until he nally uncovered a general ulysses simpson grant who was determined to slog his way to victory at whatever cost in life and limb.
in the long run as the northern strengths were brought to bear they outweighed those of the south.
but when the war began the chances for southern independence were unusually favorable certainly better than the prospects for success of the thirteen colonies in 1776.
the turn of a few events could easily have produced a different outcome.
the might have beens are fascinating.
if the border states had seceded if the uncertain states of the upper mississippi valley had turned against the union the threat of european intervention table 20 2 immigration to united states 1860 1866 year total britain ireland germany all others 1865 153 640 91 918 91 985 176 282 193 418 248 120 318 568 29 737 19 675 24 639 66 882 53 428 82 465 94 924 48 637 23 797 23 351 55 916 63 523 29 772 36 690 54 491 31 661 27 529 33 162 57 276 83 424 115 892 20 775 16 785 16 466 20 322 19 191 52 459 71 062 only the rst three months of 1865 were war months.
if a wave of northern defeatism had demanded an armistice and if britain and or france had broken the unions naval blockade of southern ports the south might well have won.
all of these possibilities almost became realities but none of them actually occurred and lacking their impetus the south could not hope to win.
dethroning king cotton successful revolutions including the american revolution of 1776 have generally succeeded because of foreign intervention.
the south counted on it did not get it and lost.
of all the confederacys potential assets none counted more weightily than the prospect of foreign intervention.
europes ruling classes were openly sympathetic to the confederate cause.
they had long abhorred the incendiary example of the american democratic experiment and they cherished a kind of fellow feeling for the souths semifeudal aristocratic social order.
in contrast the masses of working people in britain and to some extent in france were pulling and praying for the north.
many of them had read uncle toms cabin and they sensed that the war though at the outset ofcially fought only over the question of union might extinguish slavery if the north emerged victorious.
the common folk of britain could not yet cast the ballot but they could cast the brick.
their certain hostility to any ofcial intervention on behalf of the south evidently had a sobering effect on the british government.
thus the dead hands of uncle tom helped uncle sam by restraining the british and french ironclads from piercing the union blockade.
yet the fact re mained that british textile mills depended on the american south for 75 percent of their cotton supplies.
wouldnt silent looms force london to speak.
humanitarian sympathies aside southerners counted on hard economic need to bring britain to their aid.
why did king cotton fail them.
he failed in part because he had been so lavishly productive in the immediate prewar years of 1857 1860.
enormous exports of cotton in those years had piled up surpluses in british warehouses.
when the shooting started in 1861 british manufacturers had on hand a hefty oversupply of ber.
the real pinch did not come until about a year and a half later when thousands of hungry operatives were thrown out of work.
but by this time lincoln had announced his slaveemancipation policy and the wage slaves of britain were not going to demand a war to defend the slaveowners of the south.
the american minister to britain wrote the great body of the aristocracy and the commercial classes are anxious to see the united states go to pieces but the middle and lower class sympathise with us because they see in the convulsion in america an era in the history of the world out of which must come in the end a general recognition of the right of mankind to the produce of their labor and the pursuit of happiness.
chapter 20 girding for war the north and the south 1861 1865 the direst effects of the cotton famine in britain were relieved in several ways.
hunger among unemployed workers was partially eased when certain kindhearted americans sent over several cargoes of foodstuffs.
as union armies penetrated the south they captured or bought considerable supplies of cotton and shipped them to britain the confederates also ran a limited quantity through the blockade.
in addition the cotton growers of egypt and india responding to high prices increased their output and captured a share of the world cotton market that they held on to well after the wars conclusion.
finally booming war industries in eng land which supplied both the north and the south relieved unemployment.
king wheat and king corn the monarchs of northern agriculture proved to be more potent potentates than king cotton.
during these war years the as the civil war neared the end of its third year the london times january 7 1864 could boast we are as busy as rich and as fortunate in our trade as if the american war had never broken out and our trade with the states had never been disturbed.
cotton was no king notwithstanding the prerogatives which had been loudly claimed for him.
north blessed with ideal weather produced bountiful crops of grain and harvested them with mccormicks mechanical reaper.
in the same period the british suffered a series of bad harvests.
they were forced to import huge quantities of grain from america which happened to have the cheapest and most abundant supply.
if the british had broken the blockade to gain cotton they would have provoked the north to war and would have lost this precious granary.
unemployment for some seemed better than hunger for all.
hence one yankee journal could exult wave the stars and stripes high oer us let every freeman sing.
old king cottons dead and buried brave young corn is king.
the decisiveness of diplomacy the pending conict 1863 great britain and france look on while the americans struggle.
despite repeated pleas from confederate diplomats for recognition and aid both france and britain refrained from intervening in the american conict not least because of the unions demonstrated strength on the battleeld and its economic importance to european importers.
americas diplomatic front has seldom been so critical as during the civil war.
the south never wholly abandoned its dream of foreign intervention and europes rulers schemed to take advantage of americas distress.
the rst major crisis with britain came over the trent affair late in 1861.
a union warship cruising on the high seas north of cuba stopped a british mail steamer the trent and forcibly removed two confederate diplomats bound for europe.
britons were outraged upstart yankees could not so boldly offend the mistress of the seas.
war preparations buzzed and red coated troops embarked for canada with bands blaring i wish i was in dixie the london foreign ofce prepared an ultimatum demanding surrender of the prisoners and an apology.
but luckily slow communications gave passions on both sides a chance to cool.
lincoln came to see the diplomatic crises while an angered north had to divert naval strength from its blockade for wild goose chases.
the barnacled alabama nally accepted a challenge from a stronger union cruiser off the coast of france in 1864 and was quickly destroyed.
the alabama was beneath the waves but the issue of british built confederate raiders stayed aoat.
under prodding by the american minister charles francis adams the british gradually perceived that allowing such ships to be built was a dangerous precedent that might someday be used against them.
in 1863 london openly violated its own leaky laws and seized another raider being built for the south.
but despite greater ofcial efforts by britain to remain truly neutral confederate commerce destroyers chiey british built captured more than 250 yankee ships severely crippling the american merchant marine which never fully recovered.
glowering northerners looked farther north and talked openly of securing revenge by grabbing canada when the war was over.
battle of the uss kearsarge and the css alabama off the normandy coast 1864 by edouard manet the alabama sank sixty four union ships before it was destroyed off the coast of cherbourg france in 1864.
the kearsarge rescued most of the alabamas crew from their sinking vessel but confederate captain raphael semmes managed to escape aboard an english yacht that had been observing the sea battle.
trent prisoners as white elephants and reluctantly released them.
one war at a time he reportedly said.
another major crisis in anglo american relations arose over the unneutral building in britain of confederate commerce raiders notably the alabama.
these vessels were not warships within the meaning of loopholed british law because they left their shipyards unarmed and picked up their guns elsewhere.
the alabama escaped in 1862 to the portuguese azores and there took on weapons and a crew from two british ships that followed it.
although ying the confederate ag and ofcered by confederates it was manned by britons and never entered a confederate port.
britain was thus the chief naval base of the confederacy.
the alabama lighted the skies from europe to the far east with the burning hulks of yankee merchantmen.
all told this british pirate captured over sixty vessels.
competing british shippers were delighted foreign flare ups a nal anglo american crisis was touched off in 1863 by the laird rams two confederate warships being constructed in the shipyard of john laird and sons in great britain.
designed to destroy the wooden ships of the union navy with their iron rams and large caliber guns they were far more dangerous than the swift but lightly armed alabama.
if delivered to the south they probably would have sunk the blockading squadrons and then brought northern cities under their re.
in retaliation the north doubtless would have invaded canada and a full dress war with britain would have erupted.
but minister adams took a hard line warning that this is war if the rams were released.
at the last minute the london government relented and bought the two ships for the royal navy.
everyone seemed satised except the disappointed confederates.
britain also eventually repented its sorry role in the alabama business.
it agreed in 1871 to submit the alabama dispute to arbitration and in 1872 paid american claimants 15 5 million for damages caused by wartime commerce raiders.
american rancor was also directed at canada where despite the vigilance of british authorities southern agents plotted to burn northern cities.
one confederate raid into vermont left three banks plundered and one american citizen dead.
hatred of eng land burned especially ercely among irish americans and they chapter 20 girding for war the north and the south 1861 1865 unleashed their fury on canada.
they raised several tiny armies of a few hundred green shirted men and launched invasions of canada notably in 1866 and 1870.
the canadians condemned the washington government for permitting such violations of neutrality but the administration was hampered by the presence of so many irish american voters.
as fate would have it two great nations emerged from the ery furnace of the american civil war.
one was a reunited united states and the other was a united canada.
the british parliament established the dominion of canada in 1867.
it was partly designed to bolster the canadians both politically and spiritually against the possible vengeance of the united states.
emperor napoleon iii of france taking advantage of americas preoccupation with its own internal problems dispatched a french army to occupy mexico city in 1863.
the following year he installed on the ruins of the crushed republic his puppet austrian archduke maximilian as emperor of mexico.
both sending the army and enthroning maximilian were agrant violations of the monroe doctrine.
napoleon was gambling that the union would collapse and thus america would be too weak to enforce its hands off policy in the western hemisphere.
the north as long as it was convulsed by war pursued a walk on eggs policy toward france.
the washington government gave aid to the resistance movement headed by mexicos beloved national hero and the rst full blooded indian president of mexico benito jurez.
but when the shooting stopped in 1865 secretary of state seward speaking with the authority of nearly a million war tempered bayonets prepared to march south.
napoleon realized that his costly gamble was doomed.
he reluctantly took french leave of his illstarred puppet in 1867 and maximilian soon crumpled ingloriously before a mexican ring squad.
president davis versus president lincoln the confederate government like king cotton harbored fatal weaknesses.
its constitution borrowing liberally from that of the union contained one deadly defect.
created by secession it could not logically deny future secession to its constituent states.
president davis while making his bow to states rights had in view a well knit central government.
but determined states rights supporters fought him bitterly to the end.
the richmond regime encountered difculty even in per lincoln at antietam also known as sharpsburg october 1862 deeply committed to his responsibilities as commander in chief president lincoln visited union forces on the battleeld several times during the war.
with him here at antietam are the detective allan pinkerton on the left who provided intelligence to the union army and general john mcclernand who often accompanied the president on his travels see pp.
suading certain state troops to serve outside their own borders.
the governor of georgia a belligerent states righter at times seemed ready to secede from the secession and ght both sides.
states rights were no less damaging to the confederacy than yankee repower.
sharp featured jefferson davis tense humorless legalistic and stubborn was repeatedly in hot water.
although an eloquent orator and an able administrator he at no time enjoyed real personal popularity and was often at loggerheads with his congress.
at times there was serious talk of impeachment.
unlike lincoln davis was somewhat imperious and inclined to defy rather than lead public opinion.
suffering acutely from neuralgia and other ner vous disorders including a tic he overworked himself with the details of both civil government and military operations.
no one could lincoln s wartime powers doubt his courage sincerity integrity and devotion to the south but the task proved beyond his powers.
it was probably beyond the powers of any mere mortal.
lincoln also had his troubles but on the whole they were less prostrating.
the north enjoyed the prestige of a long established government nancially stable and fully recognized both at home and abroad.
lincoln the inexperienced prairie politician proved superior to the more experienced but less exible davis.
able to relax with droll stories at critical times old abe grew as the war dragged on.
tactful quiet patient yet rm he developed a genius for interpreting and leading a ckle public opinion.
holding aloft the banner of union with inspiring utterances he demonstrated charitableness toward the south and forbearance toward backbiting colleagues.
did secretary of war edwin stanton say i was a damned fool he reportedly replied to a talebearer.
then i dare say i must be one for stanton is generally right and he always says what he means limitations on wartime liberties honest abe lincoln when inaugurated laid his hand on the bible and swore a solemn oath to uphold the constitution.
then feeling driven by necessity he proceeded to tear a few holes in that hallowed document.
he understandably concluded that if he did not do so and patch the parchment later there might not be a constitution of a united united states to mend.
the rail splitter was no hairsplitter.
but such infractions were not in general sweeping.
congress as is often true in times of crisis generally accepted or con rmed the presidents questionable acts.
lincoln though accused of being a simple susan tyrant did not believe that his ironhanded authority would continue once the union was preserved.
as he pointedly remarked in 1863 a man suffering from temporary illness would not persist in feeding on bitter medicines for the remainder of his healthful life congress was not in session when war erupted so lincoln gathered the reins into his own hands.
brushing aside legal objections he boldly proclaimed a blockade.
his action was later upheld by the supreme court.
he arbitrarily increased the size of the federal army something that only congress can do under the constitution see art.
congress later approved.
he directed the secretary of the treasury to advance 2 million without appropriation or security to three private citizens for military purposes a grave irregularity contrary to the constitution see art.
he suspended the precious privilege of the writ of habeas corpus so that anti unionists might be summarily arrested.
in taking this step he deed a dubious ruling by the chief justice that the safeguards of habeas corpus could be set aside only by the authorization of congress see art.
lincolns regime was guilty of many other highhanded acts.
for example it arranged for supervised voting in the border states.
there the intimidated citizen holding a colored ballot indicating his party preference had to march between two lines of armed troops.
the federal ofcials also ordered the suspension of certain newspapers and the arrest of their editors on grounds of obstructing the war.
jefferson davis was less able than lincoln to exercise arbitrary power mainly because of con rmed states righters who fanned an intense spirit of localism.
to the very end of the con ict the owners of horsedrawn vans in petersburg virginia prevented the sensible joining of the incoming and outgoing tracks of a militarily vital railroad.
the south seemed willing to lose the war before it would surrender local rights and it did.
volunteers and draftees north and south ravenous the gods of war demanded men lots of men.
northern armies were at rst manned solely by volunteers with each state assigned a quota based on population.
but in 1863 after volunteering had slackened congress passed a federal conscription law for the rst time on a nationwide scale in the united states.
the provisions were grossly unfair to the poor.
rich boys including young john d rockefeller could hire substitutes to go in their places or purchase exemption outright by paying 300.
three hundred dollar men was the scornful epithet applied to these slackers.
draftees who did not have the necessary cash complained that their banditlike government demanded three hundred dollars or your life the draft was especially damned in the democratic strongholds of the north notably in new york city.
a frightful riot broke out in 1863 touched off largely by underprivileged and antiblack irish americans who shouted down with lincoln and down with the draft for several days the new york draft riots put the city at the mercy of a rampaging pillaging mob.
scores of lives were lost and the victims included many chapter 20 girding for war the north and the south 1861 1865 table 20 3 number of men in uniform at date given the new york city anti draft rioters 1863 mostly irish american mobs convulsed the city for days and were in the end put down only by a merciless application of federal repower.
lynched blacks.
elsewhere in the north conscription met with resentment and an occasional minor riot.
more than 90 percent of the union troops were volunteers since social and patriotic pressures to enlist were strong.
as able bodied men became scarcer generous bounties for enlistment were offered by federal state and local authorities.
an enterprising and moneywise volunteer might legitimately pocket more than 1 000.
with money owing so freely an unsavory crew of bounty brokers and substitute brokers sprang up at home and abroad.
they combed the poorhouses of the british isles and western europe and many an irishman or german was befuddled with whiskey and induced to enlist.
a number of the slippery bounty boys deserted volunteered elsewhere and netted another handsome haul.
the records reveal that one bounty jumper repeated his protable operation thirty two times.
but desertion was by no means con ned to bounty jumpers the rolls of the union army recorded about 200 000 deserters of all classes and the confederate authorities were plagued with a runaway problem of similar dimensions.
date union confederate july 1861 january 1862 march 1862 january 1863 january 1864 january 1865 186 751 575 917 637 126 918 121 860 737 959 460 112 040 351 418 401 395 446 622 481 180 445 203 like the north the south at rst relied mainly on volunteers.
but since the confederacy was much less populous it scraped the bottom of its manpower barrel much more quickly see table 20 3.
quipsters observed that any man who could see lightning and hear thunder was judged t for ser vice.
the richmond regime robbing both cradle and grave ages seventeen to fty was forced to resort to conscription as early as april 1862 nearly a year earlier than the union.
confederate draft regulations also worked serious injustices.
as in the north a rich man could hire a substitute or purchase exemption.
slaveowners or overseers with twenty slaves might also claim exemption.
these special privileges later modied made for bad feelings among the less prosperous many of whom complained that this was a rich mans war but a poor mans ght why sacrice ones life to save an afuent neighbors slaves.
no large scale draft riots broke out in the south as in new york city.
but the confederate conscription agents often found it prudent to avoid those areas inhabited by sharpshooting mountain whites who were branded tories traitors and yankee lovers the economic stresses of war blessed with a lions share of the wealth the north rode through the nancial breakers much more smoothly than the south.
excise taxes on tobacco and alcohol were substantially increased by congress.
an income tax was levied for the rst time in the nations experience and although the rates were painlessly low by later standards they netted millions of dollars.
customs receipts likewise proved to be important revenue raisers.
early in 1861 after enough antiprotection southern members had seceded congress passed the morrill tariff act superseding the low tariff of rival economies 1857.
it increased the existing duties some 5 to 10 percent boosting them to about the moderate level of the walker tariff of 1846.
but these modest rates were soon pushed sharply upward by the necessities of war.
the increases were designed partly to raise additional revenue and partly to provide more protection for the prosperous manufacturers who were being plucked by the new internal taxes.
a protective tariff thus became identied with the republican party as american industrialists mostly republicans waxed fat on these welcome benets.
the washington treasury also issued greenbacked paper money totaling nearly 450 million at face value.
this printing press currency was inadequately supported by gold and hence its value was determined by the nations credit.
greenbacks thus uctuated with the fortunes of union arms and at one low point were worth only 39 cents on the gold dollar.
the holders of the notes victims of creeping ination were indirectly taxed as the value of the currency slowly withered in their hands.
yet borrowing far outstripped both greenbacks and taxes as a money raiser.
the federal treasury netted 2 621 916 786 through the sale of bonds which bore interest and which were payable at a later date.
the modern technique of selling these issues to the people directly through drives and payroll deductions had not yet been devised.
accordingly the treasury was forced to market its bonds through the private banking house of jay cooke and company which received a commission of three eighths of 1 percent on all sales.
with both prots and patriotism at stake the bankers succeeded in making effective appeals to citizen purchasers.
a nancial landmark of the war was the national banking system authorized by congress in 1863.
launched partly as a stimulant to the sale of government bonds it was also designed to establish a standard bank note currency.
the country was then ooded with depreciated rag money issued by unreliable bankers.
banks that joined the national banking system could buy government bonds and issue sound paper money backed by them.
the war born national banking act thus turned out to be the rst signicant step taken toward a unied banking network since 1836 when the monster bank of the united states was killed by andrew jackson.
spawned by the war this new system continued to function for fty years until replaced by the federal reserve system in 1913.
an impoverished south was beset by different nancial woes.
customs duties were choked off as the coils a contemporary october 22 1863 richmond diary portrays the ruinous effects of ination a poor woman yesterday applied to a merchant in carey street to purchase a barrel of our.
the price he demanded was 70.
my god exclaimed she how can i pay such prices.
i have seven children what shall i do i dont know madam said he coolly unless you eat your children of the union blockade tightened.
large issues of confederate bonds were sold at home and abroad amounting to nearly 400 million.
the richmond regime also increased taxes sharply and imposed a 10 percent levy on farm produce.
but in general the states rights southerners were immovably opposed to heavy direct taxation by the central authority only about 1 percent of the total income was raised in this way.
as revenue began to dry up the confederate government was forced to print blue backed paper money with complete abandon.
runaway ination occurred as southern presses continued to grind out the poorly backed treasury notes totaling in all more than 1 billion.
the confederate paper dollar nally sank to the point where it was worth only 1 6 cents when lee surrendered.
overall the war in icted a 9 000 percent ination rate on the confederacy contrasted with 80 percent for the union.
the norths economic boom wartime prosperity in the north was little short of miraculous.
the marvel is that a divided nation could ght a costly con ict for four long years and then emerge seemingly more prosperous than ever before.
new factories sheltered by the friendly umbrella of the new protective tariffs mushroomed forth.
soaring prices resulting from ination unfortunately pinched the day laborer and the white collar worker to some extent.
but the manufacturers and businesspeople raked in the fortunes of war the civil war bred a millionaire class for the rst time in american history though a few individuals of extreme wealth could have been found earlier.
many of these newly rich were noisy gaudy brassy and given to extravagant living.
their emergence merely illustrates chapter 20 girding for war the north and the south 1861 1865 booth at the sanitary fair in chicago 1863 the chicago sanitary fair was the rst of many such fairs throughout the nation to raise funds for soldier relief efforts.
mainly organized by women the fair sold captured confederate ags battle relics handicrafts like these potholders right and donated items including president lincolns original draft of the emancipation proclamation which garnered 3 000 in auction.
when the fair closed the chicago headquarters of the u s sanitary commission had raised 100 000 and its female managers had gained organizational experience that many would put to work in the postwar movement for womens rights.
the truth that some gluttony and greed always mar the devotion and self sacrice called forth by war.
the story of speculators and peculators was roughly the same in both camps.
but graft was more agrant in the north than in the south partly because there was more to steal.
yankee sharpness appeared at its worst.
dishonest agents putting prots above patriotism palmed off aged and blind horses on government purchasers.
unscrupulous northern manufacturers supplied shoes with cardboard soles and fast disintegrating uniforms of reprocessed or shoddy wool rather than virgin wool.
hence the reproachful term shoddy millionaires was doubly fair.
one proteer reluctantly admitted that his prots were painfully large newly invented laborsaving machinery enabled the north to expand economically even though the cream of its manpower was being drained off to the ghting front.
the sewing machine wrought wonders in fabricating uniforms and military footwear.
the marriage of military need and innovative machinery largely ended the production of customtailored clothing.
graduated standard mea surements were introduced creating sizes that were widely used in the civilian garment industry forever after.
clattering mechanical reapers which numbered about 250 000 by 1865 proved hardly less potent than thundering guns.
they not only released tens of thousands of farm boys for the army but fed them their eld rations.
they produced vast surpluses of grain that when sent abroad helped dethrone king cotton.
they provided prots with which the north was able to buy munitions and supplies from abroad.
they contributed to the feverish prosperity of the north a prosperity that enabled the union to weather the war with ying colors.
wartime transformations other industries were humming.
the discovery of petroleum gushers in 1859 had led to a rush of fiftyniners to pennsylvania.
the result was the birth of a new industry with its petroleum plutocracy and coal oil johnnies pioneers continued to push westward during the war altogether an estimated 300 000 people.
major magnets were free gold nuggets and free land under the homestead act of 1862.
strong propellants were the federal draft agents.
the only major northern industry to suffer a crippling setback was the ocean carrying trade which fell prey to the alabama and other raiders.
the civil war was a womens war too.
the protracted con ict opened new opportunities for women.
when men departed in uniform women often took their jobs.
in washington d c ve hundred women clerks government girls became government workers with over one hundred in the treasury department alone.
the booming military demand for shoes and clothing combined with technological marvels like the sewing machine likewise drew countless women into industrial employment.
before the war one industrial worker in four had been female during the war the ratio rose to one in three.
other women on both sides stepped up to the ghting front or close behind it.
more than four hundred women accompanied husbands and sweethearts into battle by posing as male soldiers.
other women took on dangerous spy missions.
one woman was executed for smuggling gold to the confederacy.
dr elizabeth blackwell americas rst female physician helped organize the u s sanitary commission to assist the union armies in the eld.
the commission trained nurses collected medical supplies and equipped hospitals.
commission work helped many women to acquire the orga ni zational skills and the self condence that would propel the womens movement forward after the war.
heroically energetic clara barton and dedicated dorothea dix superintendent of nurses for the union army helped transform nursing from a lowly service into a respected profession and in the process opened up another major sphere of employment for women in the postwar era.
equally renowned in the south was sally tompkins who ran a richmond in rmary for wounded confederate soldiers and was awarded the rank of captain by confederate president jefferson davis.
still other women north as well as south orga nized bazaars and fairs that raised millions of dollars for the relief of widows orphans and disabled soldiers.
a crushed cotton kingdom the south fought to the point of exhaustion.
the suffocation caused by the blockade together with the destruction wrought by invaders took a terrible toll.
possessing 30 percent of the national wealth in 1860 the south claimed only 12 percent in 1870.
before the war the average per capita income of southerners including slaves was about two thirds that of northerners.
the civil war squeezed the average southern income to two fths of the northern level where it remained for the rest of the century.
the souths bid for independence exacted a cruel and devastating cost.
transportation collapsed.
the south was even driven to the economic cannibalism of pulling up rails from the less used lines to repair the main ones.
window weights were melted down into bullets gourds replaced dishes pins became so scarce that they were loaned with reluctance.
to the brutal end the south mustered remarkable resourcefulness and spirit.
women buoyed up their menfolk many of whom had seen enough of war at rst hand to be heartily sick of it.
a proposal was made by a number of women that they cut off their long hair and sell it abroad.
but the project was not adopted partly because of the blockade.
the self sacricing women took pride in denying themselves the silks and satins of their northern sisters.
the chorus of a song the southern girl touched a cheerful note so hurrah.
for southern rights hurrah.
for the homespun dress the southern ladies wear.
at wars end the northern captains of industry had conquered the southern lords of the manor.
a crippled south left the capitalistic north free to work its own way with high tariffs and other benets.
the manufacturing moguls of the north ushering in the full edged industrial revolution were headed for increased dominance over american economic and political life.
hitherto the agrarian slavocracy of the south had partially checked the ambitions of the rising plutocracy of the north.
now cotton capitalism had lost out to industrial capitalism.
the south of 1865 was to be rich in little but amputees war heroes ruins and memories.
chapter 20 girding for war the north and the south 1861 1865 chronology confederate government formed lincoln takes ofce march 4 fort sumter red on april 12 four upper south states secede april june morrill tariff act passed trent affair lincoln suspends writ of habeas corpus confederacy enacts conscription homestead act 1862 alabama raids northern shipping key terms fort sumter 463 border states 464 west virginia 464 trent affair 472 alabama 473 laird rams 473 dominion of canada 474 writ of habeas corpus 475 union enacts conscription new york city draft riots national banking system established 1863 napoleon iii installs archduke maximilian as emperor of mexico alabama sunk by union warship people to know new york draft riots 475 morrill tariff act 476 greenbacks 477 national banking system 477 homestead act 479 u s sanitary commission 479 charles francis adams napoleon iii maximilian jefferson davis elizabeth blackwell clara barton sally tompkins to learn more daniel aaron the unwritten war american writers and the civil war 1973 david w blight race and reunion the civil war in american memory 2001 richard j carwardine lincoln 2003 lawanda cox lincoln and black freedom 1981 david h donald lincoln 1995 ed why the north won the civil war 1960 drew gilpin faust the creation of confederate nationalism 1988 mothers of invention women of the slaveholding south in the american civil war 1996 william freehling the south vs.
the south how anticonfederate southerners shaped the course of the civil war 2001 doris kearns goodwin team of rivals the political genius of abraham lincoln 2005 elizabeth d leonard yankee women gender battles in the civil war 1994 randall m miller et al religion and the american civil war 1998 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 my paramount object in this struggle is to save the union and is not either to save or to destroy slavery.
w hen president lincoln issued his call to the states for seventy ve thousand militiamen on april 15 1861 he envisioned them serving for only ninety days.
reaf rming his limited war aims he declared that he had no purpose directly or indirectly to interfere with slavery in the states where it exists with a swift ourish of federal force he hoped to show the folly of secession and rapidly return the rebellious states to the union.
but the war was to be neither brief nor limited.
when the guns fell silent four years later hundreds of thousands of soldiers on both sides lay dead slavery was ended forever and the nation faced the challenge of reintegrating the defeated but still recalcitrant south into the union.
bull run ends the ninety day war northern newspapers at rst sharing lincolns expectation of a quick victory raised the cry on to rich mond in this yeasty at mosphere a union army of some thirty thousand men drilled near washington in the summer of 1861.
it was ill prepared for battle but the press and the public clamored for action.
lincoln eventually concluded that an attack on a smaller confederate force at bull run manassas junction some thirty miles southwest of washington might be worth a try.
if successful it would demonstrate the superiority of union arms.
it might even lead to the capture of the confederate capital at richmond one hundred miles to the south.
if richmond fell secession would be thoroughly discredited and the union could be restored without damage to the economic and social system of the south.
raw yankee recruits swaggered out of washington toward bull run on july 21 1861 as if they were headed for a sporting event.
congressmen and spectators trailed along with their lunch baskets to witness the fun.
at rst the battle went well for the yankees.
but thomas j.
stonewall jacksons gray clad warriors stood like a stone wall here he won his nickname and this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 the army of the potomac marching up pennsylvania avenue washington d c 1861 in this painting union troops parade before the battle of bull run.
colorfully uniformed they are a regiment of zouaves who adopted the name and style of military dress from a legendarily dashing french infantry unit recruited from berber tribesmen in north africa.
but bright uniforms were not enough to win battles and these troops were soon to be routed by the confederates.
an observer behind the union lines described the federal troops pell mell retreat from the battleeld at bull run we called to them tried to tell them there was no danger called them to stop implored them to stand.
we called them cowards denounced them in the most offensive terms put out our heavy revolvers and threatened to shoot them but all in vain a cruel crazy mad hopeless panic possessed them and communicated to everybody about in front and rear.
the heat was awful although now about six the men were exhausted their mouths gaped their lips cracked and blackened with powder of the cartridges they had bitten off in battle their eyes staring in frenzy no mortal ever saw such a mass of ghastly wretches.
confederate reinforcements arrived unexpectedly.
panic seized the green union troops many of whom ed in shameful confusion.
the confederates themselves too exhausted or disorga nized to pursue feasted on captured lunches.
the military picnic at bull run though not decisive militarily bore signicant psychological and political consequences many of them paradoxical.
victory was worse than defeat for the south because it inated an already dangerous overcondence.
many of the southern soldiers promptly deserted some boastfully to display their trophies others feeling that the war was now surely over.
southern enlistments fell off sharply and preparations for a protracted con ict slackened.
defeat was better than victory for the union because it dispelled all illusions of a one punch war and caused the northerners to buckle down to the staggering task at hand.
it also set the stage for a war that would be waged not merely for the cause of union but also eventually for the abolitionist ideal of emancipation.
the runners of bull run preparing for battle these troops of the 69th new york state militia a largely irish regiment were photographed attending sunday morning mass in may 1861 just weeks before the battle of bull run.
because the regiment was camped near washington d c women were able to visit.
the army of the potomac.
hating to sacrice his troops he was idolized by his men who affectionately called him little mac but he was a perfectionist who seems not to have realized that an army is never ready to the last button and that wars cannot be won without running some risks.
he consistently but erroneously believed that the enemy outnumbered him partly because his intelligence reports from the head of pinkertons detective agency were unreliable.
he was overcautious lincoln once accused him of having the slows and he addressed the president in an arrogant tone that a less forgiving person would never have tolerated.
privately the general referred to his chief as a baboon as mcclellan doggedly continued to drill his army without moving it toward richmond the derisive northern watchword became all quiet along the potomac the song of the hour was tardy george mcclellan.
after threatening to borrow the army if it was not going to be used lincoln nally issued rm orders to advance.
a reluctant mcclellan at last decided upon a waterborne approach to richmond which lies at the western base of a narrow peninsula formed by the james and york rivers hence the name given to this historic encounter the peninsula campaign see map 21 1.
mcclellan warily inched toward the confederate capital in the spring of 1862 with about 100 000 men.
after taking a month to capture historic yorktown which bristled with imitation wooden cannon he nally came within sight of the spires of richmond.
at this crucial juncture lincoln diverted mcclellans anticipated reinforcements to chase stonewall jackson whose lightning feints in the shenandoah valley seemed to tardy george mcclellan and the peninsula campaign northern hopes brightened later in 1861 when general george b mcclellan was given command of the army of the potomac as the major union force near washington was now called.
red haired and red mustached strong and stocky mcclellan was a brilliant thirtyfour year old west pointer.
as a serious student of warfare who was dubbed young napoleon he had seen plenty of ghting rst in the mexican war and then as an observer of the crimean war in russia.
cocky george mcclellan embodied a curious mixture of virtues and defects.
he was a superb organizer and drillmaster and he injected splendid morale into abraham lincoln 1809 1865 treated the demands of george mcclellan for reinforcements and his excuses for inaction with innite patience.
one exception came when the general complained that his horses were tired.
on october 24 1862 lincoln wrote i have just read your dispatch about soretongued and fatigued horses.
will you pardon me for asking what the horses of your army have done since the battle of antietam that fatigues anything.
chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 n j.
baltimore maryland pot o 39n 78w ma c d el.
washington d c manassas junction n cle r m cc union confederate union advance union retreat confederate victory lel n ea c o c y richmond williamsburg yorktown lan nti r 37n 50 km.
norfolk atla kr.
seven days june 25 july 1 k or.
appomattox n peake bay n an oc es r am lla esa v i r gi n i a 38n mc ra pp ch fredericksburg ah civil war scene detail a federal brigade repulses a confederate assault at williamsburg virginia in 1862 as the peninsula campaign presses toward richmond.
general wineld scott hancock commanded the troops.
for his success in this action hancock earned the nickname the superb 76w 77w pennsylvania r put washington d c in jeopardy.
stalled in front of richmond mcclellan was further frustrated when jeb stuarts confederate cavalry rode completely around his army on reconnaissance.
then general robert e lee launched a devastating counterattack the seven days battles june 26 july 2 1862.
the confederates slowly drove mcclellan back to the sea.
the union forces abandoned the peninsula campaign as a costly failure and lincoln temporarily abandoned mcclellan as commander of the army of the potomac though lees army had suffered some twenty thousand casualties to mcclellans ten thousand.
lee had achieved a brilliant if bloody triumph.
yet the ironies of his accomplishment are striking.
if mcclellan had succeeded in taking richmond and ending the war in mid 1862 the union would probably have been restored with minimal disruption to the peculiar institution slavery would have survived at least for a time.
by his successful defense of richmond and defeat of mcclellan lee had in effect ensured that the war would endure until slavery was uprooted and the old south thoroughly destroyed.
lincoln himself who had earlier professed his unwillingness to tamper with slavery where it already existed now declared that the rebels cannot experiment for ten years trying to destroy the government and if they fail still come back into the union unhurt he began to draft an emancipation proclamation.
north carolina map 21 1 peninsula campaign 1862 interactive map the union strategy dations of the old south third cut the confederacy in half by seizing control of the mississippi river backbone fourth chop the confederacy to pieces by sending troops through georgia and the carolinas fth decapitate it by capturing its capital at richmond and sixth this was ulysses grants idea especially try every where to engage the enemys main strength and to grind it into submission.
a confederate soldier assigned to burial detail after the seven days battles 1862 wrote the sights and smells that assailed us were simply indescribable.
corpses swollen to twice their original size some of them actually burst asunder with the pressure of foul gasses.
the odors were so nauseating and so deadly that in a short time we all sickened and were lying with our mouths close to the ground most of us vomiting profusely.
the war at sea the blockade started leakily it was not clamped down all at once but was extended by degrees.
a watertight patrol of some thirty ve hundred miles of coast was impossible for the hastily improvised northern navy which counted converted yachts and ferryboats in its eet.
but blockading was simplied by concentrating on the principal ports and inlets where dock facilities were available for loading bulky bales of cotton.
union strategy now turned toward total war see map 21 2.
as nally developed the northern military plan had six components rst slowly suffocate the south by blockading its coasts second liberate the slaves and hence undermine the very economic foun 80w pa n j gettysburg lee 1863 ohio indiana west virginia kentucky missouri 18 6 grant charleston fort sumter n louisiana savannah port hudson 30n rra gu t1 new orleans florida interactive map georgia 86 5 n1 fa map 21 2 main thrusts 1861 1865 northern strategists at rst believed that the rebellion could be snuffed out quickly by a swift crushing blow.
but the stiffness of southern resistance to the unions early probes and the norths inability to strike with sufcient speed and severity revealed that the conict would be a war of attrition long and bloody.
an sherm vicksburg ma.
ir pp ssi ssi south carolina atlanta alabama mcclellan raleigh chattanooga mississippi t gran 5 1864 1 north carolina tennessee mi arkansas del.
richmond appomattox court virginia house sher cairo 90w.
oh io r ill antietam washington d c lee 40n 1 atlantic ocean gulf of mexico 300 km.
boundary of confederacy union advance union confederate advance confederate union naval blockade chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 how was the blockade regarded by the naval powers of the world.
ordinarily they probably would have deed it for it was never completely effective and was especially sievelike at the outset.
but britain the greatest maritime nation recognized it as binding and warned its shippers that they ignored it at their peril.
britain plainly did not want to tie its hands in a future war by insisting that lincoln maintain impossibly high blockading standards.
blockade running was risky but protable as the growing scarcity of southern goods drove prices skyward.
the most successful blockade runners were swift gray painted steamers scores of which were specially built in scotland.
a leading rendezvous was the west indies port of nassau in the british bahamas where at one time thirty ve of the speedy ships rode at anchor.
the low lying craft would take on cargoes of arms brought in by tramp steamers from britain leave with fraudulent papers for halifax canada and then return a few days later with a cargo of cotton.
the risks were great but the prots would mount to 700 percent and more for lucky gamblers.
two successful voyages might well pay for capture on a third.
the lush days of blockade running nally passed as union squadrons gradually pinched off the leading southern ports from new orleans to charleston.
battle of the merrimack and the monitor march 9 1862 the northern navy enforced the blockade with high handed practices.
yankee captains for example would seize british freighters on the high seas if laden with war supplies for the tiny port of nassau and other halfway stations.
the justication was that obviously these shipments were ultimately destined by devious routes for the confederacy.
london although not happy acquiesced in this disagreeable doctrine of ultimate destination or continuous voyage british blockaders might need to take advantage of the same far fetched interpretation in a future war as in fact they did in the world war of 1914 1918.
the most alarming confederate threat to the blockade came in 1862.
resourceful southerners raised and reconditioned a former wooden u s warship the merrimack and plated its sides with old iron railroad rails.
renamed the virginia this clumsy but powerful monster easily destroyed two wooden ships of the union navy in the virginia waters of chesapeake bay it also threatened catastrophe to the entire yankee blockading eet.
actually the homemade ironclad was not a seaworthy craft.
a tiny union ironclad the monitor built in about one hundred days arrived on the scene in the nick of time.
for four hours on march 9 1862 the little yan antietam when news reached washington that the merrimack had sunk two wooden yankee warships with ridiculous ease president lincoln much excited summoned his advisers.
secretary of the navy gideon welles 1802 1878 recorded the most frightened man on that gloomy day.
was the secretary of war stanton.
he was at times almost frantic.
the merrimack he said would destroy every vessel in the service could lay every city on the coast under contribution could take fortress monroe.
likely the rst movement of the merrimack would be to come up the potomac and disperse congress destroy the capitol and public buildings.
kee cheesebox on a raft fought the wheezy merrimack to a standstill.
britain and france had already built several powerful ironclads but the rst battle testing of these new craft heralded the doom of wooden warships.
a few months after the historic battle the confederates destroyed the merrimack to keep it from the grasp of advancing union troops.
the pivotal point antietam robert e lee having broken the back of mcclellans assault on richmond next moved northward.
at the second battle of bull run august 29 30 1862 he encountered a federal force under general john pope.
a handsome dashing soldierly gure pope boasted that in the western theater of war from which he had recently come he had seen only the backs of the enemy.
lee quickly gave him a front view furiously attacking popes troops and inicting a crushing defeat.
emboldened by this success lee daringly thrust into maryland.
he hoped to strike a blow that would not only encourage foreign intervention but also seduce the still wavering border state and its sisters from the union.
the confederate troops sang lustily thou wilt not cower in the dust maryland.
my maryland.
thy gleaming sword shall never rust maryland.
my maryland.
but the marylanders did not respond to the siren song.
the presence among the invaders of so many blanketless hatless and shoeless soldiers dampened the states ardor.
events nally converged toward a critical battle at antietam creek maryland.
lincoln yielding to popular pressure hastily restored little mac to active command of the main northern army.
his soldiers tossed their caps skyward and hugged his horse as they hailed his return.
fortune shone upon mcclellan when two union soldiers found a copy of lees battle plans wrapped around a packet of three cigars dropped by a careless confederate ofcer.
with this crucial piece of intelligence in hand mcclellan succeeded in halting lee at antietam on september 17 1862 in one of the bitterest and bloodiest days of the war.
antietam was more or less a draw militarily.
but lee nding his thrust parried retired across the potomac.
mcclellan from whom much more had been hoped was removed from his eld command for the second and nal time.
his numerous critics condemning him for not having boldly pursued the ever dangerous lee nally got his scalp.
the landmark battle of antietam was one of the decisive engagements of world history probably the most decisive of the civil war.
jefferson davis was perhaps never again so near victory as on that fateful summer day.
the british and french governments were on the verge of diplomatic mediation a form of interference sure to be angrily resented by the north.
an almost certain rebuff by washington might well have spurred paris and london into armed collusion with richmond.
but both capitals cooled off when the union displayed unexpected power at antietam and their chill deepened with the passing months.
bloody antietam was also the long awaited victory that lincoln needed for launching his emancipation proclamation.
the abolitionists had long been clamoring for action wendell phillips was denouncing the president as a rst rate second rate man by midsummer of 1862 with the border states safely in the fold lincoln was ready to move.
but he believed that to issue such an edict on the heels of a series of military disasters would be folly.
it would seem like a confession that the north unable to conquer the south was forced to call upon the slaves to murder their masters.
lincoln therefore decided to wait for the outcome of lees invasion.
chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 the killing fields of antietam these confederate corpses testify to the awful slaughter of the battle.
the twelve hour ght at antietam creek ranks as the bloodiest single day of the war with more than ten thousand confederate casualties and even more on the union side.
at last the battle ended one historian wrote smoke heavy in the air the twilight quivering with the anguished cries of thousands of wounded men antietam served as the needed emancipation springboard.
the halting of lees offensive was just enough of a victory to justify lincolns issuing on september 23 1862 the preliminary emancipation proclamation.
this hope giving document announced that on january 1 1863 the president would issue a nal proclamation.
on the scheduled date he fully redeemed his promise and the civil war became more of a moral crusade as the fate of slavery and the south it had sustained was sealed.
the war now became more of what lincoln called a remorseless revolutionary struggle after january 1 1863 lincoln said the character of the war will be changed.
it will be one of subjugation.
the old south is to be destroyed and replaced by new propositions and ideas a proclamation without emancipation lincolns emancipation proclamation of 1863 declared forever free the slaves in those confederate areas still in rebellion.
bondsmen in the loyal border states were not affected nor were those in specic conquered areas in the south all told about 800 000.
the tone of the document was dull and legalistic one historian has said that it had all the moral grandeur of a bill of lad ing.
but if lincoln stopped short of a clarion call for a holy war to achieve freedom he pointedly concluded his historic document by declaring that the proclamation was an act of justice and calling for the considerate judgment of mankind and the gracious favor of almighty god the presidential pen did not formally strike the shackles from a single slave.
where lincoln could presumably free the slaves that is in the loyal border states he refused to do so lest he spur disunion.
where he could not that is in the confederate states he tried to.
in short where he could he would not and where he would he could not.
thus the emancipation proclamation was stronger on proclamation than emancipation.
yet much unofcial do it yourself liberation did take place.
thousands of jubilant slaves learning of the proclamation ocked to the invading union armies stripping already run down plantations of their work force.
in this sense the emancipation proclamation was heralded by the drumbeat of running feet.
but many fugitives would have come anyhow as they had from the wars outset.
one in seven southern slaves ran away to union camps.
their presence in the camps and their perseverance against all odds convinced many northern soldiers of slaverys evils and helped put emancipation atop lincolns agenda.
by issuing the proclamation lincoln addressed the refugees plight the emancipation proclamation and strengthened the moral cause of the union at home and abroad.
at the same time lincolns proclamation clearly foreshadowed the ultimate doom of slavery see map 21 3.
this was legally achieved by action of the individual states and by their ratication of the thirteenth amendment see the appendix in 1865 eight months after the civil war had ended.
the emancipation proclamation also fundamentally changed the nature of the war because it effectively removed any chance of a negotiated settlement.
both sides now knew that the war would be a ght to the nish.
public reactions to the long awaited proclamation of 1863 were varied.
god bless abraham lincoln exulted the antislavery editor horace greeley in his new york tribune.
but many ardent abolitionists complained that lincoln had not gone far enough.
on the other hand formidable numbers of northerners especially in the butternut regions of the old northwest and the border states felt that he had gone too far.
a cynical democratic rhymester quipped abraham lincoln defended his policies toward blacks in an open letter to democrats on august 26 1863 you say you will not ght to free negroes.
some of them seem willing to ght for you but no matter.
fight you then exclusively to save the union.
i issued the proclamation on purpose to aid you in saving the union.
opposition mounted in the north against supporting an abolition war ex president pierce and others felt that emancipation should not be inicted on the slaves.
many boys in blue especially from the border states had volunteered to ght for the union not against slavery.
desertions increased sharply.
the crucial congressional elections in the autumn of 1862 went heavily against the administration particularly in new york pennsylvania and ohio.
democrats even carried lincolns illinois although they did not secure control of congress.
the emancipation proclamation caused an outcry to rise from the south that lincoln the end was trying to stir up the hellish passions of a slave honest old abe when the war rst began denied abolition was part of his plan honest old abe has since made a decree the war must go on till the slaves are all free.
as both cant be honest will some one tell how if honest abe then he is honest abe now.
w va missouri tennessee md.
virginia kentucky arkansas north carolina south carolina georgia miss.
alabama texas louisiana florida by thirteenth amendment 1865 by state action 1863 1865 by emancipation proclamation in theory 1863 legalized by thirteenth amendment map 21 3 emancipation in the south president lincoln believed that emancipation of the slaves accompanied by compensation to their owners would be fairest to the south.
he formally proposed such an amendment to the constitution in december 1862.
what nally emerged was the thirteenth amendment of 1865 which freed all slaves without compensation.
interactive map chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 not everyone in the north welcomed lincolns emancipation proclamation as this condemnation from the cincinnati enquirer reveals the hundreds of thousands if not millions of slaves the act will emancipate will come north and west and will either be competitors with our white mechanics and laborers degrading them by competition or they will have to be supported as paupers and criminals at the public expense.
insurrection.
aristocrats of europe noting that the proclamation applied only to rebel slaveholders were inclined to sympathize with southern protests.
but the old world working classes especially in britain reacted otherwise.
they sensed that the proclamation spelled the ultimate doom of slavery and many laborers were more determined than ever to oppose intervention.
gradually the diplomatic position of the union improved.
the fabled 54th massachusetts infantry regiment this bas relief by famed sculptor augustus saintgaudens stands today in front of the massachusetts statehouse in boston.
it commemorates the all black volunteer regiment led by the white boston patrician robert gould shaw that suffered heavy casualties during the union siege of fort wagner south carolina in 1863.
the north now had much the stronger moral cause.
in addition to preserving the union it had committed itself to freeing the slaves.
the moral position of the south was correspondingly diminished.
blacks battle bondage as lincoln moved to emancipate the slaves he also took steps to enlist blacks in the armed forces.
although some african americans had served in the revolution and the war of 1812 the regular army contained no blacks at the wars outset and the war department refused to accept those free northern blacks who tried to volunteer.
the union navy however enrolled many blacks mainly as cooks stewards and remen.
but as manpower ran low and emancipation was proclaimed black enlistees were accepted sometimes over ferocious protests from northern as well as southern whites.
by wars end some 180 000 blacks served in the union army most of them from the slave states but many from the free soil north.
blacks accounted for about 10 percent of the total enlistments in the union forces on land and sea and included two massa black freedom fighters a bit of war history contraband recruit veteran by thomas waterman wood 1865 1866 this painting dramatically commemorates the contributions and sacrices of the 180 000 african americans who served in the union army during the civil war.
chusetts regiments raised largely through the efforts of the ex slave frederick douglass.
black ghting men unquestionably had their hearts in the war against slavery that the civil war had be in august 1863 lincoln wrote to grant that enlisting black soldiers works doubly weakening the enemy and strengthening us in december 1863 he announced it is difcult to say they are not as good soldiers as any in august 1864 he said abandon all the posts now garrisoned by black men take 150 000 black men from our side and put them in the battleeld or corneld against us and we would be compelled to abandon the war in three weeks.
come after lincoln proclaimed emancipation.
service also offered them a chance to prove their manhood and to strengthen their claim to full citizenship at wars end.
participating in about ve hundred engagements they received a total of twenty two congressional medals of honor the highest military award.
their casualties were extremely heavy more than thirty eight thousand died whether from battle sickness or reprisals from vengeful masters.
many when captured were put to death as slaves in revolt for not until 1864 did the south recognize them as prisoners of war.
in one notorious case several black soldiers were massacred after they had formally surrendered at fort pillow tennessee.
thereafter vengeful black units cried remember fort pillow as they swung into battle and vowed to take no prisoners.
for reasons of pride prejudice and principle the confederacy could not bring itself to enlist slaves until a month before the war ended and then it was too late.
meanwhile tens of thousands were forced into labor battalions the building of fortications the supplying of armies and other war connected activities.
slaves moreover were the stomach of the confederacy for they kept the farms going while the white men fought.
chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 an afdavit by a union sergeant described the fate of one group of black union troops captured by the confederates all the negroes found in blue uniform or with any outward marks of a union soldier upon him was killed i saw some taken into the woods and hung others i saw stripped of all their clothing and they stood upon the bank of the river with their faces riverwards and then they were shot still others were killed by having their brains beaten out by the butt end of the muskets in the hands of the rebels.
involuntary labor did not imply slave support for the confederacy.
in many ways the actions of southern slaves hamstrung the confederate war effort and subverted the institution of slavery.
fear of slave insurrection necessitated confederate home guards keeping many eligible young white men from the front.
everyday forms of slave resistance such as slowdowns strikes and open deance diminished productivity and undermined discipline.
when union troops neared slave assertiveness increased.
as intelligent contraband slaves served as union spies guides and scouts or provided shelter to escaped northern prisoners of war.
by wars end nearly half a million slaves took the ultimate risk of revolting with their feet abandoning their plantations.
many who remained especially in the urban south negotiated new working conditions in factories and on farms.
although they stopped short of violent uprising slaves contributed powerfully to the collapse of slavery and the disintegration of the antebellum southern way of life.
lees last lunge at gettysburg after antietam lincoln replaced mcclellan as commander of the army of the potomac with general a e burnside whose ornate side whiskers came to be known as burnsides or sideburns protesting his untness for this responsibility burnside proved it when he launched a rash frontal attack on lees strong position at fredericksburg virginia on december 13 1862.
a chicken could not have lived in the line of re remarked one confederate ofcer.
more than ten thousand northern soldiers were killed or wounded in burnsides slaughter pen a new slaughter pen was prepared when general burnside yielded his command to joseph fighting joe hooker an aggressive ofcer but a headstrong subordinate.
at chancellorsville virginia on may 2 4 1863 lee daringly divided his numerically inferior force and sent stonewall jackson to attack the union ank.
the strategy worked.
hooker temporarily dazed by a near hit from a cannonball was badly beaten but not crushed.
this victory was probably lees most brilliant but it was dearly bought.
jackson was mistakenly shot by his own men in the gathering dusk and died a few days later.
i have lost my right arm lamented lee.
southern folklore relates how jackson outanked the angels while galloping into heaven.
lee now prepared to follow up his stunning victory by invading the north again this time through pennsylvania.
a decisive blow would add strength to the noisy peace prodders in the north and would also encourage foreign intervention still a southern hope.
three days before the battle was joined union general george g meade scholarly unspectacular and abrupt was aroused from his sleep at 2 a m with the unwelcome news that he would replace hooker.
quite by accident meade took his stand atop a low ridge anking a shallow valley near quiet little gettysburg pennsylvania see map 21 4.
there his 92 000 men in blue locked in furious combat with lees 76 000 gray clad warriors.
the battle seesawed across the rolling green slopes for three agonizing days july 1 3 1863 and the outcome was in doubt until the very end.
the failure of general george picketts magnicent but futile charge nally broke the back of the confederate attack and broke the heart of the confederate cause.
picketts charge has been called the high tide of the confederacy it de ned both the northernmost point reached by any signicant southern force and the last real chance for the confederates to win the war.
as the battle of gettysburg raged a confederate peace delegation was moving under a ag of truce toward the union lines near norfolk virginia.
jefferson davis hoped his negotiators would arrive in washington from the south just as lees triumphant army marched on it from gettysburg to the north.
but the victory at gettys abraham lincolns gettysburg address olitical speeches are unfortunately all too often composed of claptrap platitudes and just plain bunk and they are frequently written by someone other than the person delivering them.
but abraham lincolns address at the dedication of the cemetery at the gettysburg battleeld on november 19 1863 has long been recognized as a masterpiece of political oratory and as a foundational document of the american political system as weighty a statement of the national purpose as the declaration of independence which it deliberately echoes in its statement that all men are created equal or even the constitution itself.
in just 272 simple but eloquent words that lin p coln himself indisputably wrote he summarized the case for american nationhood.
what were his principal arguments.
what values did he invoke.
what did he think was at stake in the civil war.
conspicuously he made no direct mention of slavery in this address.
another speech that lincoln gave in 1861 offers some clues.
he said i have often inquired of myself what great principle or idea it was that kept this nation together.
it was not the mere separation of the colonies from the motherland but that sentiment in the declaration of independence which gave liberty not alone to the people of this country but hope to the world for all future time rr july 1 he frederick m nd oa hr.
baltimore e rs pi t ze cemetery hill peach orchard un yr ke wheat field july 2 falmouth big round top bay fredericksburg dec 13 1862 rap p ah an ck no union r confederate union advance confederate advance m little round top devil s den run plum r an pid a r chancellorsville may 2 4 1863 38n n er n c k c r e ek ro le h k oo manassas junction chesapea virginia washington d c ru cr ee k a culp s hill willou ghb sh en poto ma cr july 2 july 3 picketts charge maryland.
39n lo n g s t r e e t winchester c ge idg e rid westminster meade gettysburg y rid ge le e r na an eh qu hagerstown july 1 us york gettysburg july 1 3 1863 pennsylvania harpers ferry july 1 wrightsville s chambersburg west virginia oak hill nr ew the battle of gettysburg inar 40 mi.
l so el 76w harrisburg sem 40n 77w carlisle 40 km.
er 78w ph sh ar union position 5 confederate position 1 km.
confederate advance confederate retreat union victory confederate victory map 21 4 the battle of gettysburg 1863 with the failure of picketts charge the fate of the confederacy was sealed though the civil war dragged on for almost two more bloody years.
burg belonged to lincoln who refused to allow the confederate peace mission to pass through union lines.
from now on the southern cause was doomed.
yet the men of dixie fought on for nearly two years longer through sweat blood and weariness of spirit.
later in that dreary autumn of 1863 with the graves still fresh lincoln journeyed to gettysburg to dedicate the cemetery.
he read a two minute address following a two hour speech by the orator of the day a former president of harvard.
lincolns noble remarks were branded by the london times as ludicrous and by democratic editors as dishwatery and silly the gettysburg address attracted relatively little attention at the time but the president was speaking for the ages.
interactive map the war in the west events in the western theater of the war at last provided lincoln with an able general who did not have to be shelved after every reverse.
ulysses s grant had been a mediocre student at west point distinguishing himself only in horsemanship although he did fairly well in mathematics.
after ghting creditably in the mexican war he was stationed at isolated frontier posts where boredom and loneliness drove him to drink.
resigning from the army to avoid a court martial for drunkenness he failed at various business ventures and when war came he was working in his fathers leather store in illinois for 50 a month.
grant s victories in the west general ulysses s grant and general robert e lee trained at west point grant left proved to be a better general than a president.
oddly he hated the sight of blood and recoiled from rare beef.
lee right a gentlemanly general in an ungentlemanly business remarked when the union troops were bloodily repulsed at fredericksburg it is well that war is so terrible or we should get too fond of it grant did not cut much of a gure.
the shy and silent shopkeeper was short stooped awkward stubblebearded and sloppy in dress.
he managed with some difculty to secure a colonelcy in the volunteers.
from then on his military experience combined with his boldness resourcefulness and tenacity catapulted him on a meteoric rise.
grants rst signal success came in the northern tennessee theater see map 21 5.
after heavy ghting he captured fort henry and fort donelson on the tennessee and cumberland rivers in february 1862.
when the confederate commander at fort donelson asked for terms grant bluntly demanded an unconditional and immediate surrender grants triumph in tennessee was crucial.
it not only riveted kentucky more securely to the union but also opened the gateway to the strategically important region of tennessee as well as to georgia and the heart of dixie.
grant next attempted to exploit his victory by capturing the junction of the main confederate northsouth and east west railroads in the mississippi valley at corinth mississippi.
but a confederate force foiled his plans in a gory battle at shiloh just over the tennessee border from corinth on april 6 7 1862.
though grant successfully counterattacked the impressive confederate showing at shiloh con rmed that there would be no quick end to the war in the west.
lincoln resisted all demands for the removal of unconditional surrender grant insisting i cant spare this man he ghts when talebearers later told lincoln that grant drank too much the president allegedly replied find me the brand and ill send a barrel to each of my other generals there is no evidence that grants drinking habits seriously impaired his military per for mance.
other union thrusts in the west were in the making.
in the spring of 1862 a otilla commanded by david g farragut joined with a northern army to strike the south a blow by seizing new orleans.
with union gunboats both ascending and descending the mississippi the eastern part of the confederacy was left with a jeopardized back door.
through this narrowing entrance between vicksburg mississippi and port hudson louisiana owed herds of vitally needed cattle chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 88w corinth memphis i r pp ss i er r land tennessee t en n es s e e chattanooga r nov 25 1863 mi ssi n kentucky fort donelson feb 16 1862 nt gra 3 arkansas fort henry feb 6 1862 shiloh april 6 7 o ohi r grant 1862 36n cairo b illinois mo.
86w cu m 90w gra nt 34n ga mississippi alabama vicksburg july 4 1863 montgomery 32n louisiana port hudson may 27 1863 30n mobile 50 100 km.
f 86 arrag 2 u t new orleans florida mississippi r gulf of mexico union confederate union advance union victory in the southern tier of ohio indiana and illinois sympathy for the south combined with hostility to the northeast to stimulate talk of a northwest confederacy that would itself secede from the union and make a separate peace with the confederacy.
these sentiments were fueled by economic grievances stemming from the closure of the mississippi river to trade and they gained strength after lincolns emancipation proclamation.
warned one ohio congressman in january 1863 if you of the east who have found this war against the south and for the negro gratifying to your hate or protable to your purse will continue it.
be prepared for eternal divorce between the west and the east another ohio congressman giving great urgency to the union effort to reopen the mississippi river declared the erection of the states watered by the mississippi and its tributaries into an dependent republic is the talk of every other western man.
map 21 5 the mississippi river and tennessee 1862 1863 interactive map and other provisions from louisiana and texas.
the fortress of vicksburg located on a hairpin turn of the mississippi was the souths sentinel protecting the lifeline to the western sources of supply.
general grant was now given command of the union forces attacking vicksburg and in the teeth of grave difculties displayed rare skill and daring.
the siege of vicksburg was his best fought campaign of the war.
the beleaguered city at length surrendered on july 4 1863 with the garrison reduced to eating mules and rats.
five days later came the fall of port hudson the last southern bastion on the mississippi.
the spinal cord of the confederacy was now severed and in lincolns quaint phrase the father of waters at last owed unvexed to the sea the union victory at vicksburg came the day after the confederate defeat at gettysburg.
the political sig nicance of these back to back military successes was monumental.
reopening the mississippi helped to quell the northern peace agitation in the butternut area of the ohio river valley.
confederate control of the mississippi had cut off that regions usual trade routes down the ohio mississippi river system to new orleans thus adding economic pain to that border sections already shaky support for the abolition war the twin victories also conclusively tipped the diplomatic scales in favor of the north as britain stopped delivery of the laird rams to the confederates see p 473 and as france killed a deal for the sale of six naval vessels to the richmond government.
by the end of 1863 all confederate hopes for foreign help were irretrievably lost.
sherman scorches georgia general grant the victor of vicksburg was now transferred to the east tennessee theater where confeder sherman s march to the sea ates had driven union forces from the battleeld at chickamauga into the city of chattanooga to which they then laid siege.
grant won a series of desperate engagements in november 1863 in the vicinity of besieged chattanooga including missionary ridge and lookout mountain the battle above the clouds.
chattanooga was liberated the state was cleared of confederates and the way was thus opened for an invasion of georgia.
grant was rewarded by being made general in chief.
georgias conquest was entrusted to general william tecumseh sherman.
red haired and red bearded grim faced and ruthless he captured atlanta in september 1864 and burned the city in november of that year.
he then daringly left his supply base lived off the country for some 250 miles and weeks later emerged at savannah on the sea.
a rousing northern song marching through georgia said shermans dashing yankee boys will never reach the coast so the saucy rebels said and t was a handsome boast.
but shermans hated blue bellies sixty thousand strong cut a sixty mile swath of destruction through georgia.
they burned buildings leaving only the blackened chimneys shermans sentinels.
they tore up railroad rails heated them red hot and twisted them into iron doughnuts and shermans hairpins they bayoneted family portraits and ran off with valuable souvenirs war.
is all hell admitted sherman later and he proved it by his efforts to make georgia howl one of the major purposes of shermans march was to destroy supplies destined for the confederate army and to weaken the morale of the men at the front by waging war on their homes see map 21 6.
raleigh johnston surrenders april 18 1865 tennessee bentonville mar.
19 1865 north carolina 35n fayetteville chattanooga nov 23 1863 dalton wilmington kennesaw mt.
june 27 1864 columbia feb 17 1865 atlanta occupied by sherman sept 2 1864 burned nov 16 1864 south carolina at l a n t i c o c e a n milledgeville macon charleston georgia union advance n savannah dec 21 1864 100 km.
union victory 100 mi.
80w map 21 6 shermans march 1864 1865 interactive map chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 sherman was a pioneer practitioner of total war his success in shermanizing the south was attested by increasing numbers of confederate desertions.
although his methods were brutal he probably shortened the struggle and hence saved lives.
but there can be no doubt that the discipline of his army at times broke down as roving riffraff shermans bummers engaged in an orgy of pillaging.
sherman the brute was universally damned in the south.
after seizing savannah as a christmas present for lincoln shermans army veered north into south carolina where the destruction was even more vicious.
many union soldiers believed that this state the hellhole of secession had wantonly provoked the war.
the capital city columbia burst into ames in all probability the handiwork of the yankee invader.
crunching northward shermans conquering army had rolled deep into north carolina by the time the war ended.
a letter picked up on a dead confederate in north carolina and addressed to his deer sister concluded that it was dam fulishness trying to lick shurmin he had been getting nuthin but hell lots uv it ever since he saw the dam yanks and he was tirde uv it he would head for home now but his old horse was plaid out if the dam yankees had not got there yet it would be a dam wunder they were thicker than lise on a hen and a dam site ornerier.
shermans march to the sea 1863 1864 shermans army inicted cruel destruction along its route an early instance of a tactic that came to characterize modern warfare in which civilians are considered legitimate targets.
politics in wartime the politics of war presidential elections come by the calendar and not by the crisis.
as fate would have it the election of 1864 fell most inopportunely in the midst of war.
political inghting in the north added greatly to lincolns cup of woe.
factions within his own party distrusting his ability or doubting his commitment to abolition sought to tie his hands or even remove him from ofce.
conspicuous among his critics was a group led by the overambitious secretary of the treasury salmon chase.
especially burdensome to lincoln was the creation of the congressional committee on the conduct of the war formed in late 1861.
it was dominated by radical republicans who resented the expansion of presidential power in wartime and who pressed lincoln zealously on emancipation.
most dangerous of all to the union cause were the northern democrats.
deprived of the talent that had departed with the southern wing of the party those democrats remaining in the north were left with the taint of association with the seceders.
tragedy befell the democrats and the union when their gifted leader stephen a douglas died of typhoid fever seven weeks after the war began.
unshakably devoted to the union he probably could have kept much of his following on the path of loyalty.
lacking a leader the democrats divided.
a large group of war democrats patriotically supported the lincoln administration but tens of thousands of peace democrats did not.
at the extreme were the so called copperheads named for the poisonous snake that strikes without a warning rattle.
copperheads openly obstructed the war through attacks against the draft against lincoln and especially after 1863 against emancipation.
they denounced the president as the illinois ape and condemned the nigger war they commanded considerable political strength in the southern parts of ohio indiana and illinois.
notorious among the copperheads was a sometime congressman from ohio clement l vallandigham.
this tempestuous character possessed brilliant oratorical gifts and unusual talents for stirring up a study in black and white soldiers of the 7th tennessee cavalry pose with their slaves whose bondage the confederacy fought to perpetuate.
chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 trouble.
a southern partisan he publicly demanded an end to the wicked and cruel war.
the civil courts in ohio were open and he should have been tried in them for sedition.
but he was convicted by a military tribunal in 1863 for treasonable utterances and was then sentenced to prison.
lincoln decided that if vallandigham liked the confederates so much he ought to be banished to their lines.
this was done.
vallandigham was not so easily silenced.
working his way to canada he ran for the governorship of ohio on foreign soil and polled a substantial but insufcient vote.
he returned to his own state before the war ended and although he deed king lincoln and spat upon a military decree he was not further prosecuted.
the strange case of vallandigham inspired edward everett hale to write his moving but ctional story of philip nolan the man without a country 1863 which was immensely popular in the north and which helped stimulate devotion to the union.
the ctional nolan was a young army ofcer found guilty of participation in the aaron burr plot of 1806 see p 237.
he had cried out in court damn the united states.
i wish i may never hear of the united states again for this outburst he was condemned to a life of eternal exile on american warships.
the election of 1864 as the election of 1864 approached lincolns precarious authority depended on his retaining republican support while spiking the threat from the peace democrats and copperheads.
fearing defeat the republican party executed a clever maneuver.
joining with the war democrats it proclaimed itself to be the union party see figure 21 1.
thus the republican party passed temporarily out of existence.
lincolns renomination at rst encountered surprisingly strong opposition.
hostile factions whipped up considerable agitation to shelve homely old abe in favor of his handsome nemesis secretary of the treasury chase.
lincoln was accused of lacking force of being overready to compromise of not having won the war and of having shocked many sensitive souls by his ill timed and earthy jokes.
prince of jesters one journal called him.
but the ditch lincoln move collapsed and he was nominated by the union party without serious dissent.
lincolns running mate was ex tailor andrew johnson a loyal war democrat from tennessee who had been a small slaveowner when the con ict began.
he was placed on the union party ticket to sew up the election by attracting war democrats and the voters in the border states and sadly with no proper regard for the possibility that lincoln might die in ofce.
southerners and copperheads alike condemned both candidates as birds of a feather two ignorant third rate boorish backwoods politicians born in log cabins.
embattled democrats regular and copperhead nominated the deposed and overcautious war hero general mcclellan.
the copperheads managed to force into the democratic platform a plank denouncing the prosecution of the war as a failure.
but mcclellan who could not otherwise have faced his old comrades inarms repudiated this defeatist declaration.
the campaign was noisy and nasty.
the democrats cried old abe removed mcclellan.
well now remove old abe they also sang mac will win the union back union party supporters shouted for uncle abe and andy and urged vote as you shot their most effective slogan growing out of a remark by lincoln was dont swap horses in the middle of the river lincolns reelection was at rst gravely in doubt.
the war was going badly and lincoln himself gave way to despondency fearing that political defeat was imminent.
the anti lincoln republicans taking heart started a new movement to dump lincoln in favor of someone else.
northern democrats copperheads figure 21 1 union party 1864 the blue area represents the union party.
peace democrats war democrats republicans war democrats and peace democrats mcclellan as mediator 1865 this 1864 poster shows presidents lincoln and davis trying to tear the country in half while former general george mcclellan the candidate of the democratic party attempts to mediate.
but the at mosphere of gloom was changed electrically as balloting day neared by a succession of northern victories.
admiral farragut captured mobile alabama after deantly shouting the now famous order damn the torpedoes.
go ahead general sherman seized atlanta.
general little phil sheridan laid waste the verdant shenandoah valley of virginia so thoroughly that in his words a crow could not y over it without carrying his rations with him the president pulled through but nothing more than necessary was left to chance.
at election time many northern soldiers were furloughed home to support lincoln at the polls.
one pennsylvania veteran voted forty nine times once for himself and once for each absent member of his company.
other northern soldiers were permitted to cast their ballots at the front.
lincoln bolstered by the bayonet vote vanquished mcclellan by 212 electoral votes to 21 losing only kentucky delaware and new jersey see map 21 7.
but little mac ran a closer race than the electoral count indicates.
he netted a healthy 45 percent of the popular vote 1 803 787 to lincolns 2 206 938 piling up much support in the southerner in ltrated states of the old northwest in new york and also in his native state of pennsylvania.
one of the most crushing losses suffered by the south was the defeat of the northern democrats in 1864.
the removal of lincoln was the last ghost of a hope for a confederate victory and the southern soldiers would wishfully shout hurrah for mcclellan when lincoln triumphed desertions from the sinking southern ship increased sharply.
chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 washington terr.
n h vt u 5 montana terr.
u 5 u 7 minn u 3 mass.
u 4 idaho terr.
dakota terr.
u 12 n y wisc.
u 8 u 33 mich r i u 4 u 8 nev u 2 calif u 5 utah terr.
u 8 ill u 16 colorado terr.
kansas u 3 arizona terr.
pa iowa nebraska terr.
new mexico terr.
u 21 u 13 d 3 w va md.
va ky u 11 u 7 d 7 n c tenn ark.
texas ohio ind.
n j u 6 u 26 u 5 mo.
indian terr.
conn ala ga la.
candidate party electoral vote popular vote lincoln union 91 2 206 938 55 0 confederate states 9 1 803 787 45 0 territories no returns etc.
mcclellan democrat map 21 7 presidential election of 1864 showing popular vote by county lincoln also carried california oregon and nevada but there was a considerable mcclellan vote in each.
note mcclellans strength in the border states and in the southern tier of ohio indiana and illinois the so called butternut region.
interactive map grant outlasts lee after gettysburg grant was brought in from the west over meade who was blamed for failing to pursue the defeated but always dangerous lee.
lincoln needed a general who employing the superior resources of the north would have the intestinal stamina to drive ever forward regardless of casualties.
a soldier of bulldog tenacity grant was the man for this meat grinder type of warfare.
his overall basic strategy was to assail the enemys armies simultaneously so that they could not assist one another and hence could be destroyed piecemeal.
his personal motto was when in doubt ght a grimly determined grant with more than 100 000 men struck toward richmond.
he engaged lee in a series of furious battles in the wilderness of virginia during may and june of 1864 notably in the leaden hurricane of the bloody angle and hells half acre in this wilderness campaign grant suffered about 50 000 casualties or nearly as many men as lee commanded at the start.
but lee lost about as heavily in proportion see map 21 8.
in a ghastly gamble on june 3 1864 grant ordered a frontal assault on the impregnable position of cold harbor.
the union soldiers advanced to almost certain death with papers pinned on their backs bearing their names and addresses.
in a few minutes about seven thousand men were killed or wounded.
public opinion in the north was appalled by this blood and guts type of ghting.
critics cried that grant the butcher had gone insane.
but grants reputation was undeserved while lees was overrated.
lees rate of loss at one casualty for every ve soldiers was pittsburgh 1864 1865 illinois 40n philadelphia n j md.
baltimore del.
pa ohio indiana wilderness may 5 7 1864 west richmond io virginia r virginia kentucky arkansas nashville dec 15 16 1864 averasboro march 16 1865 tennessee memphis atlanta sape r ake bay florida nt mobile bay aug 2 23 1864 nn 79w ma.
90w 38n ar nn new orleans 80w olustee feb 20 1864 louisiana 30n che charleston mobile maryland wilderness may 5 7 1864 r n chancellorsville a d pi fredericksburg ra spotsylvania courthouse po toma c may 7 19 1864 north virginia a nn r a ar.
charlottesville sout ha north anna 40 km.
oc may 23 26 1864 k r gr a.
t ta po ni pa james r r mu nk r.
ey amelia richmond courthouse x r cold harbor atto yo june 3 1864 om georgia savannah 77w a ah pp montgomery no clear victor e pleasant hill april 9 1864 jackson confederate victory confederate retreat culpeper courthouse july 22 1864 carolina alabama union victory confederate advance le mississippi tupelo july 14 15 union advance 78w north march 21 1865 carolina south mississippi r jenkins ferry april 30 1864 washington d c.
cold harbor june 3 1864 bentonville missouri oh st louis at l a n t i c ocean gul f of m ex i c o lynchburg ap 37n 300 km.
le e gr an appomattox courthouse lee surrenders april 9 1865.
r saylers creek april 6 1865 rk p n jam e t five forks april 1 1865 sr.
siege of petersburg june 15 1864 april 12 1865 300 mi.
map 21 8 grants virginia campaign 1864 1865 the wilderness campaign pitted soldier against desperate soldier in some of the most brutal and terrifying ghting of the civil war.
no one could see the ght fty feet from him a union private recalled of his month spent ghting in virginia.
the lines were very near each other and from the dense underbrush and the tops of trees came puffs of smoke the ping of the bullets and the yell of the enemy.
it was a blind and bloody hunt to the death in bewildering thickets rather than a battle interactive map the highest of any general in the war.
by contrast grant lost one of ten.
grant had intended to ght battles out in the open a tactic he had perfected in the west.
it was lee not grant who turned the eastern campaign into a war of attrition fought in the trenches.
with fewer men lee could no longer seize the offensive as he had at chancellorsville or gettysburg.
lees new defensive posture in turn forced grant into some brutal arithmetic.
grant could trade two men for one and still beat the enemy to his knees.
i propose to ght it out on this line he wrote if it takes all summer it did and it also took all autumn all winter and a part of the spring.
in february 1865 the confederates tasting the bitter dregs of defeat tried desperately to negotiate for peace between the two countries lincoln himself met with confederate representatives aboard a union ship moored at hampton roads virginia to discuss peace terms.
but lincoln could accept nothing short of union and emancipation and the southerners could accept nothing short of independence.
so the tribulation wore on amid smoke and agony to its terrible climax.
the end came with dramatic suddenness.
rapidly advancing northern troops captured richmond and cornered lee at appomattox courthouse in virginia in april 1865.
grant stubble bearded and informally dressed met with lee on the ninth palm sunday and granted generous terms of surrender.
among other concessions the hungry confederates were allowed to keep their horses for spring plowing.
tattered southern veterans lees ragamufns wept as they took leave of their beloved commander.
chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 the burning of richmond april 1865 the proud confederate capital after holding out against repeated union assaults was evacuated and burned in the nal days of the war.
the elated union soldiers cheered but they were silenced by grants stern admonition the war is over the rebels are our countrymen again lincoln traveled to conquered richmond and sat in jefferson daviss evacuated ofce just forty hours after the confederate president had left it.
thank god i have lived to see this he said.
with a small escort of sailors he walked the blasted streets of the city.
freed slaves began to recognize him and crowds gathered to see and touch father abraham one black man fell to his knees before the emancipator who said to him dont kneel to me.
this is not right.
you must kneel to god only and thank him for the liberty you will enjoy hereafter sadly as many freed slaves were to discover the hereafter of their full liberty was a long time coming.
the martyrdom of lincoln on the night of april 14 1865 good friday only ve days after lees surrender fords theater in washington witnessed its most sensational drama.
a halfcrazed fanatically pro southern actor john wilkes booth slipped behind lincoln as he sat in his box and shot him in the head.
after lying unconscious all night the great emancipator died the following morning.
now he belongs to the ages remarked the oncecritical secretary stanton probably the nest words he ever spoke.
lincoln expired in the arms of victory at the very pinnacle of his fame.
from the standpoint of his reputation his death could not have been better timed if he had hired the assassin.
a large number of his countrymen had not suspected his greatness and many the death of lincoln new york mourns lincolns death april 25 1865 lincolns body traveled by train to lie in state in fourteen cities before arriving at his nal resting place of springeld illinois.
in new york city 160 000 mourners accompanied the hearse as the funeral procession slowly made its way down broadway.
scalpers sold choice window seats for four dollars and up.
blacks were barred from participating until the mayor changed his mind at the last minute but only if they marched at the rear.
this souvenir stereo view bringing the scene to three dimensional life when seen through the popular device of a hand held stereopticon allowed many more americans to observe the funeral than could be there in person.
others had even doubted his ability.
but his dramatic death helped to erase the memory of his shortcomings and caused his nobler qualities to stand out in clearer relief.
the full impact of lincolns death was not at once apparent to the south.
hundreds of bedraggled exconfederate soldiers cheered as did some southern civilians and northern copperheads when they learned of the assassination.
this reaction was only natural because lincoln had kept the war grinding on to the bitter end.
if he had only been willing to stop the shooting the south would have won.
as time wore on increasing numbers of southerners perceived that lincolns death was a calamity for them.
belatedly they recognized that his kindliness and moderation would have been the most effective the new york herald editorialized on april 16 1865 that the south had the most to lose from lincolns assassination in the death of president lincoln we feel the pressure of a heavy national calamity but the great and irrevocable decree of the loyal states that union must and shall be preserved will lose nothing of its force but will be immensely if not terribly strengthened.
in striking abraham lincoln and his kindly disposed secretary of state the assassins struck at the best friends in the government to the prostrate rebels of the south.
thinking globally the era of nationalism t he american civil war was rooted in americas peculiar institution of slavery as well as uniquely american controversies about westward expansion.
but it was also part of a wider phenomenon that transformed many parts of the world in the mid nineteenth century nationalism.
to be sure some ancient societies such as the greeks and the hebrews had a sense of themselves as distinct peoples who shared a common culture and history.
but the creation of robust nation states with strong central governments ruling over large populations that considered themselves part of an enduring community was of decidedly modern origin.
nationalism was anchored in the french and american revolutions with their emphasis on popular sovereignty and on a government that expressed the will of a population that saw itself not just as a random assembly of persons but as a distinctive and coherent people often bonded by religion and language.
nationalism also owed much to modern technologies like the steamship railroad and telegraph which extended both the emotional range of fellow feeling and the geographical reach of centralized authority.
the convergence of these several nineteenth century developments intellectual as well as material made possible the creation of the virtual communities called nations.
count camillo di cavour 1810 1861 in the early nineteenth century only britain and france could claim to be nation states in the modern sense.
central europe remained a patchwork of major and minor principalities.
italy in the words of the austrian diplomat klemens von metternich was merely a geographic expression as several small duchies and overgrown city states uneasily coexisted on the italian peninsula.
canada a scattering of disconnected provinces was more a map makers convention than a functioning political entity.
both spain and japan looked united on the map but both notoriously lacked internal cohesion.
and in the united states sectional and state loyalties continued to compete with notions of a national identity.
but within just a dozen years between 1859 and 1871 prince otto von bismarck created modern germany count camillo di cavour united italy we have made italy now we must make italians quipped one italian wit a new meiji emperor launched japan on a dramatic program of rapid modernization the british north america act of 1867 forged a unied canada and the american civil war in abraham lincolns words gave the united states a new birth of freedom as a unied country as well as a signicantly invigorated federal government.
before the civil war prince otto von bismark 1815 1898 it was said the united states were after the civil war the united states was.
these several consolidations created the model for modern states that has prevailed ever since.
the rise of nationalism fostered the growth of unprecedentedly powerful governments able to command deep loyalty from millions of people and consequently to marshal enormous economic and military resources for good or ill.
nationalism was every where accompanied by some degree of political democratization and the expansion of public ser vices as freshly created or reinvigorated central governments sought to secure the loyalty of peoples newly brought under their sway.
bismarck for example supported universal suffrage and social insurance for german workers establishing precedents that would much later be adopted in the united states.
the new italy and meiji japan adopted fairly liberal voting laws and programs for universal education.
britains reform bill of 1867 enfranchised 1 5 million adult male urban householders effectively doubling the british electorate.
in the united states civil war era constitutional amendments at least nominally guaranteed the right to vote to adult african american males while the federal government adopted ambitious plans to facilitate the construction of transcontinental railroads distribute public lands under the homestead act and support higher education under the morrill land grant college act.
the civil war dened a historic pivot in the role of federal power.
of the twelve amendments to the constitution passed before 1865 eleven were designed to limit the authority of the federal government.
of the fteen amendments passed since the civil war nine contain the phrase congress shall have the power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation the words nation and native derive from the same latin root denoting birth or birthplace.
nationalism is at bottom a sentiment of common feeling or shared identity generally among people born in the same place.
it therefore implies boundaries territorial as well as psychological.
it denes who is included as well as who is excluded.
no nation imagines itself coterminous with mankind writes one scholar of nationalism.
it can breed exclusionary and nativist pathologies as well as chauvinism jingoism and imperialism.
the united states was no exception to these patterns.
nativists mounted increasingly effective antiimmigrant campaigns in the post civil war era beginning with the chinese exclusion act of 1882 and culminating in the highly restrictionist national origins act of 1924.
as germany and italy acquired colonies in africa and japan tightened its grip on taiwan korea and parts of manchuria the united states also joined the imperial scramble annexing the philippines puerto rico guam and samoa before the centurys end.
three nation builders count camillo di cavour 1810 1861 prince otto von bismarck 1815 1898 and abraham lincoln 1809 1865 while the two european aristocrats cavour and bismarck were creating the new nations of italy and germany respectively the lowborn lincoln was preserving american nationhood.
abraham lincoln 1809 1865 chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 shields between them and vindictive treatment by the victors.
the assassination unfortunately increased the bitterness in the north partly because of the fantastic rumor that jefferson davis had plotted it.
a few historians have argued that andrew johnson now president by bullet was crucied in lincolns stead.
the implication is that if the rail splitter had lived he would have suffered johnsons fate of being impeached by the embittered members of his own party who demanded harshness not forbearance toward the south.
the cruci xion thesis does not stand up under scrutiny.
lincoln no doubt would have clashed with congress in fact he had already found himself in some hot water.
the legislative branch normally struggles to win back the power that has been wrested from it by the executive in time of crisis.
but the surefooted and experienced lincoln could hardly have blundered into the same quicksands that engulfed johnson.
lincoln was a victorious president and there is no arguing with victory.
in addition to his powers of leadership re ned in the war crucible lincoln possessed in full mea sure tact sweet reasonableness and an uncommon amount of common sense.
andrew johnson hot tempered and impetuous lacked all of these priceless qualities.
prisoners from the front by winslow homer 1866 this celebrated painting reects the artists rsthand observations of the war.
homer brilliantly captured the enduring depths of sectional animosity.
the union ofcer somewhat disdainfully asserts his command of the situation the beaten and disarmed confederates exhibit an out at the elbows pride and deance.
fords theater with its tragic murder of lincoln set the stage for the wrenching ordeal of reconstruction.
the aftermath of the nightmare the civil war took a grisly toll in gore about as much as all of americas subsequent wars combined.
over 600 000 men died in action or of disease and in all over a million were killed or seriously wounded.
the number of dead amounting to 2 percent of the entire nations population greatly exceeded the number of americans killed in world war ii.
the modern equivalent would be a loss of some 6 million american lives.
to its lasting hurt the nation lost the cream of its young manhood and potential leadership.
in addition tens of thousands of babies went unborn because potential fathers were at the front.
direct monetary costs of the con ict totaled about 15 billion.
but this colossal gure does not include continuing expenses such as pensions and interest on the national debt.
the intangible costs dislocations disunities wasted energies lowered ethics blasted lives bitter memories and burning hates cannot be calculated.
the legacy of war nora august the fruits of emancipation an unidentied union soldier carved this ivory bust of the freedwoman nora august during the civil war.
note the elaborately braided hair a direct adaptation of a west african style.
the anonymous sculptor etched the following legend into the base of the statue carved from life.
retreat plantation.
presented to the nurses of darien ga in the year of our lord 1865.
nora august slave.
age 23 years.
purchased from the market st augustine florida april 17th 1860.
now a free woman the greatest constitutional decision of the century in a sense was written in blood and handed down at appomattox courthouse near which lee surrendered.
the extreme states righters were crushed.
the national government tested in the ery furnace of war emerged unbroken.
nullication and secession those twin nightmares of previous decades were laid to rest.
beyond doubt the civil war the nightmare of the republic was the supreme test of american democracy.
it nally answered the question in the words of lincoln at gettysburg whether a nation dedicated to such principles can long endure the preservation of democratic ideals though not an ofcially announced war aim was subconsciously one of the major objectives of the north.
victory for union arms also provided inspiration to the champions of democracy and liberalism the world over see thinking globally the era of nationalism pp.
the great eng lish reform bill of 1867 under which britain became a true political democracy was passed two years after the civil war ended.
american democracy had proved itself and its success was an additional argument used by the disfranchised british masses in securing similar blessings for themselves.
the lost cause of the south was lost but few americans today would argue that the result was not for the best.
the shameful cancer of slavery was sliced away by the sword and african americans were at last in a position to claim their rights to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
the nation was again united politically though for many generations still divided spiritually by the passions of the war.
grave dangers were averted by a union victory including the inde nite prolongation of the peculiar institution the unleashing of the slave power on weak caribbean neighbors and the transformation of the area from panama to hudson bay into an armed camp with several heavily armed and hostile states constantly snarling and sniping at one another.
america still had a long way to go to make the promises of freedom a reality for all its citizens black and white.
but emancipation laid the necessary groundwork and a united and democratic united states was free to ful ll its destiny as the dominant republic of the hemisphere and eventually of the world.
chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 chronology first battle of bull run grant takes fort henry and fort donelson battle of shiloh mcclellans peninsula campaign seven days battles second battle of bull run naval battle of merrimack virginia and monitor battle of antietam preliminary emancipation proclamation battle of fredericksburg northern army seizes new orleans shermans march through georgia grants wilderness campaign battle of cold harbor lincoln defeats mcclellan for presidency hampton roads conference lee surrenders to grant at appomattox lincoln assassinated thirteenth amendment ratied reform bill expands british electorate final emancipation proclamation battle of chancellorsville battle of gettysburg fall of vicksburg fall of port hudson key terms bull run manassas junction battle of 481 peninsula campaign 483 merrimack 486 monitor 486 bull run second battle of 487 antietam battle of 487 emancipation proclamation 487 thirteenth amendment 489 fredericksburg battle of 492 gettysburg battle of 492 gettysburg address 494 fort henry and fort donelson battle of 495 people to know shiloh battle of 495 vicksburg siege of 495 shermans march 497 congressional committee on the conduct of the war 499 copperheads 499 the man without a country 500 union party 500 wilderness campaign 502 appomattox courthouse 503 reform bill of 1867 509 thomas j.
stonewall jackson george b mcclellan robert e lee john pope a e burnside joseph fighting joe hooker george g meade george pickett ulysses s grant william tecumseh sherman salmon chase clement l vallandigham john wilkes booth varying viewpoints what were the consequences of the civil war.
w ith the end of the civil war in 1865 the united states was permanently altered despite the reunication of the union and the confederacy.
slavery was ofcially banned secession was a dead issue and industrial growth surged forward.
for the rst time the united states could securely consider itself a singular nation rather than a union of states.
though sectional differences remained there would be no return to the unstable days of precarious balancing between northern and southern interests.
with the unions victory power rested rmly with the north and it would orchestrate the future development of the country.
according to historian eric foner the war redrew the economic and political map of the country.
the constitutional impact of the terms of the union victory created some of the most far reaching transformations.
the rst twelve amendments to the constitution ratied before the war had all served to limit government power.
in contrast the thirteenth amendment which abolished slavery and the revolutionary fourteenth amendment which conferred citizenship and guaranteed civil rights to all those born in the united states marked unprecedented expansions of federal power.
historian james mcpherson has noted still other ways in which the civil war extended the authority of the central government.
it expanded federal powers of taxation.
it encouraged the government to develop the national banking system print currency and conscript an army.
it made the federal courts more inuential.
and through the freedmens bureau which aided former slaves in the south it insti tuted the rst federal social welfare agency.
with each of these actions the nation moved toward a more powerful federal government invested with the authority to protect civil rights aid its citizens and enforce laws in an aggressive manner that superseded state powers.
yet some scholars have disputed whether the civil war marked an absolute watershed in american history.
they correctly note that racial inequality scandalously persisted after the civil war despite the abolition of slavery and the supposed protections extended by federal civil rights legislation.
others have argued that the industrial growth of the post civil war era had its real roots in the jacksonian era and thus cannot be ascribed solely to war.
thomas cochran has even argued that the civil war may have retarded overall industrialization rather than advancing it.
regional differences between north and south endured moreover even down to the present day.
even so the argument that the civil war launched a modern america remains convincing.
the lives of americans white and black north and south were transformed by the war experience.
industry entered a period of unprecedented growth having been stoked by the transportation and military needs of the union army.
the emergence of new national legal and governmental institutions marked the birth of the modern american state.
all considered it is hard to deny that the end of the civil war brought one chapter of the nations history to a close while opening another.
chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 to learn more william blair virginias private war feeding body and soul in the confederacy 1861 1865 1998 david w blight frederick douglass civil war keeping faith in jubilee 1989 bruce catton this hallowed ground 1956 stephen crane the red badge of courage 1895 drew gilpin faust this republic of suffering death and the american civil war 2008 joseph glatthaar forged in battle the civil war alliance of black soldiers and white ofcers 1990 leon litwack been in the storm so long 1979 robert r mackey the uncivil war irregular warfare in the upper south 1861 1865 2004 reid mitchell the vacant chair the northern soldier leaves home 1993 geoffrey c ward the civil war an illustrated history 1990 bell i wiley the life of billy yank 1952 the life of johnny reb 1943 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 with malice toward none with charity for all with rmness in the right as god gives us to see the right let us strive on to nish the work we are in to bind up the nations wounds to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his widow and orphan to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations.
t he battle was done the buglers silent.
bone weary and bloodied the american people north and south now faced the staggering challenges of peace.
four questions loomed large.
how would the south physically devastated by war and socially revolutionized by emancipation be rebuilt.
how would liberated blacks fare as free men and women.
how would the southern states be reintegrated into the union.
and who would direct the process of reconstruction the southern states themselves the president or congress.
the problems of peace other questions also clamored for answers.
what should be done with the captured confederate ringleaders all of whom were liable to charges of treason.
during the war a popular northern song had been hang jeff davis to a sour apple tree and even innocent children had lisped it.
davis was temporarily clapped into irons during the early days of his two year imprisonment.
but he and his fellow conspirators were nally released partly because the odds were that no virginia jury would convict them.
all rebel leaders were nally pardoned by president johnson as a sort of christmas present in 1868.
but congress did not remove all remaining civil disabilities until thirty years later and only posthumously restored daviss citizenship more than a century later.
dismal indeed was the picture presented by the war racked south when the rattle of musketry faded.
not only had an age perished but a civilization had collapsed in both its economic and its social structure.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
