 Chapter 20 Political Realignments in the 1890s

Hardship and Heartache
 In June 1894, Susan Orcutt, a young farm woman from western Kansas, sat down to write the governor of her state a letter. She was desperate. The nation was in the midst of a devastating economic depression, and, like thousands of other people, she had no money and nothing to eat. “I take my Pen In hand to let you know that we are Starving to death,” she wrote. Hail had ruined the Orcutts’ crops, and none of the household could find work. “My Husband went away to find work and came home last night and told me that we would have to Starve. [H]e has bin in ten countys and did not Get no work. . . . I havent had nothing to Eat today and It is three oclock[.]” As bad as conditions were on the farms, they were no better in the cities. “There are thousands of homeless and starving men in the streets,” reported a journalist in Chicago in the winter of 1893. “I have seen more misery in this last week than I ever saw in my life before.” Charity societies and churches tried to help, but they could not handle the huge numbers of people who were

 in need. The records of the Massachusetts state medical examiner told a grim story: K.R., 29 Suicide by drowning Boston October 2, 1896 Out of work and despondent for a long while. Body found floating in the Charles [River]. F.S., 29 Suicide by arsenic Boston January 1, 1896 Much depressed for several weeks. Loss of employment. At 7:50 A.M. Jan. 1, she called her father and told him she had taken poison and wished to die. R.N., 23 Suicide by bullet wound of brain Boston June 22, 1896 Out of work. Mentally depressed. About 3 P . M . June 21 shot himself in right temple. . . . Left a letter explaining that he killed himself to save others the trouble of caring for him.

Homesteading on the Plains.


 Lasting until 1897, the depression was the decisive event of the decade. At its height, three million people were unemployed—fully 20 percent of the workforce. The human costs were enormous, even among the well-to-do. “They were for me years of simple Hell,” shattering “my whole scheme of life,” said Charles Francis Adams, Jr., the descendant of two American presidents. “I was sixty-three years old and a tired man when at last the effects of the 1893 convulsion wore themselves out.” ike the Great Depression of the 1930s that gave rise to the New Deal, the depression of the 1890s had profound and lasting effects. Bringing to a head many of the tensions that had been building in the society, it increased rural hostility toward the

L


 cities, brought about a bitter fight over the currency, and changed people’s thinking about government, unemployment, and reform. There were outbreaks of warfare between capital and labor; farmers demanded a fairer share of economic and social benefits; the new immigrants came under fresh attack. The depression of the 1890s changed the course of American history, as did another event of that decade: the war with Spain in 1898. Under the cruel impact of the depression, ideas changed in many areas, including a stronger impulse toward reform, a larger role for the presidency, and a call for help from many farmers and laborers. One of the most important of these areas was politics. A realignment of the American political system, which had been developing since the end of Reconstruction, finally reached its fruition in the 1890s, establishing new patterns that gave rise to the Progressive Era and lasted well into the twentieth century.



 CHAPTER 20

POLITICAL REALIGNMENTS IN THE 1890s

Politics of Stalemate
 Why was there a stalemate between Republicans and Democrats until the mid-1890s? Politics was a major fascination of the late nineteenth century, its mass entertainment and favorite sport. Political campaigns were events that involved the whole community, even though in most states only men could vote. During the weeks leading up to an election, there were rallies, parades, picnics, and torchlight processions. Millions of Americans read party newspapers, listened to three-hour speeches by party leaders, and in elections turned out in enormous numbers to vote. In the six presidential elections from 1876 to 1896, an average of almost 79 percent of the electorate voted, a higher percentage than voted before or after. White males made up the bulk of the electorate; until after the turn of the century, women could vote in national elections only in Wyoming, Utah, Idaho, and Colorado. The National Woman Suffrage Association sued early for the vote, but in 1875, the Supreme Court (Minor v. Happersett) upheld the power of the states to deny this right to women. On several occasions, Congress refused to pass a constitutional amendment for woman suffrage, and between 1870 and 1910, nearly a dozen states defeated referenda to grant women the vote. Black men were another group kept from the polls. In 1877, Georgia adopted the poll tax to make voters pay an annual tax for the right to vote. The technique, aimed at impoverished blacks, was quickly copied across the South. In 1882, South Carolina adopted the “eight box” law, soon copied elsewhere, that required ballots for separate offices to be placed in separate boxes, a difficult task for illiterate voters. In 1890, Mississippi required voters to be able to read and interpret the federal Constitution to the satisfaction of registration officials, all of them white. Such literacy tests, which the Supreme Court upheld in the case of Williams v. Mississippi (1898), excluded poor white voters as well as blacks. In 1898, Louisiana avoided the problem by adopting the famous “grandfather clause,” which used a literacy test to disqualify black voters but permitted men who had failed the test to vote anyway if their fathers and grandfathers had voted before 1867—a time, of course, when no blacks could vote. The number of black voters decreased dramatically. In 1896, there were 130,334 registered black voters in Louisiana; in 1904, there were 1,342.

The Party Deadlock
 The 1870s and 1880s were still dominated by the Civil War generation, the unusual group of people who rose to power in the turbulent 1850s. In both the North and South, they had ruled longer than most generations, with a consciousness that the war experience had set them apart. Five of the six presidents elected between 1865 and 1900 had served in the war, as had many civic, business, and religious leaders. In 1890, well over one million veterans of the Union army were still alive, and Confederate veterans numbered in the hundreds of thousands. Party loyalties—rooted in Civil War traditions, ethnic and religious differences, and perhaps class distinctions—were remarkably strong. Voters clung to their old parties, shifts were infrequent, and

 there were relatively few “independent” voters. Although linked to the defeated Confederacy, the Democrats revived quickly after the war. In 1874, they gained control of the House of Representatives, which they maintained for all but four of the succeeding twenty years. The Democrats rested on a less sectional base than the Republicans. Identification with civil rights and military rule cut Republican strength in the South, but the Democratic party’s principles of states’ rights, decentralization, and limited government won supporters everywhere. While Democrats wanted to keep government local and small, the Republicans pursued policies for the nation as a whole, in which government was an instrument to promote moral progress and material wealth. The Republicans passed the Homestead Act (1862), granted subsidies to the transcontinental railroads, and pushed other measures to encourage economic growth. They enacted legislation and constitutional amendments to protect civil rights. They advocated a high protective tariff as a tool of economic policy to keep out foreign products while “infant industries” grew. In national elections, sixteen states, mostly in New England and the North, consistently voted Republican; fourteen states, mostly in the South, consistently voted Democratic. Elections, therefore, depended on a handful of “doubtful” states, which could swing elections either way. These states—New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois—received special attention at election time. Politicians lavished money and time on them; presidential candidates usually came from them. From 1868 to 1912, eight of the nine Republican presidential candidates and six of the seven Democratic candidates came from the “doubtful” states, especially New York and Ohio. The two parties were evenly matched, and elections were closely fought. In three of the five presidential elections from 1876 to 1892, the victor won by less than 1 percent of the vote; in 1876 and 1888, the losing candidates actually had more popular votes than the winners but lost in the electoral college. Knowing that small mistakes could lose elections, politicians became extremely cautious. Only twice during these years did one party control both the presidency and the two houses of Congress—the Republicans in 1888 and the Democrats in 1892. Historians once believed that political leaders accomplished little between 1877 and 1900, but those who saw few achievements were looking in the wrong location. With the impeachment of Andrew Johnson, the authority of the presidency dwindled in relation to congressional strength. For the first time in many years, attention shifted away from Washington itself. North and South, people who were weary of the centralization brought on by war and Reconstruction looked first to state and local governments to deal with the problems of an urban-industrial society.

Experiments in the States
 Across the country, state bureaus and commissions were established to regulate the new industrial society. Many of the early commissions were formed to oversee the railroads, at the time the nation’s largest businesses. People who shipped goods over the railroads, especially farmers and merchants, wanted to end the policies of rate discrimination and other harmful practices. In 1869, Massachusetts

Politics of Stalemate


Read the Document


The Interstate Commerce


Act (1887)




 which created the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) to investigate and oversee railroad activities. The act outlawed rebates and pooling agreements, and the ICC became the prototype of the federal commissions that today regulate many parts of the economy.

Reestablishing Presidential Power


 The Interstate Commerce Act of 1887 was a federal law crafted to regulate the railroad industry and its anti-competitive practices. The Act created a regulatory agency, the Interstate Commerce Commission, which was empowered to investigate and oversee railroad activities.

 established the first commission to regulate the railroads; by 1900, twenty-eight states had taken such action. Most of the early commissions were advisory in nature. They collected statistics and published reports on rates and practices— serving, one commissioner said, “as a sort of lens” to focus public attention. Impatient with the results, legislatures in the Midwest and on the Pacific coast established commissions with greater power to fix rates, outlaw rebates, and investigate rate discrimination. These commissions, experimental in nature, served as models for later policy at the federal level. Illinois had one of the most thoroughgoing provisions. Responding to local merchants who were upset with existing railroad rate policies, the Illinois state constitution of 1870 declared railroads to be public highways and authorized the legislature to pass laws establishing maximum rates and preventing rate discrimination. In the important case of Munn v. Illinois (1877), the Supreme Court upheld the Illinois legislation, declaring that private property “affected with the public interest . . . must submit to being controlled by the public for the common good.” But the Court soon weakened that judgment. In the Wabash case of 1886 (Wabash, St. Louis, & Pacific Railway Co. v. Illinois), it narrowed the Munn ruling and held that states could not regulate commerce extending beyond their borders. Only Congress could. The Wabash decision turned people’s attention back to the federal government. It spurred Congress to pass the Interstate Commerce Act (1887),

 Johnson’s impeachment, the scandals of the Grant administrations, and the controversy surrounding the 1876 election weakened the presidency. During the last two decades of the nineteenth century, presidents fought to reassert their authority, and by 1900, under William McKinley, they had succeeded to a remarkable degree. The late 1890s, in fact, marked the birth of the modern powerful presidency. Rutherford B. Hayes entered the White House with his title clouded by the disputed election of 1876. Opponents called him “His Fraudulency” and “Rutherfraud B. Hayes,” but soon he began to reassert the authority of the presidency. Hayes worked for reform in the civil service, placed well-known reformers in high offices, and, ordering the last troops out of South Carolina and Louisiana, ended military Reconstruction. Committed to the gold standard— the only basis, Hayes thought, of a sound currency—in 1878 he vetoed a bill that called for the partial coinage of silver, but Congress passed this Bland-Allison Silver Purchase Act over his veto. James A. Garfield, a Union army hero and longtime member of Congress, succeeded Hayes. Winning by a handful of votes in 1880, he took office energetically, determined to unite the Republican party (which had been split by personality differences and disagreement over policy toward the tariff and the South), lower the tariff to cut taxes, and assert American economic and strategic interests in Latin America. Ambitious and eloquent, Garfield had looked forward to the presidency, yet within a few weeks he said to friends, “My God! What is there in this place that a man should ever want to get into it?” Office seekers, hordes of them, evoked Garfield’s anguish. Each one wanted a government job, and each one thought nothing of cornering the president on every occasion. The problem of government jobs also provoked a bitter fight with the powerful senator from New York, Roscoe Conkling, who resented some of Garfield’s choices. On the verge of victory over Conkling, Garfield planned to leave Washington on July 2, 1881, for a vacation in New England. Walking toward his train, he was shot in the back by Charles J. Guiteau, a deranged lawyer and disappointed office seeker. Suffering through the summer, Garfield died on September 19, 1881, and Vice President Chester A. Arthur—an ally of Senator Conkling—became president.

THE ELECTION OF 1880
Candidate Garfield Hancock Weaver 
Party
Republican
Democrat
Greenback


Popular
Vote
4,454,416
4,444,952
308,578


Electoral
Vote


 Arthur was a better president than many had expected. Deftly, he established his independence of Conkling. Conservative in outlook, he reversed Garfield’s foreign policy initiatives in



 CHAPTER 20

POLITICAL REALIGNMENTS IN THE 1890s

 Latin America, but he approved the construction of the modern American navy. Arthur worked to lower the tariff, and in 1883, with his backing, Congress passed the Pendleton Act to reform the civil service. In part a reaction to Garfield’s assassination, the act created a bipartisan Civil Service Commission to administer competitive examinations and appoint officeholders on the basis of merit. Initially, the act affected only about fourteen thousand of some one hundred thousand government offices, but it laid the basis for the later expansion of the civil service. In the election of 1884, Grover Cleveland, the Democratic governor of New York, narrowly defeated Republican nominee, James G. Blaine, largely because of the continuing divisions in the Republican party. The first Democratic president since 1861, Cleveland was slow and ponderous, known for his honesty, stubbornness, and hard work. His term in the White House from 1885 to 1889 reflected the Democratic party’s desire to curtail federal activities. Cleveland vetoed more than two-thirds of the bills presented to him, more than all his predecessors combined. Forthright and sincere, he brought a new respectability to a Democratic party still tainted by its link with secession. Working long into the night, he reviewed veterans’ pensions and civil service appointments. He continued Arthur’s naval construction program and forced railroad, lumber, and cattle companies to surrender millions of acres of fraudulently occupied public domain. Late in 1887, he devoted his annual message to an attack on the tariff, “the vicious, inequitable, and illogical source of unnecessary taxation,” and committed himself and the Democratic party to lowering the tariff. The Republicans accused him of undermining American industries, and in 1888, they nominated for the presidency Benjamin Harrison, a defender of the tariff. Cleveland garnered ninety thousand more popular votes than Harrison but won the electoral votes of only two northern states and the South. Harrison won the rest of the North, most of the “doubtful” states, and the election.

THE ELECTION OF 1884
Candidate Cleveland Blaine Butler St. John 
Party
Democrat
Republican
Greenback
Prohibition


Popular
Vote
4,874,986
4,851,981
175,370
150,369


Electoral
Vote


Republicans in Power:
The Billion-Dollar Congress
 How did the Republican party’s vision shape the “Billion-Dollar Congress”? Despite Harrison’s narrow margin, the election of 1888 was the most sweeping victory for either party in almost twenty years; it gave the Republicans the presidency and both houses of Congress. The Republicans, it seemed, had broken the party stalemate and become the majority party in the country. Democratic leaders hoped not, and, eager to embarrass the Republicans and block Republican-sponsored laws, the Democrats

Election of 1888
Electoral Vote by State


Popular Vote


REPUBLICAN
Benjamin Harrison 


5,439,853


DEMOCRATIC
Grover Cleveland 


5,540,309


396,441


MINOR PARTIES

WASH. TERR.



MONTANA TERR.

IDAHO TERR.

11,376,603


DAKOTA TERR.



WYO. TERR.

ARIZ. TERR.





NEW MEXICO TERR.

INDIAN TERR.





























UTAH TERR.













 in Congress used minority tactics, especially the “disappearing quorum” rule, which let members of the House of Representatives join in debate but then refuse to answer the roll call to determine whether a quorum was present. For two months, the Democrats used the rule to bring Congress to a halt. The Republicans grew angry and impatient. On January 29, 1890, they fell two votes short of a quorum, and Speaker of the House Thomas B. Reed, a crusty veteran of Maine politics, made congressional history. “The Chair,” he said, “directs the Clerk to record the following names of members present and refusing to vote.” Democrats shouted “Czar! Czar!”, a title that stuck to Reed for the rest of his life. Tumult continued for days, but in mid-February 1890, the Republicans adopted the Reed rules and proceeded to enact the party’s program.

Tariffs, Trusts, and Silver
 As if a dam had burst, law after law poured out of the Republican Congress during 1890. The Republicans passed the McKinley Tariff Act, which raised tariff duties about 4 percent, higher than ever before; it also included a novel reciprocity provision that allowed the president to lower duties if other countries did the same. In addition, the act used duties to promote new industries, such as tinplate for packaging the new “canned” foods appearing on grocery store shelves. A Dependent Pensions Act granted pensions to Union army veterans and their widows and children. The pensions were modest—$6 to $12 a month—but the number of pensioners doubled by 1893, when nearly one million individuals received about $160 million in pensions.

Republicans in Power: The Billion-Dollar Congress


Read the Document




 Workingman’s Amalgamated Sherman Anti-Trust (1893)

 Congress passed the Sherman Anti-Trust Act in 1890, which authorized federal action against any “combination in the form of trusts or otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade.” Though the act was envisioned as a way to control big business, its wording was sufficiently vague as to allow the federal government to use this law against labor unions, which many people considered to be combinations.

 With little debate, the Republicans and Democrats joined in passing the Sherman Antitrust Act, the first federal attempt to regulate big business. As the initial attempt to deal with the problem of trusts and industrial growth, the act shaped all later antitrust policy. It declared illegal “every contract, combination in the form of trust or otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce.” Penalties for violation were stiff, including fines and imprisonment and the dissolution of guilty trusts. Experimental in nature, the act’s terms were often vague and left precise interpretation to later experience and the courts. One of the most important laws Congress passed, the Sherman Antitrust Act made the United States virtually the only industrial nation to regulate business combinations. It tried to harness big business without harming it. Many members of Congress did not expect the new law to have much effect on businesses, and for a decade, in fact, it did not. The Justice Department rarely filed suit under it, and in the United States v. E. C. Knight Co. decision (1895), the first judicial interpretation of the law, the Supreme Court severely crippled it. Though the E. C. Knight Co. controlled 98 percent of all sugar refining in the country, the Court drew a sharp distinction between commerce and manufacturing, holding that the company, as a

 manufacturer, was not subject to the law. But judicial interpretations changed after the turn of the century, and the Sherman Antitrust Act gained fresh power. Another measure, the Sherman Silver Purchase Act, tried to end the troublesome problem presented by silver. As one of the two most commonly used precious metals, silver had once played a large role in currencies around the world, but by the mid-1800s, it had slipped into disuse. With the discovery of the great bonanza mines in Nevada, American silver production quadrupled between 1870 and 1890, glutting the world market, lowering the price of silver, and persuading many European nations to demonetize silver in favor of the scarcer metal, gold. The United States kept a limited form of silver coinage with congressional passage of the Bland-Allison Act in 1878. Support for silver coinage was especially strong in the South and West, where people thought it might inflate the currency, raise wages and crop prices, and challenge the power of the gold-oriented Northeast. Eager to avert the free coinage of silver, which would require the coinage of all silver presented at the U.S. mints, President Harrison and other Republican leaders pressed for a compromise that took shape in the Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890.



 CHAPTER 20

POLITICAL REALIGNMENTS IN THE 1890s

 The act directed the Treasury to purchase 4.5 million ounces of silver a month and to issue legal tender in the form of Treasury notes in payment for it. The act was a compromise; it satisfied both sides. Opponents of silver were pleased that it did not include free coinage. Silverites, on the other hand, were delighted that the monthly purchases would buy up most of the country’s silver production. The Treasury notes, moreover, could be cashed for either gold or silver at the bank, a gesture toward a true bimetallic system based on silver and gold. As a final measure, Republicans in the House courageously passed a federal elections bill to protect the voting rights of blacks in the South. Although restrained in language and intent, it set off a storm of denunciation among the Democrats, who called it a “force bill” that would station army troops in the South. Because of the outcry, the bill failed in the Senate; it was the last major effort until the 1950s to enforce the Fifteenth Amendment to the Constitution.

The 1890 Elections
 The Republican Congress of 1890 was one of the most important Congresses in American history. It passed a record number of significant laws that helped shape later policy and asserted the authority of the federal government to a degree the country would not then accept. Sensing the public reaction, the Democrats labeled it the “Billion-Dollar Congress” for spending that much in appropriations and grants. “This is a billion-dollar country,” Speaker Reed replied, but the voters disagreed. The 1890 elections crushed the Republicans, who lost an extraordinary seventy-eight seats in the House. The elections also crushed Republicans in the Midwest, where, again enlarging government authority, they had passed state laws prohibiting the sale of alcoholic beverages, requiring the closing of businesses on Sunday, and mandating the use of English in the public and parochial schools. Roman Catholics, German Lutherans, and other groups resented such laws, which they saw as a direct attack on their religion and personal freedoms, and they angrily deserted the Republicans. Political veterans went down to defeat, and new leaders vaulted into sudden prominence. Nebraska elected a Democratic governor for the first time in its history. The state of Iowa, once so staunchly Republican that a local leader had predicted that “Iowa will go Democratic when Hell goes Methodist,” went Democratic in 1890.

The Rise of the Populist Movement
 What factors led to the formation and growth of the Farmers’ Alliance and People’s party? The elections of 1890 drew attention to a fast-growing movement among farmers that soon came to be known far and wide as populism. The movement had begun rather quietly, in places distant from normal centers of attention, and for a time it went almost unnoticed in the press. But during the summer of 1890, wagonloads of farm families in the South and West converged on campgrounds and picnic areas to socialize

 and discuss common problems. They came by the thousands, weary of drought, mortgages, and low crop prices. At the campgrounds, they picnicked, talked, and listened to recruiters from an organization called the National Farmers’ Alliance and Industrial Union, which promised unified action to solve agricultural problems. Farmers were joining the Alliance at the rate of 1,000 a week; the Kansas Alliance alone claimed 130,000 members in 1890. The summer of 1890 became “that wonderful picnicking, speech-making Alliance summer,” a time of fellowship and spirit long remembered by farmers.

The Farm Problem
 Farm discontent was a worldwide phenomenon between 1870 and 1900. With the new means of transportation and communication, farmers everywhere were caught up in a complex international market they neither controlled nor entirely understood. American farmers complained bitterly about declining prices for their products, rising railroad rates for shipping them, and burdensome mortgages. Some of their grievances were valid. Farm profits were certainly low; agriculture in general tends to produce low profits because of the ease of entry into the industry. The prices of farm commodities fell between 1865 and 1890—corn sold at sixty-three cents a bushel in 1881 and twenty-eight cents in 1890— but they did not fall as low as did other commodity prices. Despite the fact that farmers received less for their crops, their purchasing power actually increased. Neither was the farmers’ second grievance—rising railroad rates—entirely justified. Railroad rates actually fell during these years, benefiting shippers of all products. Farm mortgages, the farmers’ third grievance, were common because many farmers mortgaged their property to expand their holdings or buy new farm machinery. While certainly burdensome, most mortgages did not bring hardship. They were often short, with a term of four years or less, after which farmers could renegotiate at new rates, and the new machinery the farmers bought enabled them to triple their output and increase their income. The terms of the farm problem varied from area to area and year to year. New England farmers suffered from overworked land; farmers in western Kansas and Nebraska went broke in a severe drought that followed a period of unusual rainfall. Many southern farmers were trapped in the crop lien system that kept them in debt. They called it the “anaconda” system because of the way it coiled slowly and tightly around them. Some farmers did have valid grievances, though many understandably tended to exaggerate them. More important, many farmers were sure their condition had declined, and this perception—as bitterly real as any actual fact—sparked a growing anger. Equally upsetting, everyone in the 1870s and 1880s seemed excited about factories, not farms. Farmers had become “hayseeds,” a word that first appeared in 1889, and they watched their offspring leave for city lights and new careers. A literature of disillusionment emerged, most notably Hamlin Garland’s Son of the Middle Border (1890) and Main-Travelled Roads (1891), which described the drabness of farm life.

The Rise of the Populist Movement




SELECTED COMMODITY PRICES
Dollars per bushel 
 Cents per pound

2.00
10.50
1.80
Cotton, 1876–1900


9.50


Wheat, 1866–1900
1.60


8.50


1.40
1.20


7.50


1.00
6.50
.80
5.50


.60












1876 1880










Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970, Bicentennial Edition, Washington, DC, 1975.


The Fast-Growing Farmers’ Alliance
 Originally a social organization for farmers, the Grange lost many of its members as it turned more and more toward politics in the late 1870s. In its place, a multitude of farm societies sprang into existence. By the end of the 1880s, they had formed into two major organizations: the National Farmers’ Alliance, located on the plains west of the Mississippi and known as the Northwestern Alliance, and the Farmers’ Alliance and Industrial Union, based in the South and known as the Southern Alliance. The Southern Alliance began in Texas in 1875 but did not assume major proportions until Dr. Charles W. Macune, an energetic and farsighted person, took over the leadership in 1886. Rapidly expanding, the Alliance absorbed other agricultural societies. Its agents spread across the South, where farmers were fed up with crop liens, depleted lands, and sharecropping. They “seem like unto ripe fruit,” an Alliance organizer said; “you can garner them by a gentle shake of the bush.” In 1890, the Southern Alliance claimed more than a million members. It welcomed to membership the farmers’ “natural friends”—country doctors, schoolteachers, preachers, and mechanics. It excluded lawyers, bankers, cotton merchants, and warehouse operators. An effective organization, the Southern Alliance published a newspaper and distributed Alliance material to hundreds of local newspapers, and in five years it sent lecturers to forty-three states and territories where they spoke to two million farm families. It was “the most massive organizing drive by any citizen institution of nineteenth-century America.” Like the Grange, the Alliance also established cooperative grain elevators, marketing associations, and retail stores—all designed to bring farmers together to make greater profits. Most of the projects were short-lived, but for a time, between 1886 and 1892, cooperative enterprises blossomed in the South.

 Loosely affiliated with the Southern Alliance, a separate Colored Farmers’ National Alliance and Cooperative Union enlisted black farmers in the South. Claiming more than one million members, it probably had closer to 250,000, but even that figure was sizable in an era when “uppity” blacks faced not merely defeat, but death. In 1891, black cotton pickers struck for higher wages near Memphis, Tennessee. Led by Ben Patterson, a 30-year-old picker, they walked off several plantations, but a posse hunted them down and, following violence on both sides, lynched fifteen strikers, including Patterson. The abortive strike ended the Colored Farmers’ Alliance. On the plains, the Northwestern Alliance, a smaller organization, was formed in 1880. Its objectives were similar to those of the Southern Alliance, but it disagreed with the Southerners’ emphasis on secrecy, centralized control, and separate organizations for blacks. In 1889, the Southern Alliance changed its name to the National Farmers’ Alliance and Industrial Union and persuaded the three strongest state alliances on the plains—those in North Dakota, South Dakota, and Kansas—to join. Thereafter, the renamed organization dominated the Alliance movement. The Alliance mainly sponsored social and economic programs, but it turned early to politics. In the West, its leaders rejected both the Republicans and Democrats and organized their own party; in June 1890, Kansas Alliance members formed the first major People’s party. The Southern Alliance resisted the idea of a new party for fear it might divide the white vote, thus undercutting white supremacy. Thomas E. Watson and Leonidas L. Polk, two politically minded Southerners, reflected the high quality of Alliance leadership. Georgia born, Watson was a talented orator and organizer; he urged Georgia farmers, black and white, to unite against their oppressors.



 CHAPTER 20

POLITICAL REALIGNMENTS IN THE 1890s

Read the Document


Proceedings of Grange Session (1879)


 The Alliance movement grew quickly in the late 1800s among discontented farmers. This photograph shows Southern Alliance members meeting at the cabin that was the site of their first formal meeting in 1877 in Lampasas County, Texas. The cabin was later uprooted and exhibited at the World’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 1893.

 The president of the National Farmers’ Alliance, Polk believed in scientific farming and cooperative action. Jeremiah Simpson of Kansas, probably the most able of the western leaders, was reflective and well read. A follower of reformer Henry George, he pushed for major social and economic change. Also from Kansas, Mary E. Lease helped head a movement remarkably open to female leadership. A captivating speaker, she made 160 speeches during the summer of 1890, calling on farmers to rise against Wall Street and the industrial East. Meeting in Ocala, Florida, in 1890, the Alliance adopted the Ocala Demands, the platform the organization pushed as long as it existed. First and foremost, the demands called for the creation of a “sub-treasury system,” which would allow farmers to store their crops in government warehouses. In return, they could claim Treasury notes for up to 80 percent of the local market value of the crop, a loan to be repaid when the crops were sold. Farmers could thus hold their crops for the best price. The Ocala Demands also urged the free coinage of silver, an end to protective tariffs and national banks, a federal income tax, the direct election of senators by voters instead of state legislatures, and tighter regulation of railroad companies.

 The Alliance strategy worked well in the elections of 1890. In Kansas, the Alliance-related People’s party, organized just a few months before, elected four congressmen and a U.S. senator. Across the South, the Alliance won victories based on the “Alliance yardstick,” a demand that Democratic party candidates pledge support for Alliance measures. Alliance leaders claimed thirty-eight Alliance supporters elected to Congress, with at least a dozen more pledged to Alliance principles.

 The People’s Party After the 1890 elections, Northern Alliance leaders urged the formation of a national third party to promote reform, although the Southerners remained reluctant, still hopeful of capturing control of the Democratic party. Plans for a new party were discussed at Alliance conventions in 1891 and the following year. In July 1892, a convention in Omaha, Nebraska, formed the new People’s (or Populist) party. Southern Alliance leaders joined in, convinced now that there was no reason to cooperate with



The Rise of the Populist Movement


Read the Document


Mary E. Lease, The
Populist Crusader (1892)


 to attract more than a million. He carried Kansas, Idaho, Nevada, and Colorado, along with portions of North Dakota and Oregon, for a total of twenty-two electoral votes, a measure of agrarian unrest. The Populists elected governors in Kansas and North Dakota, ten congressmen, five senators, and about fifteen hundred members of state legislatures. Despite the Populists’ victories, the election brought disappointment. Southern Democrats used intimidation, fraud, and manipulation to hold down Populist votes. Weaver was held to less than a quarter of the vote in every southern state except Alabama. In most of the country, he lost heavily in urban areas, with the exception of some mining towns in the Far West. He also failed to win over most farmers. In no midwestern state except Kansas and North Dakota did he win as much as 5 percent of the vote. In the election of 1892, many voters switched parties, but they tended to realign with the Democrats rather than the Populists, whose platform on silver and other issues had relatively little appeal among city dwellers or factory workers. Although the Populists did run candidates in the next three presidential elections, they had reached their peak in 1892. That year, Farmers’ Alliance membership dropped for the second year in a row, and the organization, which was once the breeding ground of the People’s party, was broken. While it lived, the Alliance was one of the most powerful protest movements in American history. Catalyzing the feelings of hundreds of thousands of farmers, it attempted to solve specific economic problems while at the same time advancing a larger

Read the Document
 Populist Mary E. Lease advised farmers to “raise less corn and more hell.” She also said, “If one man has not enough to eat three times a day and another man has $25 million, that last man has something that belongs to the first.”

Ocala Platform 1890


Election of 1892
Electoral Vote by State


Popular Vote


DEMOCRATIC*
Grover Cleveland 


5,556,918


REPUBLICAN
Benjamin Harrison 


5,176,108


PEOPLE'S (POPULIST)
James B. Weaver 


1,027,329


Source: Kansas State Historical Society.


 the Democrats who exploited Alliance popularity but failed to adopt its reforms. In the South, some Populists had worked to unite black and white farmers. “They are in the ditch just like we are,” a white Texas Populist said. Blacks and whites served on Populist election committees; they spoke from the same platforms, and they ran on the same tickets. Populist sheriffs called blacks for jury duty, an unheard-of practice in the close-of-the-century South. In 1892, a black Populist was threatened with lynching; he took refuge with Tom Watson, and two thousand white farmers, some of whom rode all night to get there, guarded Watson’s house until the threat passed. Many of the delegates at the Omaha convention had planned to nominate Leonidas L. Polk for president, but he died suddenly in June, and the convention turned instead to James B. Weaver of Iowa, a former congressman, Union army general, and third-party candidate for president in 1880 (on the Greenback-Labor party ticket). As its platform, the People’s party adopted many of the Ocala Demands. Weaver waged an active campaign but with mixed results. He won 1,027,329 votes, the first third-party presidential candidate ever

264,133


MINOR PARTIES

12,024,488


 *Electors classed as Democratic were in many states elected on joint Democratic and People's party tickets.



1 1




















UTAH TERR.



NEW ARIZ. TERR. MEXICO TERR.



OKLA. TERR.















INDIAN TERR.

































 CHAPTER 20

POLITICAL REALIGNMENTS IN THE 1890s

 vision of harmony and community, in which people who cared about each other were rewarded for what they produced.

The Crisis of the Depression
 What were the main political and labor effects of the panic and depression of the 1890s? It was economic crisis, however, not harmony and community, that dominated the last decade of the century. Responding to the heady forces of industrialization, the American economy had expanded too rapidly in the 1870s and 1880s. Railroads had overbuilt, gambling on future growth. Companies had grown beyond their markets; farms and businesses had borrowed heavily for expansion.

The Panic of 1893
 The mood changed early in 1893. In mid-February, panic suddenly hit the New York stock market. In one day, investors dumped one million shares of a leading company, the Philadelphia and Reading Railroad, and it went bankrupt. Business investment dropped sharply in the railroad and construction industries, touching off the worst economic downturn to that point in the country’s history. Frightened, people hurriedly sold stocks and other assets to buy gold. The overwhelming demand depleted the gold reserve of the U.S. Treasury. Eroding almost daily, in March 1893, the Treasury’s reserve slumped toward the $100 million mark, an amount that stood for the government’s commitment to maintain the gold standard. On April 22, for the first time since the 1870s, the reserve fell below $100 million. The news shattered business confidence—the stock market broke. On Wednesday, May 3, railroad and industrial stocks plummeted, and the next day, several major firms went bankrupt. When the market opened on Friday, crowds filled its galleries, anticipating a panic. Within minutes, leading stocks plunged to record lows, and there was pandemonium on the floor and in the streets outside. May 5, 1893, Wall Street’s worst day until the Great Crash of 1929, became “Industrial Black Friday,” “a day of terrible strain long remembered on the market.” Afterward, banks cut back on loans. Unable to get capital, businesses failed at an average rate of two dozen a day during the month of May. “The papers are full of failures—banks are breaking all over the country, and there is a tremendous contraction of credits and hoarding of money going on everywhere,” an observer noted. On July 26, the Erie Railroad, one of the leading names in railroading history, failed. August 1893 was the worst month. Across the country, factories and mines shut down. On August 15, the Northern Pacific Railroad went bankrupt; the Union Pacific and the Santa Fe soon followed. Some economists estimated unemployment at two million people, or nearly 15 percent of the labor force. During 1893, fifteen thousand business firms and more than six hundred banks closed. The year 1894 was even worse. The gross national product dropped again, and by midyear the number of unemployed stood at three million. One out of every five workers was unemployed. “Famine is in our midst,” said the head of one city’s relief committee. In the summer, a heat wave and drought struck the farm

 belt west of the Mississippi River, creating conditions unmatched until the devastating Dust Bowl of the 1930s. Corn withered in the fields. In the South, the price of cotton fell below five cents a pound, far under the break-even point. People became restless and angry. As one newspaper said in 1896: “On every corner stands a man whose fortune in these dull times has made him an ugly critic of everything and everybody.” There was even talk of revolution and bloodshed. “Everyone scolds,” Henry Adams, the historian, wrote a British friend. “Everyone also knows what ought to be done. Everyone reviles everyone who does not agree with him, and everyone differs, or agrees only in contempt for everyone else. As far as I can see, everyone is right.”

 Coxey’s Army and the Pullman Strike Some of the unemployed wandered across the country—singly, in small groups, and in small armies. During 1894, there were some fourteen hundred strikes involving more than a half million workers. On Easter Sunday 1894, an unusual “army” of perhaps three hundred people left Massillon, Ohio. At its head rode “General” Jacob S. Coxey, a mild-looking middle-aged businessman who wanted to put the nation’s jobless to work building roads. Coxey wanted Congress to pass the Coxey Good Roads bill, which would authorize the printing of $500 million in paper money to finance road construction. His march to Washington—“a petition in boots,” he called it—drew nationwide attention. Other armies sprang up around the country, and all headed for Washington to persuade the government to provide jobs on irrigation, road construction, or other projects. In the West, they commandeered freight trains and headed east. Coxey himself reached Washington on May 1, 1894, after a difficult, tiring march. Police were everywhere, lining the streets and blocking the approaches to the Capitol. Coxey made it to the foot of the Capitol steps, but before he could do anything, the police were on him. He and a companion were clubbed, then arrested for trespassing. A week later, Coxey was sentenced to twenty days in jail. The armies melted away, but discontent did not. The great Pullman strike —one of the largest strikes in the country’s history—began just a few days after Coxey’s arrest when the employees of the Pullman Palace Car Company, living in a company town just outside Chicago (a town in which everything was owned and meted out by the company), struck to protest wage cuts, continuing high rents, and layoffs. On June 26, 1894, the American Railway Union (ARU) under Eugene V. Debs joined the strike by refusing to handle trains that carried Pullman sleeping cars. Within hours, the strike paralyzed the western half of the nation. Grain and livestock could not reach markets. Factories shut down for lack of coal. The strike extended into twenty-seven states and territories, tying up the economy and renewing talk of class warfare. In Washington, President Grover Cleveland, who had been reelected to the presidency in 1892, decided to break the strike on the grounds that it obstructed delivery of the mail. On July 2, he secured a court injunction against the ARU, and he ordered troops to Chicago. When they arrived on the morning of Independence Day, the city was peaceful. Before long, however, violence broke out, and mobs, composed mostly of nonstrikers,

The Crisis of the Depression


Read the Document


Jacob S. Coxey, “Address


 of Protest” (1894)

 Coxey’s army is shown here entering Washington, D.C. Jacob Coxey was arrested for trespassing on the lawn surrounding the U.S. Capitol. On the fiftieth anniversary of his march to Washington, Coxey was permitted to finish the speech that had been interrupted by his arrest in 1894.

 overturned freight cars, looted, and burned. Restoring order, the army occupied railroad yards in Illinois, California, and other places. By late July, the strike was over; Debs was jailed for violating the injunction. Many people applauded Cleveland’s action, “nominally for the expedition of the mails,” a newspaper said, but “really for the preservation of society.” The Pullman strike had far-reaching consequences for the development of the labor movement. Working people resented Cleveland’s actions in the strike, particularly as it became apparent that he sided with the railroads. Upholding Debs’s sentence in In re Debs (1895), the Supreme Court endorsed the use of the injunction in labor disputes, thus giving business and government an effective antilabor weapon that hindered union growth in the 1890s. The strike’s failure catapulted Debs into prominence. During his time in jail, he turned to socialism, and after his release, he worked to build the Socialist Party of America, which experienced some success after 1900.

The Miners of the Midwest
 The plight of coal miners in the Midwest illustrated the personal and social impact of the depression. Even in the best of times, mining was a dirty and dangerous business. One miner in twelve died underground; one in three suffered injury. Mines routinely closed for as long as six months a year, and wages fell with the depression.



 Midwestern mining was often a family occupation, passed down from father to son. It demanded delicate judgments about when to blast, where to follow a seam, and how to avoid rockfalls. Until 1890, English and Irish immigrants dominated the business. They migrated from mine to mine, and they nearly always lived in flimsy shacks owned by the company. Time and again the miners struck for higher wages—between 1887 and 1894, there were 116 major coal strikes in Illinois, 111 in Ohio. After 1890, immigration from southern and eastern Europe, hitherto a trickle, became a flood. Italians, Lithuanians, Poles, Slovaks, Magyars, Russians, Bohemians, and Croatians came to the mines to find work. In three years, nearly one thousand Italians settled in Coal City, Illinois; they comprised more than one-third of the population. In other mining towns, Italian and Polish miners soon made up almost half the population. As the depression deepened, tensions grew between miners and their employers and between “old” miners and the “new.” Many new miners spoke no English, and often they were “birds of passage,” transients who had come to the United States to make money to take back home. Lacking the skills handed down by the old miners, they were often blamed for accidents, and they worked longer hours for less pay. At many a tavern after work, old miners grumbled about the different-looking newcomers and considered ways to get rid of them. In April 1894, a wave of wage reductions sparked an explosion of labor unrest in the mines. The United Mine Workers, a struggling union formed just four years earlier, called for a strike of bituminous coal miners, and on April 21, virtually all midwestern and Pennsylvania miners—some 170,000 in all—quit working. The flow of crucial coal slackened; cities faced blackouts; factories closed. The violence that soon broke out followed a significant pattern. Over the years, the English and Irish miners had built up a set of unspoken understandings with their employers. The new miners had not, and they were more prone to violent action to win a strike. The depression hit them especially hard, frustrating their plans to earn money and return home. In many areas, anger and frustration turned the 1894 strikes into outright war. For nearly two weeks in June 1894, fighting rocked the Illinois, Ohio, and Indiana coalfields. Mobs ignited mine shafts, dynamited coal trains, and defied state militias. While miners of all backgrounds participated in the violence, it often divided old miners and new. In Spring Valley, Illinois, exiled Italian anarchists took over the strike leadership and incited rioting despite the opposition of the old miners. Elsewhere, a mine fired by arsonists burned because the new miners prevented the old ones from extinguishing the blaze. Shocked by the violence, public opinion shifted against the strikers. The strike ended in a matter of weeks, but its effects lingered. English and Irish miners moved out into other jobs or up into supervisory positions. Jokes and songs poked cruel fun at the new immigrants, and the Pennsylvania and Illinois legislatures adopted laws to keep them out of the mines. Thousands of old miners voted Populist in 1894—the Populist platform called for restrictions on immigration—in one of the Populists’ few successes that year. The United Mine Workers, dominated by the older miners, began in 1896 to urge Congress to stop the “demoralizing effects” of immigration.



 CHAPTER 20

POLITICAL REALIGNMENTS IN THE 1890s

 Occurring at the same time, the Pullman strike pulled attention away from the crisis in the coalfields, yet the miners’ strike involved three times as many workers and provided a revealing glimpse of the tensions within American society. The miners of the Midwest were the first large group of skilled workers seriously affected by the flood of immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. Buffeted by depression, they reflected the social and economic discord that permeated every industry.

A
Beleaguered President  Building on the Democratic party’s sweeping triumph in the midterm elections of 1890, Grover Cleveland decisively defeated the Populist candidate, James B. Weaver, and the incumbent president, Benjamin Harrison, in 1892. He won by nearly four hundred thousand votes, a large margin by the standards of the era, and the Democrats increased their strength in the cities and among working-class voters. For the first time since the 1850s, they controlled the White House and both branches of Congress. The Democrats, it now seemed, had broken the party stalemate, but unfortunately for Cleveland, the Panic of 1893 struck almost as he took office. He was sure that he knew its cause. The Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890, he believed, had damaged business confidence, drained the Treasury’s gold reserve, and caused the panic. The solution to the depression was equally simple: repeal the act. In June 1893, Cleveland summoned Congress into special session. India had just closed its mints to silver, and Mexico was now the only country in the world with free silver coinage. The silverites were on the defensive, although they pleaded for a compromise. Rejecting the pleas, Cleveland pushed the repeal bill through Congress, and on November 1, 1893, he signed it into law. Always sure of himself, he had staked everything on a single measure—a winning strategy if he succeeded, a devastating one if he did not. Repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act was probably a necessary action. It responded to the realities of international finance, reduced the flight of gold out of the country, and, over the long run, boosted business confidence. Unfortunately, it contracted the currency at a time when inflation might have helped. It did not bring economic revival. The stock market remained listless, businesses continued to close, unemployment spread, and farm prices dropped. “We are hourly expecting the arrival of the benevolent man who is to pay ten cents a pound for cotton,” a Virginia newspaper said. The repeal battle of 1893, discrediting the conservative Cleveland Democrats who had dominated the party since the 1860s, reshaped the politics of the country. It confined the Democratic party largely to the South, helped the Republicans become the majority party in 1894, and strengthened the position of the silver Democrats in their bid for the presidency in 1896. It also focused national attention on the silver issue and thus intensified the silver sentiment Cleveland had intended to dampen. In the end, repeal did not even solve the Treasury’s gold problem. By January 1894, the reserve had fallen to $65 million. A year later, it fell to $44.5 million. In January 1894, Cleveland desperately resorted to a sale of $50 million in gold bonds to replenish the gold reserve. The

 following November, he again sold bonds, and in February 1895, arousing outrage among many, he agreed to a third bond sale that allowed financier J. Pierpont Morgan and other bankers to reap large profits. A fourth bond sale in January 1896 also failed to stop the drain on the reserve, although it further sharpened the silverites’ hatred of President Cleveland. Still another blow to the morale of the Democrats came in 1894, when they tried to fulfill their long-standing promise to reduce the tariff. Despite all their efforts, the Wilson-Gorman Tariff Act, passed by Congress in August 1894, contained only modest reductions in duties. It reduced the tariff on coal, iron ore, wool, and sugar, ended the McKinley Tariff Act’s popular reciprocity agreements with other countries, and moved some duties higher than ever before. It also imposed a small income tax, a provision the Supreme Court overturned in 1895 (Pollock v. Farmer’s Loan and Trust Co.). Very few Democrats, including Cleveland, were pleased with the measure, and the president let it become law without his signature.

Breaking the Party Deadlock
 The Democrats were buried in the elections of 1894. Suffering the greatest defeat in congressional history, they lost 113 House seats, while the Republicans gained 117. In twenty-four states, not a single Democrat was elected to Congress. Only one Democrat (Boston’s John F. Fitzgerald, the grandfather of President John F. Kennedy) came from all of New England. The Democrats even lost some of the “solid South,” and in the Midwest, a crucial battleground of the 1890s, the party was virtually destroyed. Wooing labor and the unemployed, the Populists made striking inroads in parts of the South and West, yet their progress was far from enough. In a year in which thousands of voters switched parties, the People’s party elected only four senators and four congressmen. Southern Democrats again used fraud and violence to keep the Populists’ totals down. In the Midwest, the Populists won double the number of votes they had received in 1892, yet still attracted less than 7 percent of the vote. Across the country, the discontented tended to vote for the Republicans, not the Populists, a discouraging sign for the Populist party. For millions of people, Grover Cleveland became a scapegoat for the country’s economic ills. The Democratic party split, and southern and western Democrats deserted him in droves. At Democratic conventions, Cleveland’s name evoked jeers. “He is an old bag of beef,” Democratic Congressman “Pitchfork” Ben Tillman told a South Carolina audience, “and I am going to go to Washington with a pitchfork and prod him in his old fat ribs.” The elections of 1894 marked the end of the party deadlock that had existed since the 1870s. The Democrats lost, the Populists gained somewhat, and the Republicans became the majority party in the country. In the midst of the depression, the Republican doctrines of activism and national authority, which voters had repudiated in the elections of 1890, became more attractive. This was a development of great significance, because as Americans became more accepting of the use of government power to regulate the economy and safeguard individual welfare, the way lay open to the reforms of the Progressive Era, the New Deal, and beyond.

Changing Attitudes


Changing Attitudes
 What changes in outlook did the panic and depression of the 1890s bring about? The depression, brutal and far reaching, did more than shift political alignments. Across the country, it undermined traditional views and caused people to rethink older ideas about government, the economy, and society. As men and women concluded that established ideas had failed to deal with the depression, they looked for new ones. There was, the president of the University of Wisconsin said, “a general, all-pervasive, restless discontent with the results of current political and economic thought.” In prosperous times, Americans had thought of unemployment as the result of personal failure, affecting primarily the lazy and immoral. “Let us remember,” a leading Protestant minister once said, “that there is not a poor person in the United States who was not made poor by his own shortcomings.” In the midst of depression, such views were harder to maintain, since everyone knew people who were both worthy and unemployed. Next door, a respected neighbor might be laid off; down the block, an entire factory might be shut down. People debated issues they had long taken for granted. New and reinvigorated local institutions—discussion clubs, women’s

Read the Document




 clubs, reform societies, university extension centers, church groups, farmers’ societies—gave people a place to discuss alternatives to the existing order. Pressures for reform increased, and demand grew for government intervention to help the poor and unemployed.

“Everybody Works But Father”
 Women and children had been entering the labor force for years, and the depression accelerated the trend. As husbands and fathers lost their jobs, more and more women and children went to work. Even as late as 1901, well after the depression had ended, a study of working-class families showed that more than half the principal breadwinners were out of work. So many women and children worked that in 1905 there was a popular song titled “Everybody Works But Father.” During the 1890s, the number of working women rose from 4 million to 5.3 million. Trying to make ends meet, they took in boarders and found jobs as laundresses, cleaners, or domestics. Where possible, they worked in offices and factories. Far more black urban women than white worked to supplement their husbands’ meager earnings. In New York City in 1900, nearly 60 percent of all black women worked, compared to 27 percent of the foreign-born and 24 percent of native-born white women. Men still dominated business offices, but during the 1890s, more

“Everybody Works But Father” (1905)


 Tiny children peddling newspapers and women domestics serving the rich—their meager earnings were desperately needed.



 CHAPTER 20

POLITICAL REALIGNMENTS IN THE 1890s

 and more employers noted the relative cheapness of female labor. Women telegraph and telephone operators nearly tripled in number during the decade. Women worked as clerks in the new five-and-tens and department stores, and as nurses; in 1900, a half million were teachers. They increasingly entered office work as stenographers and typists, occupations in which they earned between $6.00 and $15.00 a week, compared to factory wages of $1.50 to $8.00 a week. The depression also caused an increasing number of children to work. During the 1890s, the number of children employed in southern textile mills jumped more than 160 percent, and boys and girls under sixteen years of age made up nearly one-third of the labor force of the mills. Youngsters of eight and nine years worked twelve hours a day for pitiful wages. In most cases, however, children worked not in factories but in farming and city street trades such as peddling and shoe shining. In 1900, the South had more than half the child laborers in the nation. Concerned about child labor, middle-class women in 1896 formed the League for the Protection of the Family, which called for compulsory education to get children out of factories and into classrooms. The Mothers Congress of 1896 gave rise to the National Congress of Parents and Teachers, the spawning ground of thousands of local Parent-Teacher Associations. The National Council of Women and the General Federation of Women’s Clubs took up similar issues. By the end of the 1890s, the Federation had 150,000 members who worked for various civic reforms in the fields of child welfare, education, and sanitation.

Changing Themes in Literature
 The depression also gave point to a growing movement in literature toward realism and naturalism. In the years after the Civil War, literature often reflected the mood of romanticism—sentimental and unrealistic. Walt Whitman called it “ornamental confectionary” and “copious dribble,” but it remained popular through the end of the century. The novels of Horatio Alger, which provided simple lessons about how to get ahead in business and life, continued to attract large numbers of readers. A failed New York minister, Alger published some 130 novels—with titles such as Sink or Swim, Work and Win, and Struggling Upward—which sold more than 20 million copies. They told of poor youngsters who made their way to the top through hard work, thrift, honesty, and luck. Louisa May Alcott’s Little Women (1868–1869) related the daily lives of four girls in a New England family, Anna Sewell’s Black Beauty (1877) charmed readers with the story of an abused horse that found a happy home, and Lew Wallace’s Ben Hur (1880), one of the era’s best-selling books, offered a sweeping epic of life in the Roman empire. After the 1870s, however, a number of talented authors began to reject romanticism and escapism, turning instead to realism. Determined to portray life as it was, they studied local dialects, wrote regional stories, and emphasized the “true” relationships between people. In doing so, they reflected broader trends in the society, such as industrialism; evolutionary theory,

 which emphasized the effect of the environment on humans; and the new philosophy of pragmatism, which emphasized the relativity of values. Regionalist authors such as Joel Chandler Harris and George Washington Cable depicted life in the South. Hamlin Garland described the grimness of life on the Great Plains, and Sarah Orne Jewett wrote about everyday life in rural New England. Another regionalist, Bret Harte, achieved fame with stories that portrayed the local color of the California mining camps, particularly in his popular tale “The Outcasts of Poker Flat.” Harte was joined by a more talented writer, Mark Twain, who became the country’s most outstanding realist author. Growing up along the Mississippi River in Hannibal County, Missouri, the young Samuel Langhorne Clemens observed life around him with a humorous and skeptical eye. Adopting a pen name from the river term “mark twain” (two fathoms), he wrote a number of important works that drew on his own experiences. Life on the Mississippi (1883) described his career as a steamboat pilot. The Adventures of Tom Sawyer (1876) and The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn (1884) gained international prominence. In these books, Twain used dialect and common speech instead of literary language, touching off a major change in American prose style. William Dean Howells—after Twain, the country’s most famous author—came more slowly to the realist approach. At first, he wrote about the happier sides of life, but then he grew worried about the impact of industrialization. A Traveler from Altruria (1894), a utopian novel, described an industrial society that consumed lives. The poem “Society” (1895), written in the midst of the depression, compared society to a splendid ball in which men and women danced on flowers covering the bodies of the poor: And now and then from out the dreadful floor An arm or brow was lifted from the rest, As if to strike in madness, or implore For mercy; and anon some suffering breast Heaved from the mass and sank; and as before The revellers above them thronged and prest. Other writers, the naturalists, became impatient even with realism. Pushing Darwinian theory to its limits, they wrote of a world in which a cruel and merciless environment determined human fate. Often focusing on economic hardship, naturalist writers studied the poor, the lower classes, and the criminal mind; they brought to their writing the social worker’s passion for direct and honest experience. Stephen Crane spent a night in a seven-cent lodging house on the Bowery and in “An Experiment in Misery” captured the smells and sounds of the poor. Crane depicted the carnage of war in The Red Badge of Courage (1895) and the impact of poverty in Maggie: A Girl of the Streets (1893). Frank Norris assailed the power of big business in two dramatic novels, The Octopus (1901) and The Pit (1903), both the story of individual futility in the face of the heartless corporations. Norris’s McTeague (1899) studied the disintegration of character

The Presidential Election of 1896


 under economic pressure. Jack London, another naturalist author, traced the power of nature over civilized society in novels such as The Sea Wolf (1904) and The Call of the Wild (1903), his classic tale of a sled dog that preferred the difficult life of the wilderness to the world of human beings. Theodore Dreiser, the foremost naturalist writer, grimly portrayed a dark world in which human beings were tossed about by forces beyond their understanding or control. “My own ambition,” Dreiser said, “is to represent my world, to conform to the large, truthful lines of life.” In his great novel Sister Carrie (1901), he followed a young farm girl who took a job in a Chicago shoe factory. He described the exhausting nature of factory work: “Her hands began to ache at the wrists and then in the fingers, and towards the last she seemed one mass of dull, complaining muscle, fixed in an eternal position, and performing a single mechanical movement.” Like other naturalists, Dreiser focused on environment and character. He thought writers should tell the truth about human affairs, not fabricate romance, and Sister Carrie, he said, was “not intended as a piece of literary craftsmanship, but was a picture of conditions.”



 The election of 1896 was known as the “battle of the standards” because it focused primarily on the gold and silver standards of money. As an election, it was exciting and decisive. New voting patterns replaced old, a new majority party confirmed its control of the country, and national policy shifted to suit new realities.

 silverites believed the amount of money in circulation determined the level of activity in the economy. If money was short, that meant there was a limit on economic activity and ultimately a depression. If the government coined silver as well as gold, that meant more money in circulation, more business for everyone, and thus prosperity. Farm prices would rise; laborers would go back to work. By 1896, silver was also a symbol. It had moral and patriotic dimensions—by going to a silver standard, the United States could assert its independence in the world—and it stood for a wide range of popular grievances. For many, it reflected rural values rather than urban ones, suggested a shift of power away from the Northeast, and spoke for the downtrodden instead of the well-to-do. Silver represented the common people, as the vast literature of the movement showed. William H. Harvey’s Coin’s Financial School (1894), the most popular of all silver pamphlets, had the eloquent Coin, a wise but unknown youth, tutoring famous people on the currency. Bankers, lawyers, and scholars came to argue for gold, but they left shaken, leaning toward silver. Coin’s Financial School sold five thousand copies a day at its peak in 1895, with tens of thousands of copies distributed free by silver organizations. It “is being sold on every railroad train by the newsboys and at every cigar store,” a Mississippi congressman said. “It is being read by almost everybody.” Silver was more than just a political or economic issue. It was a social movement, one of the largest in American history, but its life span turned out to be brief. As a mass phenomenon, it flourished between 1894 and 1896, then succumbed to electoral defeat, the return of prosperity, and the onset of fresh concerns. But in its time, the silver movement bespoke a national mood and won millions of followers.

The Mystique of Silver


The Republicans and Gold


 Sentiment for free silver coinage grew swiftly after 1894, dominating the South and West, appearing even in the farming regions of New York and New England. Pro-silver literature flooded the country. (See the Feature Essay, “The Wonderful Wizard of Oz,” pp. 482–483.) Pamphlets issued by the millions argued silver’s virtues. People wanted quick solutions to the economic crisis. During 1896, unemployment shot up and farm income and prices fell to the lowest point in the decade. “I can remember back as far as 1858,” an Iowa hardware dealer said in February 1896, “and I have never seen such hard times as these are.” The silverites offered a solution, simple but compelling: the free and independent coinage of silver at the ratio of 16 ounces of silver to every ounce of gold. Free coinage meant that the U.S. mints would coin all the silver offered to them. Independent coinage meant that the country would coin silver regardless of the policies of other nations, nearly all of which were on the gold standard. It is difficult now to understand the kind of faith the silverites placed in silver as a cure for the depression. But faith it was, and of a sort that some observers compared to religious fervor. Underlying it all was a belief in a quantity theory of money: The

 Sensing victory over the discredited Democrats, numerous Republicans fought for the party’s presidential nomination, including “Czar” Thomas B. Reed of the Billion-Dollar Congress. Reed picked up early support but suffered from his reputation for biting wit. William McKinley of Ohio, his chief rival, soon passed him in the race for the nomination. Able, calm, and affable, McKinley had served in the Union army during the Civil War. In 1876, he won a seat in Congress, where he became the chief sponsor of the tariff act named for him. In the months before the 1896 national convention, Marcus A. Hanna, his campaign manager and trusted friend, built a powerful national organization that featured McKinley as “the advance agent of prosperity,” an alluring slogan in a country beset with depression. When the convention met in June, McKinley had the nomination in hand, and he backed a platform that favored the gold standard against the free coinage of silver. Republicans favoring silver proposed a prosilver platform, but the convention overwhelmingly defeated it. Twenty-three silverite Republicans, far fewer than prosilver forces had hoped, marched out of the convention hall. The remaining delegates waved handkerchiefs and flags and shouted “Good-bye” and

The Presidential Election of 1896
 Why was the presidential election of 1896 so important?

 Complete the Assignment The Wonderful Wizard of Oz on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


A


 restless dreamer, Frank Baum tried his hand at several careers before he gained fame and fortune as a writer of children’s literature. From 1888 to 1891, he ran a store and newspaper in South Dakota, where he experienced the desolation and grayness that accompanied agrarian discontent. An avid supporter of William Jennings Bryan in the “battle of the standards,” Baum wrote what many interpret as an enduring allegory of the silver movement, The Wonderful Wizard of Oz. Published in April 1900, it was an immediate success. The book opens with a grim description of Kansas, the drab environment in which Dorothy grew up: When Dorothy stood in the doorway and looked around, she could see nothing but the great gray prairie on every side. Not a tree nor a house broke the broad sweep of flat country that reached the edge of the sky in all directions. The sun had baked the plowed land into a gray mass, with little cracks running through it. Even the grass was not green, for the sun had burned the tops of the long blades until they were the same gray color to be seen everywhere. Once the house had been painted, but the sun blistered the paint and the rains washed it away, and now the house was as dull and gray as everything else. Kansas had not always seemed that way. After 1854, when the Kansas–Nebraska Act opened to settlement its 50 million acres of grassland, people poured into the state to stake their claims. Many came from the hilly timbered country to the east,

The Wonderful Wizard of Oz


 and breaking onto the prairie, they saw “a new world, reaching to the far horizon without break of trees or chimney stack; just sky and grass and grass and sky. . . . The hush was so loud. . . . The heavens seemed nearer than ever before and awe and beauty and majesty over all.” In later years, railroads crisscrossed the state, and advertisements touted the fertile soil. Land was plentiful, rainfall somehow seemed to increase each year, crop prices held at levels high enough to pay, new farming implements yielded larger crops, and property values increased. Yet life on the prairie was never an easy matter. Flat, lonely, and windswept, the land affected people in ways that were hard to describe to the folks back East. When Aunt Em, Dorothy’s aunt, came to Kansas to live, she was young and pretty, but the sun and wind soon changed her. “They had taken the sparkle from her eyes and left them a sober gray; they had taken the red from her cheeks and lips, and they were gray also.” Like Aunt Em, Uncle Henry never laughed. “He worked hard from morning till night and did not know what joy was.” After 1887, the environment of the Great Plains family changed dramatically. A series of droughts struck Kansas, and as many as three out of four farms were mortgaged in some Kansas counties. Thousands of settlers like Aunt Em and Uncle Henry gave up and retraced their steps East; others trusted in the Farmers’ Alliance and pinned their hopes on the free coinage of silver. While gold as a standard of currency symbolized the idle rich of the industrial Northeast, silver stood

The Wicked Witch of the West.


 for the common folk. Added to the currency in the form of silver dollars, it meant more money, higher crop prices, and a return of prosperity.

 Or so the supporters of silver coinage believed. In The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, read as an allegory, Dorothy (every person) is carried by a cyclone (a victory of the silver forces at the polls) from drought-stricken Kansas to a marvelous land of riches and witches. Unlike dry, gray Kansas, Oz is beautiful, with rippling brooks, stately trees, colorful flowers, and brightfeathered birds. On arrival, Dorothy disposes of one witch, the Wicked Witch of the East (the eastern money power and those favoring gold), and frees the Munchkins (the common people) from servitude. To return to Kansas, she must first go to the Emerald City (the greenback-colored national capital). Dorothy wears magical silver slippers and follows the yellow brick road, thus achieving a proper relationship between the precious metals, silver and gold. Like many of her countrymen, she does not at first recognize the power of the silver slippers, but a kiss from the Good Witch of the North (Northern voters) protects her on the road. Dorothy meets the Scarecrow (the farmer), who has been told he has no brain but actually possesses great common sense (no “hick” or “hayseed,” he); the Tin Woodman (the industrial worker), who fears he has become heartless but discovers the spirit of love and cooperation; and the Cowardly Lion (reformers, particularly William Jennings Bryan), who turns out not to be very cowardly at all.

 When the four companions reach the Emerald City, they meet the “Great and Terrible” Wizard, who tells them that, to gain his help, they must destroy the Wicked Witch of the West (mortgage companies, heartless nature, and other things opposing progress there). Courageously, they set forth. Dorothy dissolves the witch with a bucket of water (what else for drought-ridden farmers?), but when they return to the Emerald City, they find that the great and powerful Wizard (the money power) is only a charlatan, a manipulator, whose power rests on myth and illusion. “‘I thought Oz was a great Head,’ said Dorothy. . . . ‘And I thought Oz was a terrible Beast,’ said the Tin Woodman. ‘And I thought Oz was a Ball of Fire,’ exclaimed the Lion. ‘No; you are all wrong,’ said the little man meekly. ‘I have been making believe.’” Dorothy unmasks the wizard, and with the help of Glinda, the Good Witch of the South (support for silver was strong in the South), uses the silver slippers to return home to Kansas. Sadly, the shoes are lost in flight. Back in Oz, the Scarecrow rules the Emerald City (the triumph of the farmers), and the Tin Woodman reigns in the West (industrialism moves West). Oz was a familiar abbreviation to those involved in the fight over the ratio of silver to gold—16 ounces to 1. Baum wanted to write American fairy tales to “bear the stamp of our times and depict the progressive

 fairies of today.” The land of Oz reflected his belief in the American values of freedom and independence, love of family, self-reliance, individualism, and sympathy for the underdog. Oz, he said in the original introduction, “aspires to being a modernized fairy tale, in which the wonderment and joy are retained and the heartaches and nightmares are left out.” The Oz stories have remained popular, and they still rest on many children’s bookshelves. A 1939 film starring Judy Garland as Dorothy, with Ray Bolger as the Scarecrow, Jack Haley as the Tin Woodman, Bert Lahr as the Cowardly Lion, and Frank Morgan as the Wizard, was spectacularly successful. Released in the midst of another depression, the film included songs designed to escape hardship, as Dorothy once had, “somewhere over the rainbow.”

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
Why was The Wizard of Oz so popular as a book in the 1890s and a film during the Great Depression in the 1930s? 2. How do Baum’s characters symbolize the values and social forces he was trying to address? 3. If Baum were writing today, what social forces and issues might he address? 




 CHAPTER 20

POLITICAL REALIGNMENTS IN THE 1890s

 “Put them out.” Hanna stood on a chair screaming “Go! Go! Go!” William Jennings Bryan, who was there as a special correspondent for a Nebraska newspaper, climbed on a desk to get a better view.

The Democrats and Silver
 Silver, meanwhile, had captured large segments of the Democratic party in the South and West. Despite President Cleveland’s opposition, more than twenty Democratic state platforms came out for free silver in 1894. Power in the party shifted to the South, where it remained for decades. The party’s base narrowed; its outlook increasingly reflected southern views on silver, race, and other issues. In effect, the Democrats became a sectional—no longer a national—party.

Read the Document


William Jennings Bryan, “Cross
 of Gold” Speech (1896)

 The anti-Cleveland Democrats had their issue, but they lacked a leader. Out in Nebraska, Bryan saw the opportunity to take on that role. He was barely thirty-six years old and had relatively little political experience. But he had spent months wooing support, and he was a captivating public speaker—tall, slender, and handsome, with a resounding voice that, in an era without microphones, projected easily into every corner of an auditorium. From the outset of the 1896 Democratic convention, the silver Democrats were in charge, and they put together a platform that stunned the Cleveland wing of the party. It demanded the free coinage of silver, attacked Cleveland’s actions in the Pullman strike, and censured his sales of gold bonds. On July 9, as delegates debated the platform, Bryan’s moment came. Striding to the stage, he stood for an instant, a hand raised for silence, waiting for the applause to die down. He would not contend with the previous speakers, he began, for “this is not a contest between persons. The humblest citizen in all the land, when clad in the armor of a righteous cause, is stronger than all the hosts of error. I come to speak to you in defense of a cause as holy as the cause of liberty—the cause of humanity.” The delegates were captivated. Like a trained choir, they rose, cheered each point, and sat back to listen for more. Easterners, Bryan said, liked to praise businessmen but forgot that plain people—laborers, miners, and farmers—were businessmen, too. Shouts rang through the hall, and delegates pounded on chairs. Savoring each cheer, Bryan defended silver. Then came the famous closing: “Having behind us the producing masses of this nation and the world . . . we will answer their demand for a gold standard by saying to them: ‘You shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns, you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.”’ Bryan moved his fingers down his temples, suggesting blood trickling from his wounds. He ended with his arms outstretched as on a cross. Letting the silence hang, he dropped his arms, stepped back, then started to his seat. Suddenly, there was pandemonium. Delegates shouted and cheered. When the tumult subsided, they adopted the anti-Cleveland platform, and the next day, Bryan won the presidential nomination.

Campaign and Election


 William Jennings Bryan was well known for his dramatic speeches. During the Democratic Convention of 1896, Bryan delivered his best-known speech, which attacked the gold standard. His stirring rhetoric captivated his audience and won him the Democratic presidential nomination for the election of 1896.

 The Democratic convention presented the Populists with a dilemma. The People’s party had staked everything on the assumption that neither major party would endorse silver. Now it faced a painful choice: Nominate an independent ticket and risk splitting the silverite forces, or nominate Bryan and give up its separate identity as a party. The choice was unpleasant, and it shattered the People’s party. Meeting late in July, the party’s national convention nominated Bryan, but rather than accept the Democratic candidate for vice president, it named Tom Watson instead. The Populists’ endorsement probably hurt Bryan as much as it helped. It won him relatively few votes, since many Populists would have voted for him anyway. It also identified him as a Populist, which he was not, allowing the Republicans to accuse him of heading a ragtag army of malcontents. The squabble over Watson seemed

 The McKinley Administration

 the Northeast and Midwest and carried four border states. In the cities, McKinley crushed Bryan. The election struck down the Populists, whose totals sagged nearly everywhere. Many Populist proposals were later adopted under different leadership. The graduated income tax, crop loans to farmers, the secret ballot, and direct election of U.S. senators all were early Populist ideas. But the People’s party never could win over a majority of the voters, and failing that, it vanished after 1896.

Election of 1896
Electoral Vote by State


Popular Vote


REPUBLICAN
William McKinley 
7,104,779


 DEMOCRATIC 176 William J. Bryan

6,502,925
265,155


MINOR PARTIES

13,872,859
















ARIZ. NEW 1 TERR. MEXICO TERR.

















OKLA. TERR. INDIAN TERR.

24 15






6 12


















 to prove that the Democratic-Populist alliance could never stay together long enough to govern. In August 1896, Bryan set off on a campaign that became an American legend. Much of the conservative Democratic eastern press had deserted him, and he took his campaign directly to the voters, the first presidential candidate in history to do so in a systematic way. By his own count, Bryan traveled 18,009 miles, visited 27 states, and spoke 600 times to a total of some 3 million people. He built skillfully on a new “merchandising” style of campaign in which he worked to educate and persuade voters. Bryan summoned voters to an older America: a land where farms were as important as factories, where the virtues of rural and religious life outweighed the doubtful lure of the city, where common people still ruled and opportunity existed for all. He drew on the Jeffersonian tradition of rural virtue, distrust of central authority, and abiding faith in the powers of human reason. Urged to take the stump against Bryan, McKinley replied, “I might just as well put up a trapeze on my front lawn and compete with some professional athlete as go out speaking against Bryan.” The Republican candidate let voters come to him. Railroads brought them by the thousands into McKinley’s hometown of Canton, Ohio, and he spoke to them from his front porch. Through use of the press, he reached fully as many people as Bryan’s more strenuous effort. Appealing to labor, immigrants, well-to-do farmers, businessmen, and the middle class, McKinley defended economic nationalism and the advancing urbanindustrial society. On election day, voter turnout was extraordinarily high, a measure of the intense interest. By nightfall, the outcome was clear: McKinley won 50 percent of the vote to Bryan’s 46 percent. He won

 The McKinley Administration What did McKinley accomplish that placed the results of the 1896 election on a solid basis? The election of 1896 cemented the voter realignment of 1894 and initiated a generation of Republican rule. For more than three decades after 1896, with only a brief Democratic resurgence under Woodrow Wilson, the Republicans remained the country’s majority party. McKinley took office in 1897 under favorable circumstances. To everyone’s relief, the economy had begun to revive. The stock market rose, factories once again churned out goods, and farmers prospered. Farm prices climbed sharply during 1897 on bumper crops of wheat, cotton, and corn. Discoveries of gold in Australia and Alaska—together with the development of a new cyanide process for extracting gold from ore—enlarged the world’s gold supply, decreased its price, and inflated the currency as the silverites had hoped. For the first time since 1890, the 1897 Treasury statements showed a comfortable gold reserve. McKinley and the Republicans basked in the glow. They became the party of progress and prosperity, an image that helped them win victories until another depression hit in the 1930s. McKinley’s popularity soared. Open and accessible, in contrast to Cleveland’s isolation, he rode the Washington streetcars, walked the streets, and enjoyed looking in department store windows. McKinley became the first president to ride in an automobile, reaching the speed of 18 miles an hour. An activist president, he set the policies of the administration. Conscious of the limits of power, he maintained close ties with Congress and worked hard to educate the public on national choices and priorities. McKinley struck new relations with the press and traveled far more than previous presidents. In some ways, he began the modern presidency. Shortly after taking office, he summoned Congress into special session to revise the tariff. In July 1897, the Dingley Tariff passed the House and Senate. It raised average tariff duties to a record level, and as the final burst of nineteenth-century protectionism, it caused trouble for the Republican party. By the end of the 1890s, consumers, critics, and the Republicans themselves were wondering if the tariff had outlived its usefulness in the maturing American economy. From the 1860s to the 1890s, the Republicans had built their party on a pledge to promote economic growth through the use of state and national power. By 1900, with the industrial system



 CHAPTER 20

POLITICAL REALIGNMENTS IN THE 1890s

THE ELECTION OF 1900
View the Closer Look 
Republican Campaign Poster


 of 1896, William McKinley

Candidate
 McKinley Bryan Woolley Debs

Party
Republican
Democrat
Prohibition
Socialist


Popular
Vote
7,207,923
6,358,133
209,004
94,768


Electoral
Vote


 In 1898 and 1899, the McKinley administration focused on the war with Spain, the peace treaty that followed, and the dawning realization that the war had thrust the United States into a position of world power. In March 1900, Congress passed the Gold Standard Act, which declared gold the standard of currency and ended the silver controversy that had dominated the 1890s. The presidential campaign of 1900 was a replay of the McKinley–Bryan fight of 1896. McKinley’s running mate was Theodore Roosevelt, hero of the Spanish-American War and former governor of New York, who was nominated for vice president to capitalize on his popularity and, his enemies hoped, to sidetrack his political career into oblivion. Bryan emphasized the issues of imperialism and the trusts; McKinley emphasized his record at home and abroad. The result in 1900 was a landslide. On September 6, 1901, a few months after his second inauguration, McKinley stood in a receiving line at the PanAmerican Exposition in Buffalo. Leon Czolgosz, a 28-year-old unemployed laborer and anarchist, moved through the line and, reaching the president, shot him. Surgeons probed the wound but could find nothing. A recent discovery called the X ray was on display at the exposition, but it was not used. On September 14, McKinley died, and Vice President Theodore Roosevelt became president. A new century had begun. This Republican campaign poster of 1896 depicts candidate William McKinley as the champion of commerce and civilization. The sun rising behind the flag McKinley is holding suggests that a new day will dawn with a Republican administration.

 firmly in place, the focus had shifted. The need to regulate, to control the effects of industrialism, became a central public concern of the new century. McKinley prodded the Republicans to meet that shift, but he died before his plans matured. McKinley toyed with the idea of lowering the tariff, but one obstacle always stood in the way: The government needed revenue, and tariff duties were one of the few taxes the public would support. The Spanish-American War of 1898 persuaded people to accept greater federal power and, with it, new forms of taxation. In 1899, McKinley spoke of lowering tariff barriers in a world that technology had made smaller. “God and man have linked the nations together,” he said in his last speech at Buffalo, New York, in 1901. “Isolation is no longer possible or desirable.”

 Conclusion: A Decade’s Dramatic Changes As the funeral train carried McKinley’s body back to Ohio, Mark Hanna, McKinley’s old friend and ally, sat slumped in his parlor car. “I told William McKinley it was a mistake to nominate that wild man at Philadelphia,” he mourned. “I asked him if he realized what would happen if he should die. Now look, that damned cowboy is president of the United States!” Hanna’s world had changed, and so had the nation’s—not so much because “that damned cowboy” was suddenly president, but because events of the 1890s had had powerful effects. In the course of that decade, political patterns shifted, the presidency acquired fresh power, and massive unrest prompted social change. The war with Spain brought a new empire and worldwide responsibilities. Economic hardship posed questions of the most difficult sort about industrialization, urbanization, and the quality of American life. Worried, people embraced new ideas

STUDY RESOURCES

 and causes. Reform movements begun in the 1890s flowered in the Progressive Era after 1900. Technology continued to alter the way Americans lived. In 1896, Henry Ford produced a two-cylinder, four-horsepower car, the first of the famous line that bore his name. In 1899, the first automobile salesroom opened in New York, and some innovative thinkers were already imagining a network of service stations to keep the new cars running. At Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, Wilbur



 and Orville Wright, two bicycle manufacturers, neared the birth of powered flight. The realignments that reached their peak in the 1890s seem distant, yet they are not. Important decisions in those years shaped nearly everything that came after them. In character and influence, the 1890s were as much a part of the twentieth century as of the nineteenth and continue to have repercussions into the twenty-first century.

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 20 Political Realignments in the 1890s on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1876
Mark Twain publishes The Adventures of Tom Sawyer 1877 Disputed election of 1876 results in awarding of 
 presidency to Republican Rutherford B. Hayes Republican James A. Garfield elected president Garfield assassinated; Vice President Chester A. Arthur becomes president Democrat Grover Cleveland elected president, defeating Republican James G. Blaine Cleveland calls for lowering of tariff duties Republican Benjamin Harrison wins presidential election National Farmers’ Alliance and Industrial Union formed to address problems of farmers Republican-dominated “Billion-Dollar” Congress enacts McKinley Tariff Act, Sherman Antitrust Act, and Sherman Silver Purchase Act; Farmers’ Alliance adopts the Ocala Demands

 1892 Democrat Cleveland defeats Republican Harrison for

 presidency; People’s party formed Financial panic touches off depression lasting until 1897; Sherman Silver Purchase Act repealed; World Columbian Exposition opens in Chicago Coxey’s army marches on Washington; Pullman employees strike Republican McKinley defeats William Jennings Bryan, Democratic and Populist candidate, in “battle of the standards” Gold discovered in Alaska; Dingley Tariff Act raises tariff duties McKinley reelected, again defeating Bryan; Gold Standard Act establishes gold as standard of currency McKinley assassinated; Vice President Theodore Roosevelt assumes presidency; Naturalist writer Theodore Dreiser publishes Sister Carrie



 CHAPTER 20

CHAPTER REVIEW

CHAPTER REVIEW
Politics of Stalemate 
Changing Attitudes


 Why was there a stalemate between Republicans and Democrats until the mid-1890s?

 What changes in outlook did the panic and depression of the 1890s bring about?

 For more than two decades after Reconstruction, there was a stalemate, in which the Democrats and Republicans fought for votes and focused on a handful of “doubtful” states. In general, Democrats dominated the South, and Republicans controlled crucial sections of the North. Presidents reestablished the authority of their office. (p. 468)

 The depression led people to reconsider the roles of the government, the economy, and society. They had once thought that people lost their jobs because of their own failings; now they knew that economic forces were at fault. People joined organizations like women’s clubs, church groups, and farm societies to discuss cures for the situation. More women and children worked. Realism and naturalism dominated American literature. (p. 479)

Republicans in Power: The Billion-Dollar Congress
The Presidential Election of 1896
 How did the Republican party’s vision shape the “Billion-Dollar Congress”?

 Why was the presidential election of 1896 so important?

 In control of both the presidency and Congress after 1888, Republicans enacted their activist policies, only to discover that voters were not ready for them. The congressional elections of 1890 restored the Democrats to power. (p. 470)

 The election of 1896 brought to a head the fight between supporters of silver and gold, established the Republicans as the majority party, and shaped the nation’s politics until 1932. (p. 481)

The Rise of the Populist Movement
 The McKinley Administration What factors led to the formation and growth of the Farmers’ Alliance and People’s party?

 What did McKinley accomplish that placed the results of the 1896 election on a solid basis?

 In the late 1880s and early 1890s, farmers in the South and West joined the Farmers’ Alliance, and later the People’s party. The People’s party failed, as voters turned to the Democrats in the presidential election of 1892. (p. 472)

 The McKinley administration profited from economic recovery. It enacted the gold standard, passed a new tariff, and defeated Spain. How to regulate big business instead of simply promoting it became a new challenge. (p. 485)

The Crisis of the Depression
 What were the main political and labor effects of the panic and depression of the 1890s? The depression encouraged people to rethink their views on the causes of poverty and unemployment. It discredited President Cleveland and crushed the Democrats in the midterm elections of 1894, giving the Republican party a long-term lease on power. (p. 476)

KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Bland–Allison Silver Purchase Act This 1878 act called for the partial coinage of silver. Those favoring silver coinage argued that it would increase the money supply and help farmers and workers repay their debts. Opponents advocated a restricted money supply based solely on gold and pointed out that few other major countries accepted silver coinage. Congress passed the bill over President Rutherford B. Hayes’s veto. p. 469 Pendleton Act This 1883 law created a bipartisan Civil Service Commission to administer competitive exams for civil service jobs and appoint officeholders based on merit. It also outlawed compulsory political contributions from appointed officials. p. 470 
 Sherman Antitrust Act This 1890 act was the first major U.S. attempt to deal with the problem of the increasing size of business. It declared illegal “every contract, combination in the form of trust or otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce.” p. 471 Sherman Silver Purchase Act An 1890 act that attempted to resolve the controversy over silver coinage by requiring the Treasury to purchase 4.5 million ounces of silver each month and issue legal tender (in the form of Treasury notes) for it. The act pleased opponents of silver because it did not call for free coinage; it pleased proponents of silver because it bought up most of the nation’s silver production. p. 471

STUDY RESOURCES

National Farmers’ Alliance and Industrial Union The Alliance
 sought to organize farmers in the South and West to fight for reforms that would improve their lot, including measures to overcome low crop prices, burdensome mortgages, and high railroad rates. The Alliance ultimately organized the People’s (Populist) party. p. 472 Ocala Demands Adopted by the Farmers’ Alliance in 1890 in Ocala, Florida, these demands became the organization’s main platform. They called for a sub-treasury system to allow farmers to store their crops until they could get the best price, the free coinage of silver, an end to protective tariffs and national banks, a federal income tax, the direct election of senators by voters, and tighter regulation of railroads. (See People’s party.) p. 474 People’s (or Populist) party This political party was organized in 1892 by farm, labor, and reform leaders, mainly from the Farmers’ Alliance. It offered a broad-based reform platform reflecting the Ocala Demands.



 After 1896, it became identified as a one-issue party focused on free silver and gradually died away. p. 474 Pullman strike Beginning in May 1894, this strike at the Pullman Palace Car Company near Chicago was one of the largest strikes in American history. Workers struck to protest wage cuts, high rents for company housing, and layoffs. The American Railway Union, led by Eugene v. Debs, joined the strike in June. Extending into 27 states and territories, it paralyzed the western half of the nation. President Grover Cleveland secured an injunction to break the strike on the grounds that it obstructed the mail, and sent federal troops to enforce it. p. 476 Gold Standard Act Passed by Congress in 1900, this law made all currency redeemable in gold. The United States remained on the gold standard until 1933. p. 486

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
What effect did the rise of the People’s party have on American politics? 2. How did the depression give rise to conditions that made the election 
 3. How would events have been different if William Jennings Bryan and the Democrats won the election of 1896?

 4. Why did McKinley and the Republican party demonstrate about the

 of 1896 important?

 changes in popular attitudes since 1890?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 20 on MyHistoryLab Politics of Stalemate Read the Document

Changing Attitudes
Read the Document


The Interstate Commerce Act


(1887) p. 469


Republicans in Power: The Billion-Dollar Congress
Read the Document


 Workingman’s Amalgamated Sherman Anti-Trust (1893) p. 471

The Rise of the Populist Movement
◾


Read the Document


Mary E. Lease, The Populist


Read the Document


Ocala Platform, 1890 p. 475


The Crisis of the Depression
Read the Document


Protest” (1894) p. 477


◾


Complete the Assignment
Oz p. 482


◾


Read the Document


The Wonderful Wizard of


William Jennings Bryan, “Cross
 of Gold” Speech (1896) p. 484

 The McKinley Administration

Crusader (1892) p. 475


◾


The Presidential Election of 1896


Proceedings of Grange


Session, 1879 p. 474
Read the Document


“Everybody Works But Father”


(1905) p. 479


Jacob S. Coxey, “Address of


◾


View the Closer Look


Republican Campaign Poster of
 1896, William McKinley p. 486

◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




Toward Empire


Contents and Learning Objectives
AMERICA LOOKS OUTWARD PG. 492

ACQUISITION OF EMPIRE PG. 503

 Why did Americans look outward in the last half of the nineteenth century?

 What were the various viewpoints about the acquisition of empire after the war with Spain?

WAR WITH SPAIN PG. 497
What were the causes and results of the war with Spain? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

FEATURE ESSAY
The 400 Million Customers of China 
