 United States and the Soviet Union had added this dread new weapon to their arsenals. With new long-range ballistic missiles being perfected, it was only a matter of time before Russia and the United States would be capable of destroying each other completely. Peace, as Winston Churchill noted, now depended on a balance of terror. Throughout the 1950s, Eisenhower sought a way out of the nuclear dilemma. In April 1953, shortly after Stalin’s death, he gave a speech in which he called on the Russians to join him in a new effort at disarmament, pointing out that “every warship launched, every rocket fired signifies, in the final sense, a theft from those who hunger and are not fed, those who are cold and are not clothed.” When the Soviets ignored this appeal, the president tried again in December 1953. Addressing the UN General Assembly, he outlined an “atoms for peace” plan whereby the United States and the Soviet Union would donate fissionable material to a new UN agency to be used for peaceful purposes. Despite Ike’s appeal “to serve the needs rather than the fears of mankind,” the Russians again rebuffed him. Undaunted, Eisenhower tried once more. At a summit conference in Geneva, Switzerland, in 1955, Ike proposed to Nikita Khrushchev, just emerging as Stalin’s successor after a two-year struggle for power, a way to break the disarmament deadlock. “Open skies,” as reporters dubbed the plan, would overcome the traditional Russian objection to on-site inspection by having both superpowers open their territory to mutual aerial surveillance. Unfortunately, Khrushchev dismissed open skies as “a very transparent espionage device,” and the conference ended without any significant breakthrough in the Cold War. After his reelection in 1956, the president renewed his efforts toward nuclear arms control. Concern over atmospheric fallout from nuclear testing had led presidential candidate Adlai Stevenson to propose a mutual ban on such experiments. At first, Eisenhower rejected the test ban idea, arguing that it could be effective only as part of a comprehensive disarmament agreement, but the Russians supported it. Finally, in 1958, the president changed his mind after American and Soviet scientists developed a system to detect nuclear testing in the atmosphere without on-site inspection. In October 1958, Eisenhower and Khrushchev each voluntarily suspended further weapons tests pending the outcome of a conference held at Geneva to work out a test ban treaty. Although the Geneva Conference failed to make progress, neither the United States nor the Soviet Union resumed testing for the remainder of Ike’s term in office. The suspension of testing halted the nuclear pollution of the world’s atmosphere, but it did not lead to the improvement in Soviet–American relations that Eisenhower sought. Instead, the Soviet feat in launching Sputnik, the first artificial satellite to orbit the Earth, intensified the Cold War. (See the Feature Essay in Chapter 29, “The Reaction to Sputnik,” pp. 694–695.) Fearful that the Russians were several years ahead of the United States in the development of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), Democrats criticized Eisenhower for not spending enough on defense and warned that a dangerous missile gap would open up by the early 1960s—a time when the Russians might have such a commanding lead in ICBMs that they could launch a first strike and destroy America. Despite the president’s belief that the American missile program was in good shape, he allowed increased defense spending to speed up the building of American ICBMs and the new Polaris submarine–launched intermediate range missile (IRBM).

Conclusion: The Continuing Cold War


 Nikita Khrushchev took full advantage of the furor over Sputnik to put the United States on the defensive. “We will bury you,” he boasted, telling Americans, “Your grandchildren will live under communism.” The most serious threat of all came in November 1958, when the Russian leader declared that within six months he would sign a separate peace treaty with East Germany, calling for an end to American, British, and French occupation rights in Berlin. Eisenhower met the second Berlin crisis as firmly as Truman had the first. He refused to abandon the city but also tried to avoid a military showdown. Prudent diplomacy forced Khrushchev to extend his deadline indefinitely. After a trip to the United States, culminating in a personal meeting with Eisenhower at Camp David, the Russian leader agreed to attend a summit conference in Paris in May 1960. This much heralded meeting never took place. On May 1, two weeks before the leaders were to convene in Paris, the Soviets shot down an American U-2 plane piloted by Francis Gary Powers. The United States had been flying over Russia since 1956 in the high-altitude spy planes, gaining vital information about the Soviet missile program that showed there was little basis for the public’s fear that the Russians had opened up a dangerous missile gap. After initially denying any knowledge, Eisenhower took full responsibility for Powers’s overflight, and Khrushchev responded with a scathing personal denunciation and a refusal to meet with the American president.



Conclusion: The Continuing
Cold War
 The breakup of the Paris summit marked the end of Eisenhower’s attempts to moderate the Cold War. The disillusioned leader told an aide that “he saw nothing worthwhile left for him to do now until the end of his presidency.” But Eisenhower did make a final effort for peace by delivering a somber warning about the danger of massive military spending in his farewell address to the American people. “In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial complex,” he declared. “The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist.” Rarely has an American president been more prophetic. In the next few years, the level of defense spending would skyrocket as the Cold War escalated. The military-industrial complex reached its acme of power in the 1960s when the United States realized the full implications of Truman’s doctrine of containment. Eisenhower had succeeded in keeping the peace for eight years, but he had failed to halt the momentum of the Cold War he had inherited from Harry Truman. Ike’s efforts to ease tension with the Soviet Union were dashed by his own distrust of communism and by Khrushchev’s belligerent rhetoric and behavior. Still, he had begun to relax tensions, a process that would survive the troubled 1960s and, after several false starts, would finally begin to erode the Cold War by the end of the 1980s.

 Russians view the wreckage of the U-2 reconnaissance plane piloted by Francis Powers that was shot down over Soviet territory on May 1, 1960. Although Eisenhower originally disavowed any knowledge of Powers’s mission, Khrushchev produced photographs of Soviet military and industrial sites, which he said had been taken by the U-2 pilot. Powers was held in a Soviet prison for two years before he was released in exchange for a Russian spy.



 CHAPTER 28

CHAPTER REVIEW

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 28 The Onset of the Cold War on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1945
Truman meets Stalin at Potsdam Conference (July); World War II ends with Japanese surrender (August) Winston Churchill gives “Iron Curtain” speech Truman Doctrine announced to Congress (March); Truman orders loyalty program for government employees (March); George Marshall outlines Marshall Plan (June); Truman signs National Security Act (July) 


 1948 Soviets begin blockade of Berlin (June); Truman scores upset victory in presidential election NATO treaty signed in Washington (April); Soviet Union tests its first atomic bomb (August) Truman authorizes building of hydrogen bomb (January); Senator Joseph McCarthy claims Communists in government (February); North Korea invades South Korea (June)



 1951 Truman recalls MacArthur from Korea 1952 Dwight D. Eisenhower elected president 1953 Julius and Ethel Rosenberg executed for atomic1954

 secrets spying (June); Korean War truce signed at Panmunjom (July) Fall of Dien Bien Phu to Vietminh ends French control of Indochina England and France touch off Suez crisis

 1957 Russia launches Sputnik satellite 1959 Fidel Castro takes power in Cuba 1960 American U-2 spy plane shot down over Russia

CHAPTER REVIEW
The Cold War Begins How did the Cold War begin? 
ICELAND
Western bloc 
The Cold War at Home
 How did the Cold War affect life in America?

 Communist bloc/ Soviet zone Nonaligned nations

 FINLAND

“Iron Curtain”
 NORWAY



 SWEDEN

 500 miles

 The Cold War began as the United States and the Soviet Union discovered that their interests in Europe conflicted. Each feared the other and, acting on its fears, took steps that heightened the other’s fears. Atomic weapons made the mistakes of miscalculation far greater than in the past and everyone more fearful. (p. 666)

 The Cold War spawned fears of Communist subversion. It led to a campaign to ensure loyalty, and fostered McCarthyism, an exaggerated effort to find Communists in every corner of American life. Although McCarthyism eventually burned itself out, it contributed to Eisenhower’s election in 1952, which ended twenty years of Democratic control of the White House. (p. 674)

Containment


Eisenhower Wages the Cold War






 500 kilometers

North
Sea


 IRELAND

 DEN.

SOVIE UNIO

UNITED KINGDOM

 NETH.

 POLAND

 BELG.

ATLANTIC OCEAN

 GERMANY

 CZECH.

 LUX.

 FRANCE

 AUS.

 SWITZ.

 HUN.

 ROMANIA

Bl a


 YUGOSLAVIA

 PORTUGAL

 BULG.

 ITALY

 SPAIN

 ALB.

 TU

SP. MOROCCO

 GREECE

 MOROCCO (Fr.)

 ALGERIA (Fr.)

 TUNISIA (Fr.)

Medi
 terranea n Sea

 What was containment, and why was it adopted? Containment was the American policy of preventing Soviet power and influence from expanding. It was adopted to preserve American interests without excessively risking war. (p. 668)

The Cold War Expands
 How did the Cold War expand from Europe to Asia?

 CHINA

 lu Ya

R.


 The United States and the Soviet Union took opposite sides in the Chinese civil war. Shortly after the Communist victory in China, Communist North Korea battled antiCommunist South Korea. The United States sided with South Korea. The Soviet Union and Communist China backed North Korea. (p. 671) NORTH KOREA

Pyongyang


Truce Line


Panmunjom


Seoul


Inchon Landing
Sept. 15, 1950


 How successful was Eisenhower at dealing with the foreign policy issues facing the United States? When he became president in 1953, Eisenhower was deeply experienced in military and diplomatic affairs. While he failed to halt the momentum of the Cold War, as president he kept the peace for eight years and began to relax tensions with the Soviet Union. (p. 680)

STUDY RESOURCES



KEY TERMS & DEFINITIONS
Potsdam Conference The final wartime meeting of the leaders of the United States, Britain, and the Soviet Union was held at Potsdam, outside Berlin, in July, 1945. Their failure to agree about the future of Europe led to the Cold War. p. 664 Iron Curtain Winston Churchill coined the phrase “Iron Curtain” to refer to the boundary in Europe that divided Soviet dominated Eastern and Central Europe from Western Europe. p. 666 Baruch Plan In 1946, Bernard Baruch presented an American plan to control and eventually outlaw nuclear weapons. The plan called for UN control of nuclear weapons in three stages before the United States gave up its stockpile. Soviet insistence on immediate nuclear disarmament without inspection doomed the Baruch Plan and led to a nuclear arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union. p. 668 Containment First proposed by George Kennan in 1947, containment became the basic strategy of the United States throughout the Cold War. Kennan argued that firm American resistance would eventually compel Moscow to adopt more peaceful policies. p. 669 Truman Doctrine In 1947, President Truman asked Congress for money to aid the Greek and Turkish governments that were then threatened by communist rebels. Truman asserted that the United States was committed to support free people everywhere against Communist attack or rebellion. p. 669 
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) In 1949, the United States, Canada, and ten European nations formed this military mutualdefense pact. p. 670 Berlin airlift In 1948, in response to a Soviet land blockade of Berlin, the United States carried out a massive effort to supply the 2 million Berlin citizens by air. The airlift forced the Soviets to end the blockade in 1949. p. 671 National Security Act Congress passed the National Security Act in 1947 in response to perceived threats from the Soviet Union after World War II. It established the Department of Defense and created the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and National Security Council. p. 671 NSC-68 National Security Council planning paper No. 68 redefined America’s national defense policy. Adopted in 1950, it committed the United States to a massive military buildup to meet the challenge posed by the Soviet Union. p. 672 Taft–Hartley Act This 1947 anti-union legislation outlawed the closed shop and secondary boycotts. It also authorized the president to seek injunctions to prevent strikes that threatened national security. p. 675 McCarthyism A sensationalist campaign by Senator Joseph McCarthy against supposed communists in government that began in 1950 and ended when the Senate censured him in 1954. p. 677

 Marshall Plan In 1947, A massive aid program to rebuild the war-torn economies of Western Europe. The plan was motivated by both humanitarian concerns and fear of communism. p. 670

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
Why was the Soviet Union suspicious of the United States? 2. In what ways did the Marshall Plan demonstrate American generosity? In what ways did it reflect American self-interest? 
 3. How was the Cold War in Asia similar to the Cold War in Europe? How was it different?

 4. To what extent was McCarthyism justified?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 28 on MyHistoryLab The Cold War Begins ◾

The Cold War at Home


 Read the Document Churchill’s “Iron Curtain” Speech (March 5, 1946) p. 667

Read the Document
 HUAC (1947) p. 677

◾


Containment
Read the Document George F. Kennan, “The Long
Telegram” (1946) p. 668
Read the Document
(1947) p. 669


George Marshall, The Marshall Plan


Watch the Video
 p. 679

View the Closer Look Berlin Airlift p. 672


◾


View the Map


The Korean War (1950–1953) p. 673


 McCarthyism and the Politics of

Ike for President: Campaign Ad (1952)|


Eisenhower Wages the Cold War
Read the Document Dwight D. Eisenhower, Letters on
Dien Bien Phu (1954) p. 681


The Cold War Expands
◾


Watch the Video
Fear p. 678


Ronald Reagan, Testimony Before


◾


Complete the Assignment
Middle East p. 682


◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment


America Enters the




Affluence and Anxiety


Contents and Learning Objectives
THE POSTWAR BOOM PG. 690

THE STRUGGLE OVER CIVIL RIGHTS PG. 698

 How did the American economy evolve after World War II?

 How did the civil rights movement develop in the 1940s and 1950s?

THE GOOD LIFE? PG. 692
How did American culture change after the war? 
FEATURE ESSAY
The Reaction to Sputnik 
FAREWELL TO REFORM PG. 696
What was the primary justification for the passage of the Interstate Highway Act of 1956? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

Chapter 29 Affluence and Anxiety


Levittown: The Flight to
 the Suburbs On May 7, 1947, William Levitt announced plans to build two thousand rental houses in a former potato field on Long Island, thirty miles from Midtown Manhattan. Using mass production techniques he had learned while erecting navy housing during the war, Levitt quickly built four thousand homes and rented them to young veterans eager to leave crowded city apartments or their parents’ homes to begin raising families. A change in government financing regulations led him to begin offering his houses for sale in 1948 for a small amount down and a low monthly payment. Young couples, many of them the original renters, quickly bought the first four thousand; by the time Levittown—as he called the new community—was completed in 1951, it contained more than seventeen thousand homes. So many babies were born in Levittown that it soon became known as “Fertility Valley” and “the Rabbit Hutch.” Levitt eventually built two more Levittowns, one in Pennsylvania and one in New Jersey; each contained the same curving streets, neighborhood parks and playgrounds, and community swimming pools characteristic of the first development. The secret of Levittown’s appeal was the basic house, a 720-square-foot Cape Cod design built on a concrete slab. It had a kitchen, two bedrooms and bath, a living room complete with a fireplace and 16-foot picture window, and an expansion attic with room for two more bedrooms. Levitt built only

 one interior, but there were four different facades to break the monotony. The original house sold for $6,990 in 1948; even the improved model, a ranch-style house, sold for less than $10,000 in 1951. Levitt’s houses were ideal for young people just starting out in life. They were cheap, comfortable, and efficient, and each home came with a refrigerator, cooking range, and washing machine. Despite the conformity of the houses, the three Levittowns were surprisingly diverse communities; residents had a wide variety of religious, ethnic, and occupational backgrounds. African Americans, however, were rigidly excluded. In time, as the more successful families moved on to larger homes in more expensive neighborhoods, the Levittowns became enclaves for lower-middle-class families. evittown symbolized the most significant social trend of the postwar era in the United States—the flight to the suburbs. The residential areas surrounding cities such as New York and Chicago nearly doubled in the 1950s. While central cities remained relatively stagnant during the decade, suburbs grew by 46 percent; by 1960, some sixty million people, one-third of the nation, lived in suburban rings around the cities. This massive shift in population from the central city was accompanied by a baby boom that started during World War II. Young married couples began to have three, four, or even five children (compared with only one or two children in American families during the 1930s). These larger families led to a 19 percent growth in the nation’s population between 1950 and 1960, the highest growth rate since 1910.

L


 The houses of Levittown spread over twelve hundred acres of former potato fields on Long Island, New York.

 The economy boomed as residential construction soared. By 1960, one-fourth of all existing homes were less than ten years old, and factories were turning out large quantities of appliances and television sets for the new households. A multitude of new consumer products—ranging from frozen foods to filter cigarettes, from high-fidelity phonographs to cars equipped with automatic

 transmissions and tubeless tires—appeared in stores and showrooms. In the suburbs, the corner grocery gave way to the supermarket carrying a vast array of items that enabled homemakers to provide their families with a more varied diet. A new affluence replaced the poverty and hunger of the Great Depression for most Americans, but many had haunting memories



 CHAPTER 29

AFFLUENCE AND ANXIETY

Listen to the Audio File


 Events abroad added to the feeling of anxiety in the postwar years. Nuclear war became a frighteningly real possibility. The rivalry with the Soviet Union had led to the second Red Scare, with charges of treason and disloyalty being leveled at loyal Americans. Many Americans joined Senator Joseph McCarthy in searching for the communist enemy at home rather than abroad. Loyalty oaths and book burning revealed how insecure Americans had become in the era of the Cold War. The 1950s also witnessed a growing demand by African Americans for equal opportunity in an age of abundance. The civil rights movement, along with strident criticism of the consumer culture, revealed that beneath the bland surface of suburban affluence forces for change were at work.

“Little Boxes”


The Postwar Boom
 How did the American economy evolve after World War II?

 A photograph, for a Levittown house. The Levittown builders applied the principles of mass production used in auto manufacturing to house construction. One important difference was the fact that the product stood stationary while workers came to the site to perform their specialized tasks.

 of the 1930s. The obsession with material goods took on an almost desperate quality, as if a profusion of houses, cars, and home appliances could guarantee that the nightmare of depression would never return. Critics were quick to disparage the quality of life in suburban society. They condemned the conformity, charging the newly affluent with forsaking traditional American individualism to live in identical houses, drive look-alike cars, and accumulate the same material possessions. Folksinger Malvina Reynolds caught the essence of postwar suburbia in a 1962 song: Little boxes on the hillside, Little boxes made of ticky tacky, Little boxes on the hillside, Little boxes all the same. There’s a green one and a pink one And a blue one and a yellow one, And they’re all made out of ticky tacky, And they all look just the same.1

 “Little Boxes,” words and music by Malvina Reynolds. Copyright © 1962 Schroder Music Co. [ASCAP]. Used by permission. All rights reserved.

 For fifteen years following World War II, the nation witnessed a period of unparalleled economic growth. A pent-up demand for consumer goods fueled a steady industrial expansion. Heavy government spending during the Cold War added an extra stimulus to the economy, offsetting brief recessions in 1949 and 1953 and moderating a steeper one in 1957–1958. By the end of the 1950s, the American people had achieved an affluence that finally erased the lingering fears of the Great Depression.

Postwar Prosperity
 The economy began its upward surge as the result of two longterm factors. First, American consumers—after being held in check by depression and then by wartime scarcities—finally had a chance to indulge their suppressed appetites for material goods. At the war’s end, personal savings in the United States stood at more than $37 billion, providing a powerful stimulus to consumption. Initially, American factories could not turn out enough automobiles and appliances to satisfy the horde of buyers. By 1950, however, production lines had finally caught up with the demand. In that year, Americans bought more than six million cars, and the gross national product (GNP) reached $318 billion (50 percent higher than in 1940). The Cold War provided the additional stimulus the economy needed when postwar expansion slowed. The Marshall Plan and other foreign aid programs financed a heavy export trade. The Korean War helped overturn a brief recession and ensured continued prosperity as the government spent massive amounts on guns, planes, and munitions. In 1952, the nation spent $44 billion, two-thirds of the federal budget, on national defense.

The Postwar Boom


 Although Eisenhower managed to bring about some modest reductions, defense spending continued at a level of $40 billion throughout the decade. The nation achieved an affluence in the 1950s that made the persisting fear of another Great Depression seem irrational. The baby boom and the spectacular growth of suburbia served as great stimulants to the consumer goods industries. Manufacturers turned out an ever-increasing number of refrigerators, washing machines, and dishwashers to equip the kitchens of Levittown and its many imitators across the country. The automobile industry thrived with suburban expansion as two-car families became more and more common. In 1955, in an era when oil was abundant and gasoline sold for less than 30 cents a gallon, Detroit sold a record eight million cars. The electronics industry boomed. Consumers were eager to acquire the latest marvel of home entertainment—the television set. Commercial enterprises snapped up office machines and the first generation of computers; industry installed electronic sensors and processors as it underwent extensive automation; and the military displayed an insatiable appetite for electronic devices for its planes and ships. As a result, American industry averaged more than $10 billion a year in capital investment, and the number of persons employed rose above the long-sought goal of sixty million nationwide. Yet the economic abundance of the 1950s was not without its problems. While some sections of the nation (notably the emerging Sunbelt areas of the South and West) benefited enormously from the growth of the aircraft and electronics industries, older manufacturing regions, such as New England, did not fare as well. The steel industry increased its capacity during the decade, but it began to fall behind the rate of national growth. Agriculture continued to experience bumper crops and low prices, so rural regions, like the vast areas of the Plains states, failed to share in the general affluence. Unemployment persisted despite the boom, rising to more than 7 percent in a sharp recession that hit the country in the fall of 1957 and lasted through the summer of 1958. The rate of economic growth slowed in the second half of the decade, causing concern about the continuing vitality of the American economy. None of these flaws, however, could disguise the fact that the nation was prospering to an extent no one dreamed possible in the 1930s. The GNP grew to $440 billion by 1960, more than double the 1940 level. More important, workers now labored fewer than forty hours a week; they rarely worked on Saturdays, and nearly all enjoyed a two-week paid vacation each year. By the mid-1950s, the average American family had twice as much real income to spend as its counterpart had possessed in the boom years of the 1920s. From 1945 to 1960, per capita disposable income rose by $500—to $1,845—for every man, woman, and child in the country. The American people, in one generation, had moved from poverty and depression to the highest standard of living the world had ever known.

Life in the Suburbs
 Sociologists had difficulty describing the nature of suburban society in the 1950s. Some saw it as classless, while others noted the absence of both the very rich and the very poor and consequently labeled it “middle class.” Rather than forming a homogeneous social group, though, the suburbs contained a surprising variety of people, whether classified as “upper lower,” “lower middle,” and



 “upper middle” or simply as blue collar, white collar, and professional. Doctors and lawyers often lived in the same developments as salesclerks and master plumbers. The traditional distinctions of ancestry, education, and size of residence no longer differentiated people as easily as they had in the past. Yet suburbs could vary widely, from working-class communities clustered near factories built in the countryside to old, elitist areas such as Scarsdale, New York, and Shaker Heights, Ohio. Most were almost exclusively white and Christian, but suburbs such as Great Neck on Long Island and Richmond Heights outside Miami enabled Jews and blacks to take part in the flight from the inner city. Life in all the suburban communities depended on the automobile. Highways and expressways allowed fathers to commute to jobs in the cities, often an hour or more away. Children might ride buses to and from school, but mothers had to drive them to piano lessons and Little League ballgames. Two cars became a necessity for almost every suburban family, thus helping spur the boom in automobile production. In 1948, only 59 percent of American families owned a car; just a few years later, nearly every suburban family had at least one vehicle, and many had several. In the new drive-in culture, people shopped at the stores that grew up first in “miracle miles” along the highways and later at the shopping centers that spread across the countryside in the 1950s. There were only eight shopping centers in the entire country in 1946; hundreds appeared over the next fifteen years, including Poplar Plaza in Memphis, with one large department store, thirty retail shops, and parking for more than five hundred cars. In 1956, the first enclosed air-conditioned mall, the Southdale Shopping Center, opened outside Minneapolis. Despite the increased mobility provided by the car, the home became the focus for activities and aspirations. The postwar shortage of housing that often forced young couples to live with their parents or in-laws created an intense demand for new homes in the suburbs. When questioned, prospective buyers expressed a desire for “more space,” for “comfort and roominess,” and for “privacy and freedom of action” in their new residences. Men and women who moved to the suburbs prized the new kitchens with their built-in dishwashers, electric ovens, and gleaming counters; the extra bedrooms that ensured privacy from and for the children; the large garages that could be converted into recreation rooms; and the small, neat lawns that gave them an area for outdoor activities as well as a new way to compete with their neighbors. “Togetherness” became the code word of the 1950s. Families did things together, whether gathering around the TV sets that dominated living rooms, attending community activities, or taking vacations in the huge station wagons of the era. But there were some less attractive consequences of the new suburban lifestyle. The extended family, in which several generations had lived in close proximity, was a casualty of the boom in small detached homes. As historian Kenneth Jackson noted, suburban life “ordained that most children would grow up in intimate contact only with their parents and siblings.” For many families, grandparents, aunts and uncles, cousins, and more distant relatives would become remote figures, seen only on special occasions. The nuclear family, typical of the suburb, did little to encourage the development of feminism. The end of the war saw many women who had entered the workforce return to the home, where



 CHAPTER 29

AFFLUENCE AND ANXIETY

 the role of wife and mother continued to be viewed as the ideal for women in the 1950s. Trends toward getting married earlier and having larger families reinforced the pattern of women devoting all their efforts to housework and child raising rather than acquiring professional skills and pursuing careers outside the home. Adlai Stevenson, extolling “the humble role of housewife,” told Smith College graduates that there was much they could do “in the living room with a baby in your lap or in the kitchen with a can opener in your hand.” Dr. Benjamin Spock’s 1946 best-seller, Baby and Child Care, became a fixture in millions of homes, while the traditional women’s magazines such as McCall’s and Good Housekeeping thrived by featuring articles on natural childbirth and inspirational pieces such as “Homemaking Is My Vocation.” Nonetheless, the number of working wives doubled between 1940 and 1960. By the end of the 1950s, 40 percent of American women, and nearly one-third of all married women, had jobs outside the home. The heavy expenses involved in rearing and educating children led wives and mothers to seek ways to augment the family income, inadvertently preparing the way for a new demand for equality in the 1960s.

The Good Life?
 How did American culture change after the war? Consumerism became the dominant social theme of the 1950s. Yet even with an abundance of creature comforts and added hours of leisure time, the quality of life left many Americans anxious and dissatisfied.

Areas of Greatest Growth
 Organized religion flourished in the climate of the 1950s. Ministers, priests, and rabbis all commented on the rise in church and synagogue attendance in the new communities. Will Herberg claimed that religious affiliation had become the primary identifying feature of modern American life, dividing the nation into three separate segments—Protestant, Catholic, and Jewish. Some observers condemned the bland, secular nature of suburban churches, which seemed to be an integral part of the consumer society. “On weekdays one shops for food,” wrote one critic, “on Saturdays one shops for recreation, and on Sundays one shops for the Holy Ghost.” But the popularity of religious writer Norman Vincent Peale, with his positive gospel that urged people to “start thinking faith, enthusiasm, and joy,” suggested that the new churches filled a genuine, if shallow, human need. At the same time, the emergence of neo-orthodoxy in Protestant seminaries (notably through the ideas of Reinhold Niebuhr) and the rapid spread of radical forms of fundamentalism (such as the Assemblies of God) indicated that millions of Americans still were searching for a more personal religious faith. Schools provided an immediate problem for the growing new suburban communities. The increase in the number of school-age children, from twenty to thirty million in the first eight grades, overwhelmed the resources of many local districts, leading to demands for federal aid. Congress granted limited help for areas affected by

 defense plants and military bases, but Eisenhower’s reluctance to unbalance the budget—along with traditional adherence to state control over public education—blocked further federal assistance prior to 1957, when the government reacted to Sputnik. (See the Feature Essay, “The Reaction to Sputnik,” pp. 694–695.) Equally important, a controversy arose over the nature of education in the 1950s. Critics of “progressive” education called for sweeping educational reforms and a new emphasis on traditional academic subjects. Suburban communities often had bitter fights; affluent parents demanded kindergarten enrichment programs and grade school foreign language instruction while workingclass people resisted such costly innovations. The one thing all seemed to agree on was the desirability of a college education. The number of young people attending colleges increased from 1.5 million in 1940 to 3.6 million in 1960. The largest advances were made in the exciting new medium of television. From a shaky start just after the war, TV boomed in the 1950s, pushing radio aside and undermining many of the nation’s magazines. By 1957, three networks controlled the airwaves, reaching forty million sets over nearly five hundred stations. Advertisers soon took charge of the new medium, using techniques first pioneered in radio—including taped commercials, quiz shows, and soap operas. At first, the insatiable demand for programs encouraged a burst of creativity. Playwrights such as Reginald Rose, Rod Serling, and Paddy Chayefsky wrote a series of notable dramas for Playhouse 90, Studio One, and the Goodyear Television Playhouse. Broadcast live from cramped studios, these productions thrived on tight dramatic structures, movable scenery, and frequent close-ups of the actors. Advertisers, however, quickly became disillusioned with the live anthology programs, which usually dealt with controversial subjects or focused on ordinary people and events. In contrast, sponsors wanted shows that stressed excitement, glamour, and instant success. Aware that audiences were fascinated by contestants with unusual expertise (a shoemaker answering tough questions on operas, a grandmother stumping experts on baseball), producers began giving away huge cash prizes on The $64,000 Question and Twenty-one. In 1959, the nation was shocked when Charles Van Doren, a Columbia University professor, confessed he had been given the answers in advance to win $129,000 on Twenty-one. The three networks quickly dropped all the big-prize quiz programs, replacing them with comedy, action, and adventure shows such as The Untouchables and Bonanza. Despite its early promise of artistic innovation, television had become a technologically sophisticated but safe conveyor of the consumer culture.

Critics of the Consumer Society
 One striking feature of the 1950s was the abundance of self-criticism. A number of widely read books explored the flaws in the new suburbia. John Keats’s The Crack in the Picture Window described the endless rows of tract houses “vomited up” by developers as “identical boxes spreading like gangrene.” Their occupants—whom he dubbed the Drones, the Amiables, and the Fecunds—lost any sense of individuality in their obsession with material goods. Richard Gordon, Katherine Gordon, and Max Gunther were more concerned about the psychological toll of suburban life in

The Good Life?


 their 1960 book The Split-Level Trap. They labeled the new lifestyle “Disturbia” and bemoaned the “haggard” men, the “tense and anxious” women, and the “gimme” kids it produced. The most sweeping indictment came in William H. Whyte’s The Organization Man (1956), based on a study of the Chicago suburb of Park Forest. Whyte perceived a change from the old Protestant ethic, with its emphasis on hard work and personal responsibility, to a new social ethic centered on “the team” with the ultimate goal of “belongingness.” The result was a stifling conformity and the loss of personal identity. The most influential social critic of the 1950s was Harvard sociologist David Riesman. His book The Lonely Crowd appeared in 1950 and set the tone for intellectual commentary about suburbia for the rest of the decade. Riesman described the shift from the “innerdirected” Americans of the past who had relied on such traditional values as self-denial and frugality to the “other-directed” Americans of the consumer society who constantly adapted their behavior to conform to social pressures. The consequences—a decline in individualism and a tendency for people to become acutely sensitive to the expectations of others—produced a bland and tolerant society of consumers lacking creativity and a sense of adventure.

View the Closer Look




C.
Wright Mills was a far more caustic commentator on American society in the 1950s. Anticipating government statistics that revealed white-collar workers (salesclerks, office workers, bank tellers) now outnumbered blue-collar workers (miners, factory workers, mill hands), Mills described the new middle class in ominous terms in his books White Collar (1951) and Power Elite (1956). The corporation was the villain for Mills, depriving office workers of their own identities and imposing an impersonal discipline through manipulation and propaganda. The industrial assembly line had given way to an even more dehumanizing workplace, the modern office. “At rows of blank-looking counters sat rows of blank-looking girls with blank, white folders in their blank hands, all blankly folding blank papers.” This disenchantment with the consumer culture reached its most eloquent expression with the beats, literary groups that rebelled against the materialistic society of the 1950s. Jack Kerouac’s novel On the Road, published in 1957, set the tone for the new movement. The name came from the quest for beatitude, a state of inner grace sought in Zen Buddhism. Flouting the respectability of suburbia, the “beatniks”—as middle America termed them—were 
I
Love Lucy]  A 1950s Family Watching Television

I
Love Lucy was one of the most popular television shows of the 1950s. Manufacturers designed television sets as living room furniture and marketed televisions as promoting family togetherness and facilitating domestic leisure time. 
 Complete the Assignment The Reaction to Sputnik on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


The Reaction to Sputnik


 Sputnik was launched into an elliptical low orbit by the Soviet Union on October 4, 1957. The surprise success of the launching of the world’s first artificial satellite by the Soviet Union served as catalyst in the United States for major changes and initiatives in national security, education, and space exploration.

O


 n October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik, the world’s first artificial satellite. Every 92 minutes, the 184-pound sphere orbited the globe, emitting its distinctive radio signal, “beep . . . beep . . . beep.” Americans were stunned. The United States had been planning to send up its own satellite as part of the International Geophysical Year established as July 1, 1957, to December 31, 1958. But the Vanguard program, kept

 separate from the military’s quest for an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM), was far behind schedule. All American scientists could do was offer their congratulations to the Soviets, while political leaders tried to downplay the feat, with one official dismissing Sputnik as “a silly bauble.” Critics of the Eisenhower administration, however, reacted quite differently. A sense of panic gripped the nation. Edward Teller, father of the H-bomb, spoke of a technological

 Pearl Harbor and raised the fear that the Soviets, with a rocket powerful enough to send Sputnik into space, were ahead of the United States in the race for the ICBM. Even more important, many soon began to worry that the Soviets threatened the superiority of the United States in science and technology, areas in which Americans had long felt invincible. Thus Senator Henry Jackson, a Cold War Democrat, called the launch of Sputnik “a devastating blow to the prestige of the United

 States as the leader in the scientific and technical world.” In responding to Sputnik, Americans began to voice doubts about the vitality and quality of their own society. Critics warned of excessive devotion to material objects—cars, appliances, luxury goods—at the expense of traditional American values such as hard work, dedication, and national pride. One senator proclaimed that it was time “to be less concerned with the depth of pile on the new broadloom rug or the height of the tail fin on the car and to be more prepared to shed blood, sweat, and tears if this country and the Free World are to survive.” Others worried over the realization that the Soviets were training more scientists and engineers than the United States and called for a complete overhaul of the American educational system. Sputnik gave new momentum to reformers who for years had been critical of the trend toward social adjustment in American schools and were crying out for more stress on the basics—reading, writing, and arithmetic. Events in the first few months following the launch of Sputnik did little to calm the nation. In November 1957, the Soviets orbited a second satellite, one weighing over 1,000 pounds and carrying a dog into space. A month later, American scientists readied Vanguard for its first launch at Cape Canaveral in Florida. The slim rocket, carrying a tiny 4-pound sphere as its payload, rose only a few inches off the ground and then toppled over in a cloud of smoke and fire. Reporters covering the event quickly derided Vanguard, referring to it as “Flopnik” and “Kaputnik.” President Eisenhower then approved plans to let an army team, led by German scientist Wernher Von Braun, attempt to put a satellite into orbit using the reliable intermediate range Jupiter rocket. On January 31, 1958, Explorer, the first American satellite, successfully orbited the earth. Much smaller than the original Sputnik, Explorer did carry a more sophisticated set of instruments to send back data from space. Informed of the

 successful launch, President Eisenhower expressed the sentiments of millions of Americans when he exclaimed, “I surely feel a lot better now.” Sputnik served as a catalyst for change that led to many positive developments. The most significant came in the area of national security. Democrats, led by Senator Lyndon Johnson, criticized Eisenhower for cutting defense spending in an effort to balance the budget and warned of a future missile gap, claiming that the powerful rocket that launched Sputnik into orbit showed the Soviets were ahead in developing the ICBM. The president responded by increasing the Pentagon budget by several billion dollars and speeding up the American missile program. His most important action, however, was the appointment of MIT President James Killian to the new post of presidential science adviser. Killian quickly created a President’s Science Advisory Committee (PSAC), composed of 17 leading scientists who met regularly to advise Eisenhower on technical issues. “Science,” commented Time magazine, “has never before been given that kind of attention at that level.” Killian and the PSAC persuaded Eisenhower to take a gamble on ICBMs that paid off handsomely. Instead of focusing on liquid-fuel missiles, which took hours to load and could not be placed in hardened sites, the president gave priority to development of solidfuel missiles—the Minuteman and the Polaris—which could be fired almost immediately and could be protected against attack in underground silos or underwater onboard submarines. By the 1960s, fears of a missile gap evaporated as America’s second generation of missiles made the original Soviet ICBMs obsolete. In 1958, the nation moved quickly to address the other issues raised by Sputnik. With strong bipartisan support, Congress acted on long overdue educational reform. The National Defense Education Act (NDEA) helped schools improve and broaden their science and

 math offerings as academic leaders helped design “new math” and “new physics” courses. The act also created a loan fund to assist needy students in meeting the costs of a college education, as well as establishing graduate fellowships in science, engineering, and foreign area studies. Sputnik had allowed those calling for educational reform to break the logjam and upgrade and improve school curriculums as well as make higher education more affordable. Another important congressional action came with the creation of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) in 1958. Concerned by the interservice rivalry that hampered the missile program, its sponsors insisted on a new civilian agency to oversee the nation’s space program. While dependent on the military for the rocket boosters, NASA was able to develop its own agenda for space exploration and started a program that would eventually place astronauts in orbit around the Earth and land them on the moon by the end of the next decade. The reaction to Sputnik illustrates the curious way that democracy often works. Advocates of space exploration, educational reform, and intercontinental ballistic missiles had made little headway before October 4, 1957. The Soviet feat in launching Sputnik helped arouse the nation, and despite the initial overreaction, led to important advances in all three areas. Sputnik thus proved to be like a fire bell in the night, filling the American people with alarm but triggering a positive response that served the nation well.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
How did the Cold War influence America’s decision to invest heavily in space exploration? 2. Why did NASA favor manned space flight over instrument probes? 




 CHAPTER 29

AFFLUENCE AND ANXIETY

Read the Document


Pearson Profiles:


Jack Kerouac


 Despite the disapproval they evoked from mainstream Americans, the beat generation had some compassion for their detractors. “We love everything,” Kerouac proclaimed, “Billy Graham, the Big Ten, Rock and Roll, Zen, apple pie, Eisenhower— we dig it all.” Yet, as highly visible nonconformists in an era of stifling conformity, the beats demonstrated a style of social protest that would flower into the counterculture of the 1960s.

Farewell to Reform
 What was the primary justification for the passage of the Interstate Highway Act of 1956? It is not surprising that the spirit of reform underlying the New Deal failed to flourish in the postwar years. Growing affluence took away the sense of grievance and the cry for change that was so strong in the 1930s. Eager to enjoy the new prosperity after years of want and sacrifice, the American people turned away from federal regulation and welfare programs.

Truman and the Fair Deal


 Novelist Jack Kerouac and his fellow “beat” writers bemoaned the moral bankruptcy of popular culture. They sought not to improve conditions but to find release from the moral and social confines constricting their lives and the literary conventions circumscribing their writing. This photograph of Jack Kerouac was taken by beat poet Allen Ginsberg.

 easily identified by their long hair and bizarre clothing; they also had a penchant for sexual promiscuity and drug experimentation. They were conspicuous dropouts from a society they found senseless. Poet Lawrence Ferlinghetti, who held forth in the City Lights Bookshop in San Francisco (a favorite resort of the beats), summed it up this way: “I was a wind-up toy someone had dropped wound up into a world already running down.” The social protest inherent in the books and poems of the beats found its artistic counterpart in the rise of abstract expressionism. Abstract expressionists worked in styles that emphasized individuality and freedom from the constraints of representational, realistic art. Painters Jackson Pollock and Mark Rothko, among others, challenged mainstream America’s notions about the form and function of art. For Pollock, the act of creating a painting was as important as the painting itself. Rothko pioneered a style known as color field painting; his works in this style are monumental pieces in which enormous areas of color lacking any distinct structure or central focus are used to create a mood.

 Harry Truman was in a buoyant mood when he gave his State of the Union address on January 5, 1949. Heartened by his upset victory in 1948 and by the substantial Democratic majorities in Congress—54 to 42 in the Senate and 263 to 171 in the House— he looked forward to advancing a liberal legislative agenda. As expected, he emphasized traditional New Deal goals: expansion and reform of the farm price-support program, broadened Social Security, an increase in the minimum wage, and repeal of the antiunion Taft-Hartley Act. But he went further, advocating new areas of reform when he declared, “Every segment of our population and every individual has a right to expect from our government a fair deal.” Three reform measures stood out in Truman’s plan for a Fair Deal. The first measure called for medical insurance for all Americans, designed to provide a comprehensive solution to the nation’s health problem. Equally controversial was the second measure that proposed establishing a compulsory Fair Employment Practices Commission (FEPC) to open up employment opportunities for African Americans. During World War II, President Roosevelt had created a voluntary Fair Employment Practices Committee, but Congress stopped funding, and it expired in 1946. The third measure called for federal aid to education in order to help the states and local school districts meet the demands created by the postwar baby boom. Taken together, these legislative proposals went far beyond the New Deal legacy in an effort to provide greater social justice for all citizens. Truman’s ambitious Fair Deal met with defeat after defeat in Congress. Doctors, led by the American Medical Association, branded the administration’s health insurance plan as socialized medicine and lobbied effectively against it. Southern senators threatened a filibuster against the FEPC proposal, quickly ending any chance for action on civil rights. And despite the need for more funding for schools, those favoring local control, especially southern defenders of segregation, were able to defeat measures for federal

Farewell to Reform


 aid. Thus Congress failed to act on all three of the Fair Deal reforms; it also refused to repeal the Taft-Hartley Act or revise the farm program. Truman’s only successes came in expanding Social Security to cover 10 million more Americans and in raising the minimum wage to 75 cents an hour. The president’s failure to enact his Fair Deal program stemmed primarily from political reality. Despite the nominal Democratic control of the House and Senate, a conservative coalition, in the making since 1938, blocked all efforts at further reform. Southern Democrats and northern Republicans combined to defeat any effort to extend government regulation, especially into sensitive areas such as health care and civil rights. At the same time, Truman can be faulted for trying to do too much, too soon. Had he selected one of his proposed reforms, such as federal aid to education, and given it priority, he might have been successful. But attempting to pass such a sweeping program in face of the bipartisan conservative coalition proved hopeless. Yet Truman must be given credit for defending and consolidating the New Deal legacy of the 1930s. By going on the offensive, he blocked any effort by conservatives to undo reforms such as Social Security. Moreover, Truman succeeded in expanding his party’s reform agenda. By calling for action on civil rights, health care, and federal aid to education, he was opening up discussion of vital issues that laid the groundwork for legislative action in the future.

 Eisenhower’s Modern Republicanism The American people found that moderation was the keynote of the Eisenhower presidency. His major goal from the outset was to restore calm and tranquility to a badly divided nation. Unlike FDR and Truman, Eisenhower had no commitment to social change or economic reform. Ike was a fiscal conservative who was intent on balancing the budget. Yet unlike some Republicans of the extreme right wing, he had no plans to dismantle the social programs of the New Deal. He sought instead to keep military spending in check, to encourage as much private initiative as possible, and to reduce federal activities to the bare minimum. Defining his position as Modern Republicanism, he claimed that he was “conservative when it comes to money and liberal when it comes to human beings.” On domestic issues, Eisenhower preferred to delegate authority and to play a passive role. He concentrated his own efforts on the Cold War abroad. The men he chose to run the nation reflected his preference for successful corporation executives. Thus George Humphrey, an Ohio industrialist, carried out a policy of fiscal stringency as secretary of the treasury, while Charles E. Wilson (the former head of General Motors) sought to keep the Pentagon budget under control as secretary of defense. Neither man was wholly successful, and both were guilty of tactless public statements. Humphrey warned that unless Congress showed budgetary restraint, “We’re gonna have a depression which will curl your hair,” and Wilson gained notoriety by proclaiming that “What was good for our country was good for General Motors, and vice versa.” Eisenhower was equally reluctant to play an active role in dealing with Congress. A fervent believer in the separation of powers, Ike did not want to engage in intensive lobbying. He left congressional relations to aides such as Sherman Adams, a former New Hampshire governor who served as White House chief of



 staff. Adams’s skill at resolving problems at lower levels insulated Eisenhower from many of the nation’s pressing domestic concerns. Republican losses in the midterm election of 1954 weakened Eisenhower’s relations with Congress. The Democrats regained control of both houses and kept it throughout the 1950s. The president had to rely on two Texas Democrats, Senate Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson and Speaker of the House Sam Rayburn, for legislative action; at best, it was an awkward and uneasy relationship. The result was a very modest legislative record. Eisenhower did continue the basic social measures of the New Deal. In 1954, he signed bills extending Social Security benefits to more than seven million Americans, raising the minimum wage to $1 an hour, and adding four million workers to those eligible for unemployment benefits. He consolidated the administration of welfare programs by creating the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare in 1953. Oveta Culp Hobby, the first woman to hold a cabinet post in a Republican administration, headed the new department. But Ike steadfastly opposed Democratic plans for compulsory health insurance—which he condemned as the “socialization of medicine”—and comprehensive federal aid to education, preferring to leave everything except school construction in the hands of local and state authorities. This lack of presidential support and the continuing grip of the conservative coalition in Congress blocked any further reform in the 1950s. The one significant legislative achievement of the Eisenhower years came with the passage of the Highway Act of 1956. After a twelve-year delay, Congress appropriated funds for a 41,000-mile interstate highway system consisting of multilane divided expressways that would connect the nation’s major cities. Justified on grounds of national defense, the 1956 act pleased a variety of highway users: the trucking industry, automobile clubs, organized labor (eager for construction jobs), farmers (needing to speed their crops to market), and state highway officials (anxious for the 90 percent funding contributed by the federal government). Eisenhower’s insistence that general revenue funds not be used to provide the federal share—estimated at $25 billion—of the total cost led to the creation of a highway trust fund raised by taxes on fuel, tires, and new cars and trucks. Built over the next twenty years, the interstate highway system had a profound influence on American life. It stimulated the economy and shortened travel time dramatically, while at the same time intensifying the nation’s dependence on the automobile and distorting metropolitan growth patterns into long strips paralleling the new expressways.

THE ELECTION OF 1956
Candidate Eisenhower Stevenson 
Party
Republican
Democratic


Popular
Vote
35,575,420
26,033,066


Electoral
Vote


 Overall, the Eisenhower years marked an era of political moderation. The American people, enjoying the abundance of the 1950s, seemed quite content with legislative inaction. The president was sensitive to the nation’s economic health; when recessions



 CHAPTER 29

AFFLUENCE AND ANXIETY

Seattle
Portland
Butte
Billings


Fargo
Boston
Minneapolis
Detroit
New York


Sioux Falls
Chicago


Pittsburgh
Columbus


Omaha
Cheyenne


Salt Lake City


Kansas City


Denver


San
Francisco


Washington, D.C.


Cincinnati


Indianapolis
St. Louis


Louisville


Nashville
Oklahoma
City
Los Angeles


Albuquerque


Birmingham


San Diego
Tucson
El Paso


Fort Worth


Charlotte


Little
Rock
Atlanta


Dallas
Mobile


San
Antonio
 ALASKA (No interstate highways)

Charleston
Savannah


Montgomery


Jacksonville


New Orleans


Houston


Tampa


Honolulu


Miami
 HAWAII



 500 miles





 500 kilometers



 100 miles 100 kilometers





 500 miles

 Major interstate highways

 500 kilometers

THE INTERSTATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM
The 1956 plan to create an interstate highway system drastically changed America’s landscape and culture. Today, the system covers about forty-five thousand miles, only a few thousand more miles than called for in the original plan. 
 developed in 1953 and again in 1957 after his landslide reelection victory over Adlai Stevenson, he quickly abandoned his goal of a balanced budget in favor of a policy advocating government spending to restore prosperity. These steps, along with modest increases in New Deal welfare programs, led to a steady growth in the federal budget from $29.5 billion in 1950 to $76.5 billion in 1960. Eisenhower was able to balance the budget in only three of his eight years in office, and the $12 billion deficit in 1959 was larger than any ever before recorded in peacetime. In this manner, Eisenhower was able to maintain the New Deal legacy of federal responsibility for social welfare and the state of the economy while at the same time successfully resisting demands for more extensive government involvement in American life.

 The Struggle over Civil Rights How did the civil rights movement develop in the 1940s and 1950s? Despite President Eisenhower’s reluctance to champion the cause of reform, powerful pressures for change forced long-overdue action in one area of American life—the denial of basic rights

 to the nation’s black minority. In the midst of the Cold War, the contradiction between the denunciation of the Soviet Union for its human rights violations and the second-class status of African Americans began to arouse the national conscience. Fighting for freedom against communist tyranny abroad, Americans had to face the reality of the continued denial of freedom to a submerged minority at home. African Americans had benefited economically from World War II, but they were still a seriously disadvantaged group. Those who had left the South for better opportunities in northern and western cities were concentrated in blighted and segregated neighborhoods, working at low-paying jobs, suffering economic and social discrimination, and failing to share fully in the postwar prosperity. The rising expectations of African Americans in the postwar years led them to challenge the older patterns of racial segregation and inequality. In the South, conditions were much worse. State laws forced blacks to live almost totally segregated from white society. Not only did African Americans attend separate (and almost always inferior) schools, but they also were rigidly segregated in all public facilities. They were forced to use separate waiting rooms in train stations, separate seats on all forms of transportation, separate drinking

 The Struggle over Civil Rights

Watch the Video




Justice for All: Civil Protest and Civil Rights


 The firebombing of a Greyhound bus carrying white and black civil rights activists challenging illegal segregation on interstate bus routes in the South during 1961 was undertaken by a mob outside of Anniston, Alabama. These civil rights activists barely escaped with their lives from this violent attack on their passive resistance efforts.

 fountains, and even separate telephone booths. “Segregation was enforced at all places of public entertainment, including libraries, auditoriums, and circuses,” Chief Justice Earl Warren noted. “There was segregation in the hospitals, prisons, mental institutions, and nursing homes. Even ambulance service was segregated.”

Civil Rights as a Political Issue
 Truman was the first president to attempt to alter the historic pattern of racial discrimination in the United States. In 1946, he appointed a presidential commission on civil rights. A year later, in a sweeping report titled To Secure These Rights, the commission recommended the reinstatement of the wartime Fair Employment Practices Committee (FEPC), the establishment of a permanent civil rights commission, and the denial of federal aid to any state that condoned segregation in schools and public facilities. The president’s ten-point legislative program proposed

 in 1948 included some of these measures, notably the establishment of a permanent FEPC and a civil rights commission. But southern resistance had blocked any action by Congress, and the inclusion of a strong civil rights plank in the 1948 Democratic platform had led to the walkout of some southern delegations and a separate States’ Rights (Dixiecrat) ticket in several states of the South that fall. African American voters in the North overwhelmingly backed Truman over Dewey in the 1948 election. The African American vote in key cities—Los Angeles, Cleveland, and Chicago—ensured the Democratic victory in California, Ohio, and Illinois. Truman responded by including civil rights legislation in his Fair Deal program in 1949. Once again, however, determined southern opposition blocked congressional action on both a permanent FEPC and an antilynching measure. Even though President Truman was unable to secure any significant legislation, he did succeed in adding civil rights to the



 CHAPTER 29

AFFLUENCE AND ANXIETY

 liberal agenda. From this time forward, it would be an integral part of the Democratic reform program. Also, Truman used his executive power to assist African Americans. He strengthened the civil rights division of the Justice Department, which aided black groups in their efforts to challenge school segregation and restrictive housing covenants in the courts. Most important, in 1948 Truman issued an order calling for the desegregation of the armed forces. The navy and the air force quickly complied, but the army resisted until the personnel needs of the Korean War finally overcame the military’s objections. By the end of the 1950s, the armed forces had become far more integrated than American society at large.

 “by appealing to reason, by prayer, and by constantly working at it through our own efforts” could change be enacted. Quietly and unobtrusively, he worked to achieve desegregation in federal facilities, particularly in veterans’ hospitals, navy yards, and the District of Columbia school system. Yet he refrained from endorsing the Brown decision, which he told an aide he believed had “set back progress in the South at least fifteen years.” Southern leaders mistook Ike’s silence for tacit support of segregation. In 1957, Governor Orval Faubus of Arkansas called out the national guard to prevent the integration of Little Rock’s Central High School on grounds of a threat to public order. After 270 armed troops turned back nine young African American students, a federal judge ordered the guardsmen removed; but when

Desegregating the Schools
 The nation’s schools soon became the primary target of civil rights advocates. The NAACP concentrated first on universities, successfully waging an intensive legal battle to win admission for qualified African Americans to graduate schools and professional programs. Led by Thurgood Marshall, NAACP lawyers then took on the broader issue of segregation in the country’s public schools. Challenging the 1896 Supreme Court decision that upheld the constitutionality of separate but equal public facilities (see “Plessy v. Ferguson: The Shaping of Jim Crow,” pp. 460–463), Marshall argued that even substantially equal but separate schools did profound psychological damage to African American children and thus violated the Fourteenth Amendment. The Supreme Court was unanimous in its 1954 decision in the case of Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka. Chief Justice Earl Warren, recently appointed by President Eisenhower, wrote the landmark opinion flatly declaring that “separate educational facilities are inherently unequal.” To divide grade school children “solely because of their race,” Warren argued, “generates a feeling of inferiority as to their status in the community that may affect their hearts and minds in a way unlikely ever to be undone.” Despite this sweeping language, Warren realized it would be difficult to change historic patterns of segregation quickly. Accordingly, in 1955, the Court ruled that desegregation of the schools should proceed “with all deliberate speed” and left the details to the lower federal courts. “All deliberate speed” proved to be agonizingly slow. Officials in the border states quickly complied with the Court’s ruling, but states deeper in the South responded with a policy of massive resistance. Local white citizens’ councils organized to fight for retention of racial separation; 101 representatives and senators signed a Southern Manifesto in 1956 that denounced the Brown decision as “a clear abuse of judicial power.” School boards, encouraged by this show of defiance, found a variety of ways to evade the Court’s ruling. The most successful was the passage of pupil placement laws. These laws enabled local officials to assign individual students to schools on the basis of scholastic aptitude, ability to adjust, and “morals, conduct, health, and personal standards.” These stalling tactics led to long disputes in the federal courts; by the end of the decade, fewer than 1 percent of the black children in the Deep South attended school with whites. A conspicuous lack of presidential support further weakened the desegregation effort. Dwight Eisenhower believed that people’s attitudes could not be altered by “cold lawmaking”—only

Read the Document


Brown v. Board of
Education of Topeka, Kansas (1954)


 Demonstrators bearing signs in support of the Supreme Court’s 1954 Brown v. Board of Education ruling to desegregate the nation’s schools. The ruling also sparked protests, many of them violent and destructive, from opponents of integration.

 The Struggle over Civil Rights

Watch the Video




How did the Civil Rights Movement Change American Schools?


 Clinton High School, located in a small town of 5,000 in eastern Tennessee, was the first public high school to desegregate. Clinton was also one of the first towns to witness the anger and hatred associated with school integration. On September 1, 1956, the National Guard and state troopers were called in to help control the violent crowds of protestors.

 the black students entered the school, a mob of five hundred jeering whites surrounded the building. Eisenhower, who had told Faubus that “the Federal Constitution will be upheld by me by every legal means at my command,” sent in one thousand paratroopers to ensure the rights of the Little Rock Nine to attend Central High. The students finished the school year under armed guard. Then Little Rock authorities closed Central High School for the next two years; when it reopened, there were only three African Americans in attendance. Despite the snail’s pace of school desegregation, the Brown decision led to other advances. In 1957, the Eisenhower administration proposed the first general civil rights legislation since Reconstruction. Senate Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson overcame strong southern resistance to avoid a filibuster, but at the expense of weakening the measure considerably. The final act, however, did create a permanent Commission for Civil Rights, one of Truman’s original goals. It also provided for federal efforts aimed at

 “securing and protecting the right to vote.” A second civil rights act in 1960 slightly strengthened the voting rights section. Like the desegregation effort, the attempt to ensure African American voting rights in the South was still largely symbolic. Southern registrars used a variety of devices, ranging from intimidation to unfair tests, to deny African Americans suffrage. Yet the actions of Congress and the Supreme Court marked a vital turning point in national policy toward racial justice.

The Beginnings of Black Activism
 The most dynamic force for change came from African Americans themselves. The shift from legal struggles in the courts to protest in the streets began with an incident in Montgomery, Alabama. On December 1, 1955, Rosa Parks—a black seamstress who had been active in the local NAACP chapter—violated a city ordinance by refusing to give up her seat to a white person on a local



 CHAPTER 29

AFFLUENCE AND ANXIETY

 bus. Her action, often viewed as spontaneous, grew out of a long tradition of black protest against the rigid segregation of the races in the South. Rosa Parks herself had been ejected from a bus a decade earlier for refusing to obey the driver’s command, “Niggers move back.” In 1953, black church leaders in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, had mounted a weeklong boycott of that city’s bus system and succeeded in modifying the traditional segregated seating rules. In Montgomery, the arrest of Rosa Parks sparked a massive protest movement. Black women played a particularly important role in the protest, printing and handing out fifty thousand leaflets to rally the African American community behind Parks. The movement also led to the emergence of Martin Luther King, Jr., as an eloquent new spokesman for African Americans. King agreed to lead the subsequent bus boycott. The son of a famous Atlanta preacher, he had recently taken his first church in Montgomery after years of studying theology while earning a Ph.D. at Boston University. Now he would be able to combine his wide learning with his charismatic appeal in behalf of a practical goal—fair treatment for the African Americans who made up the bulk of the riders on the city’s buses. The Montgomery bus boycott started out with a modest goal. Instead of challenging the legality of segregated seating, King simply asked that seats be taken on a first-come, first-served basis, with African Americans being seated from the back and the whites from the front of each bus. As the protest continued, however, and as they endured both legal harassment and sporadic acts of violence, the protesters began to be more assertive. An effective system of car pools enabled them to avoid using the city buses. Soon they were insisting on a complete end to segregated seating as they sang their new song of protest:

 voice became familiar to the entire nation. Unlike many African American preachers, he never shouted, yet he captured his audience by presenting his ideas with both passion and a compelling cadence. “Though still a boy to many of his older listeners,” Branch noted, “he had the commanding air of a burning sage.” Even more important, he had a strategy and message that fitted perfectly with the plight of his followers. Drawing on sources as diverse as Gandhi and Henry David Thoreau, King came out of the bus boycott with the concept of passive resistance. “If cursed,” he had told protesters in Montgomery, “do not curse back. If struck, do not strike back, but evidence love and goodwill at all times.” The essence of his strategy was to use the apparent weakness of southern blacks—their lack of power—and turn it into a conquering weapon. His message to southern whites was clear and unmistakable: “We will match your capacity to inflict suffering with our capacity to endure suffering. We will meet your physical force with soul force. We will not hate you, but we will not obey your evil laws. We will soon wear you down by pure capacity to suffer.” His ultimate goal was to unite the broken community through bonds of Christian love. He hoped to use nonviolence to appeal to middle-class white America, “to the conscience of the great decent majority who through blindness, fear, pride or irrationality have allowed their consciences to sleep.” The result, King prophesied, would be to enable future historians to say of the effort, “There lived

View the Map


Civil Rights Movement


 Ain’t gonna ride them buses no more Ain’t gonna ride no more Why in the hell don’t the white folk know That I ain’t gonna ride no more. The boycott ended in victory a year later when the Supreme Court ruled the Alabama segregated seating law unconstitutional. The protest movement had triumphed, not only in denting the wall of southern segregation, but in featuring the leadership of Martin Luther King, Jr. He had emerged as the charismatic leader of a new civil rights movement—a man who won acclaim not only at home but around the world. A year after the successful bus boycott, King founded the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)

 to direct the crusade against segregation. He visited Third World leaders in Africa and Asia and paid homage to India’s Mahatma Gandhi, who had influenced his reliance on civil disobedience. He led a triumphant Prayer Pilgrimage to Washington in 1957 on the third anniversary of the Brown decision, stirring the crowd of thirty thousand with his ringing demand for the right to vote. His cry “Give us the ballot” boomed in salvos that civil rights historian Taylor Branch likened to “cannon bursts in a diplomatic salute.” His remarkable

 Rosa Parks’ refusal to surrender her seat to a white man on a Montgomery, Alabama, bus led to a citywide bus boycott that brought Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr., to prominence as a leader of the civil rights movement. Parks remained active in the movement as well; she is shown here being fingerprinted in February 1956 after her arrest for violating an antiboycott law.

Conclusion: Restoring National Confidence


Read the Document


Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee, Statement




 from North Carolina Agricultural and Technical College sat down at a dime-store lunch counter in Greensboro, North Carolina, and refused to move after being denied service. Other students, both whites and blacks, joined in similar “sit-ins” across the South, as well as “kneel-ins” at churches and “wade-ins” at swimming pools. By the end of the year, some fifty thousand young people had succeeded in desegregating public facilities in more than a hundred southern cities. Several thousand of the demonstrators were arrested and put in jail, but the movement gained strength, leading to the formation of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) in April 1960. From this time on, the SCLC and SNCC, with their tactic of direct, though peaceful confrontation, would replace the NAACP and its reliance on court action in the forefront of the civil rights movement. The change would eventually lead to dramatic success for the movement, but it also ushered in a period of heightened tension and social turmoil in the 1960s.

Conclusion: Restoring
National Confidence


 In February 1960, black students from North Carolina A&T College staged a sit-in at a “whites only” Woolworth’s lunch counter in Greensboro, North Carolina. Their act of nonviolent protest spurred similar demonstrations in public spaces across the South in an effort to draw national attention to racial injustice, to demand desegregation of public facilities, and to prompt the federal government to take a more active role to end segregation.

 a great people—a black people—who injected new meaning and dignity into the veins of civilization.” King was not alone in championing the cause of civil rights. JoAnn Robinson helped pave the way in Montgomery with the Woman’s Political Caucus, and leaders as diverse as Bayard Rustin and Ella Baker were advancing the cause at the grassroots level. In February 1960, another spontaneous event sparked a further advance for passive resistance. Four African American students

 In 1959, disturbed by the criticism of American society sparked by Sputnik, President Eisenhower appointed a Commission on National Goals “to develop a broad outline of national objectives for the next decade and longer.” Ten prominent citizens from all walks of life, led by Henry W. Wriston of Brown University, issued a report that called for increased military spending abroad, greater economic growth at home, broader educational opportunities, and more government support for both scientific research and the advancement of the arts. The consensus seemed to be that rather than a change of direction, all the United States needed was a renewed commitment to the pursuit of excellence. The 1950s ended with the national mood less troubled than when the decade began amid the turmoil of the second Red Scare and the Korean War, yet hardly as tranquil or confident as Eisenhower had hoped it would be. The American people felt reassured about the state of the economy, no longer fearing a return to the grim years of the Great Depression. At the same time, however, they were aware that abundance alone did not guarantee the quality of everyday life and realized that there was still a huge gap between American ideals and the reality of race relations, in the North as well as the South.



 CHAPTER 29

CHAPTER REVIEW

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 29 Affluence and Anxiety on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1946
Republicans win control of both houses of Congress 
 1955 African Americans begin boycott of Montgomery,

 in November elections William Levitt announces first Levittown Truman orders end to segregation in armed forces Minimum wage raised from 40 to 75 cents an hour McDonald’s chooses golden arches design for its hamburger shops Supreme Court orders schools desegregated in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka

 Alabama, bus company (December) Eisenhower signs legislation creating the interstate highway system Congress passes first Civil Rights Act since Reconstruction Charles Van Doren confesses to cheating on television quiz show Twenty-One African American college students stage sit-in in Greensboro, North Carolina



CHAPTER REVIEW
The Postwar Boom 
Farewell to Reform


 How did the American economy evolve after World War II?

Butte
Bi


Salt Lake City


 What was the primary justification for the passage of the Interstate Highway Act of 1956?

Cheyen


 The American economy boomed after World War II, as the nation recovered from the Great Depression and the war. The GNP doubled between 1940 and 1960. Individuals spent heavily on housing, automobiles, and consumer goods, and the government on defense. New communities emerged in the suburbs and the Sunbelt states of the West and South. (p. 690)

 The Highway Act appropriated funds to construct a 41,000-mile interstate highway system that would connect the nation’s major cities to each other. Although the highways would benefit a variety of users, such as the trucking industry, organized labor, state transportation departments, and farmers, the primary justification for passing the law in Congress was national defense. (p. 696)

The Good Life?


 The Struggle over Civil Rights

 How did American culture change after the war? American culture reflected both the promise of material prosperity and the failure of material goods to yield true happiness. More people went to church than ever; more young people went to college. Television provided endless information and entertainment. But suburban life exhibited a shallow sameness that prompted critics to question if it was worthwhile. (p. 692)

Den


A


 l

 How did the civil rights movement develop in the 1940s and 1950s? Civil rights became a major issue after World War II. Truman desegregated the military, and federal courts ordered the desegregation of schools. Black activists such as Rosa Parks and Martin Luther King, Jr., led protests against segregation on buses and other public facilities. Students organized sit-ins. (p. 698)

STUDY RESOURCES



KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Levittown In 1947, William Levitt used mass production techniques to build inexpensive houses in suburban New York to help relieve the postwar housing shortage. Levittown became a symbol of the postwar move to the suburbs. p. 688 
 after seamstress Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to move to the back of a bus. The boycott, which ended when the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the protesters, marked the beginning of a new, activist phase of the civil rights movement. p. 702

 Baby boom The rise in births following World War II. Children born to this generation are referred to as “baby boomers.” p. 688

 Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) An organization founded by Martin Luther King, Jr., to fight segregation through passive resistance, nonviolence, and peaceful confrontation. p. 702

Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka In 1954, the Supreme
 Court reversed the Plessy v. Ferguson decision (1896), which established the “separate but equal” doctrine. The Brown decision found segregation in schools inherently unequal and initiated a long and difficult effort to integrate the nation’s public schools. p. 700 Montgomery bus boycott In late 1955, African Americans led by Martin Luther King, Jr., boycotted the buses in Montgomery, Alabama,

 Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) A group organized by students to work for equal rights for African Americans. It spearheaded peaceful sit-its and marches in the early 1960s, but later grew more radical and changed its name to the Student National Coordinating Committee. p. 703

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
What are some advantages of suburban life? What are some 
 3. Were the civil rights marchers justified in breaking Jim Crow Laws?

 disadvantages?

 2. Did television bring Americans together, or drive them apart?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 29 on MyHistoryLab The Postwar Boom Listen to the Audio

 The Struggle over Civil Rights “Little Boxes” p. 690

The Good Life?
◾
◾


View the Closer Look
Television p. 693


 A 1950s Family Watching

Complete the Assignment
Sputnik p. 694


The Reaction to


Read the Document Pearson Profiles: Jack
Kerouac p. 696


◾


Watch the Video Justice for All: Civil Protest
 and Civil Rights p. 699

◾


Read the Document Brown v. Board of Education of
Topeka, Kansas (1954) p. 700


◾


Watch the Video How did the Civil Rights Movement
Change American Schools? p. 701
View the Map


Civil Rights Movement p. 702


Read the Document Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee, Statement p. 703


◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




The Turbulent Sixties


Contents and Learning Objectives
KENNEDY INTENSIFIES THE COLD WAR PG. 708

YEARS OF TURMOIL PG. 726
Why were there protests during the 1960s? 
 How did the Cold War intensify under Kennedy?

THE RETURN OF RICHARD NIXON PG. 731
How did the Vietnam War influence American politics? 
THE NEW FRONTIER AT HOME PG. 713
What was the “New Frontier,” and what did it accomplish? 
FEATURE ESSAY
Unintended Consequences: The Second Great Migration 
US CONTINUE” PG. 717
What were Johnson’s domestic priorities and what were his achievements? 
JOHNSON ESCALATES THE VIETNAM WAR PG. 721
How did Johnson’s Vietnam policy evolve? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

