New World Encounters


Contents and Learning Objectives
NATIVE AMERICAN HISTORIES BEFORE THE CONQUEST PG. 4

IMAGINING A NEW WORLD PG. 16

 What explains cultural differences among Native American groups before European conquest?

 How did Spanish conquest of Central and South America transform Native American cultures?

THE FRENCH CLAIM CANADA PG. 20

A WORLD TRANSFORMED PG. 8

 What was the character of the French empire in Canada?

 How did Europeans and Native Americans interact during the period of first contact?

THE ENGLISH ENTER THE COMPETITION PG. 21

WEST AFRICA: ANCIENT AND COMPLEX SOCIETIES PG. 11
What was the character of the West African societies that European traders first encountered? 
EUROPE ON THE EVE OF CONQUEST PG. 15
How do you explain Spain’s central role in New World exploration and colonization? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

 Why did England not participate in the early competition for New World colonies?

AN UNPROMISING BEGINNING: MYSTERY AT ROANOKE PG. 24
What role did the Spanish play in the failure of the Roanoke colony? ◾ FEATURE ESSAY The Columbian Exchange and the Global Environment: Ecological Revolution 
Chapter 1 New World Encounters


Clash of Cultures: Interpreting
Murder in Early Maryland
 New World conquest sparked unexpected, often embarrassing contests over the alleged superiority of European culture. Not surprisingly, the colonizers insisted they brought the benefits of civilization to the primitive and savage peoples of North America. Native Americans never shared this perspective, voicing a strong preference for their own values and institutions. In early seventeenth-century Maryland the struggle over cultural superiority turned dramatically on how best to punish the crime of murder, an issue about which both Native Americans and Europeans had firm opinions. The actual events that occurred at Captain William Claiborne’s trading post in 1635 may never be known. Surviving records indicate that several young males identified as Wicomess Indians apparently traveled to Claiborne’s on business, but to their great annoyance, they found the proprietor entertaining Susquehannock Indians, their most hated enemies. The situation deteriorated rapidly after the Susquehannock men

 ridiculed the Wicomess youths, “whereat some of Claiborne’s people that saw it, did laugh.” Unwilling to endure public humiliation, the Wicomess later ambushed the Susquehannock group, killing five, and then returned to the trading post where they murdered three Englishmen. Wicomess leaders realized immediately that something had to be done. They dispatched a trusted messenger to inform the governor of Maryland that they intended “to offer satisfaction for the harm . . . done to the English.” The murder of the Susquehannock was another matter, best addressed by the Native Americans themselves. The governor praised the Wicomess for coming forward, announcing that “I expect that those men, who have done this outrage, should be delivered unto me, to do with them as I shall think fit.” The Wicomess spokesman was dumbfounded. The governor surely did not understand basic Native American legal procedure. “It is the manner amongst

 Europeans imagined a New World that often bore little relation to reality. This early engraving depicts the coast of North America as a dangerous place where hostile Indians, bizarre navigational hazards, and sea monsters greeted English sailors.

 us Indians, that if any such like accident happens,” he explained, “we do redeem the life of a man that is so slain with a 100 Arms length of Roanoke (which is a sort of Beads that they make, and use for money.)” The governor’s demand for prisoners seemed doubly impertinent, “since you [English settlers] are here strangers, and coming into our Country, you should rather conform your selves to the Customs of our Country, than impose yours upon us.” At this point the governor hastily ended

 the conversation, perhaps uncomfortably aware that if the legal tables had been turned and the murders committed in England, he would be the one loudly defending “the Customs of our Country.” uropeans sailing in the wake of Admiral Christopher Columbus constructed a narrative of superiority that survived long after the Wicomess had been dispersed—a fate that befell them in the late seventeenth century. The story recounted first in Europe and then in the United States depicted

E




 CHAPTER 1

NEW WORLD ENCOUNTERS

 heroic adventures, missionaries, and soldiers sharing Western civilization with the peoples of the New World and opening a vast virgin land to economic development. The familiar tale celebrated material progress, the inevitable spread of European values, and the taming of frontiers. It was a history crafted by the victors—usually by white leaders such as Maryland’s governor— and by the children of the victors to explain how they had come to inherit the land. This narrative of events no longer provides an adequate explanation for European conquest and settlement. It is not so much wrong as partisan, incomplete, even offensive. History recounted from the perspective of the victors inevitably silences the voices of the victims, the peoples who, in the victors’ view, foolishly resisted economic and technological progress. Heroic tales of the advance of Western values only serve to deflect modern attention away from the rich cultural and racial diversity that characterized North American societies for a very long time. More disturbing, traditional tales of European conquest also obscure the sufferings of the millions of Native Americans who perished, as well as the huge numbers of Africans sold in the New World as slaves. By placing these complex, often unsettling, experiences within an interpretive framework of creative adaptations— rather than of exploration or settlement—we go a long way toward recapturing the full human dimensions of conquest and resistance. While the New World often witnessed tragic violence and systematic betrayal, it allowed ordinary people of three different races and many different ethnic identities opportunities to shape their own lives as best they could within diverse, often hostile, environments. It should be remembered that neither the Native Americans nor the Africans were passive victims of European exploitation. Within their own families and communities they made choices, sometimes rebelling, sometimes accommodating, but always trying to make sense in terms of their own cultures of what was happening to them. Of course, that was precisely what the Wicomess messenger tried to tell the governor of Maryland.

Native American Histories Before
 the Conquest What explains cultural differences among Native American groups before European conquest? As almost any Native American could have informed the first European adventurers, the peopling of America did not begin in 1492. In fact, although European invaders such as Columbus proclaimed the discovery of a “New World,” they really brought into contact three worlds—Europe, Africa, and America— that in the fifteenth century were already old. Indeed, the first migrants reached the North American continent some fifteen to twenty thousand years ago. The precise dating of this great human trek remains a hotly contested topic. Although some archaeologists maintain that settlement began as early as thirty thousand years ago, the scientific evidence in support of this thesis currently is not persuasive. However this debate eventually resolves itself; no one doubts that Native Americans have

 recorded a very long history in North America. Their social and cultural development over the period was as complex as any encountered in the so-called Old World. Environmental conditions played a major part in the story. Twenty thousand years ago the earth’s climate was considerably colder than it is today. Huge glaciers, often more than a mile thick, extended as far south as the present states of Illinois and Ohio and covered broad sections of western Canada. Much of the world’s moisture was transformed into ice, and the oceans dropped hundreds of feet below their current levels. The receding waters created a land bridge connecting Asia and North America, a region now submerged beneath the Bering Sea that modern archaeologists named Beringia. Even at the height of the last Ice Age, much of the far North remained free of glaciers. Small bands of spear-throwing Paleo-Indians pursued giant mammals (megafauna)—woolly mammoths and mastodons, for example—across the vast tundra of Beringia. These hunters were the first human beings to set foot on a vast, uninhabited continent. Because these migrations took place over a long period of time and involved small, independent bands of highly nomadic people, the Paleo-Indians never developed a sense of common identity. Each group focused on its own immediate survival, adjusting to the opportunities presented by various microenvironments. The material culture of the Paleo-Indians differed little from that of other Stone Age peoples found in Asia, Africa, and Europe. In terms of human health, however, something occurred on the Beringian tundra that forever altered the history of Native Americans. For reasons that remain obscure, the members of these small migrating groups stopped hosting a number of communicative diseases—smallpox and measles being the deadliest—and although Native Americans experienced illnesses such as tuberculosis, they no longer suffered the major epidemics that under normal conditions would have killed a large percentage of their population every year. The physical isolation of the various bands may have protected them from the spread of contagious disease. Another theory notes that epidemics have frequently been associated with prolonged contact with domestic animals such as cattle and pigs. Since the Paleo-Indians did not domesticate animals, not even horses, they may have avoided the microbes that caused virulent European and African diseases. Whatever the explanation for this curious epidemiological record, Native Americans lost inherited immunities that later might have protected them from many contagious germs. Thus, when they first came into contact with Europeans and Africans, Native Americans had no defense against the great killers of the Early Modern world. And, as medical researchers have discovered, dislocations resulting from war and famine made the Indians even more vulnerable to infectious disease.

The Environmental Challenge: Food,
Climate, and Culture
 Some twelve thousand years ago global warming substantially reduced the glaciers, allowing nomadic hunters to pour into the heart of the North American continent. Within just

Native American Histories Before the Conquest


 a few thousand years, Native Americans had journeyed from Colorado to the southern tip of South America. Blessed with a seemingly inexhaustible supply of meat, the early migrants experienced rapid population growth. As archaeologists have discovered, however, the sudden expansion of human population coincided with the loss of scores of large mammals, many of them the spear-throwers’ favorite sources of food. The animals that died out during this period included mammoths and mastodons; camels and, amazingly, horses were eradicated from the land. The peoples of the Great Plains did not obtain horses until the Spanish reintroduced them in the New World in 1547. Some archaeologists have suggested that the early Paleo-Indian hunters bear responsibility for the mass extinction of so many animals. It is more probable that climatic warming, which transformed well-watered regions into arid territories, put the large mammals under severe stress, and the early humans simply contributed to an ecological process over which they ultimately had little control. The Indian peoples adjusted to the changing environmental conditions. As they dispersed across the North American continent, they developed new food sources, at first smaller mammals and fish, nuts and berries, and then about five thousand years ago, they discovered how to cultivate certain plants. Knowledge of maize (corn), squash, and beans spread

 north from central Mexico. The peoples living in the Southwest acquired cultivation skills long before the bands living along the Atlantic Coast. The shift to basic crops—a transformation that is sometimes termed the Agricultural Revolution—profoundly altered Native American societies. The availability of a more reliable store of food helped liberate nomadic groups from the insecurities of hunting and gathering. It was during this period that Native Americans began to produce ceramics, a valuable technology for the storage of grain. The vegetable harvest made possible the establishment of permanent villages, that often were governed by clearly defined hierarchies of elders and kings, and as the food supply increased, the Native American population greatly expanded, especially around urban centers in the Southwest and in the Mississippi Valley. Although the evidence is patchy, scholars currently estimate that approximately four million Native Americans lived north of Mexico at the time of the initial encounter with Europeans.

Mysterious Disappearances
 Several magnificent sites in North America provide powerful testimony to the cultural and social achievements of native peoples during the final two thousand years before European conquest. One of the more impressive is Chaco Canyon on

Sea Ice
Siberia


Beringia


Al


Continental Glaciation


 pi

 ne

G


 la

 cia

 tio

 n

 y ck

 OCEAN

N O RT H A M E R I C A


Ro


PA C I F I C

M
 s ain

 nt ou

 Possible migration routes Glaciated areas Present day shorelines Land areas

ROUTES OF THE FIRST AMERICANS



 The peopling of North America began about twenty thousand years ago, during an ice age, and continued for many millennia. Land bridges created by lower sea levels during glaciation formed a tundra coastal plain over what is now the Bering Strait, between Asia and North America.



 CHAPTER 1

NEW WORLD ENCOUNTERS

 the San Juan River in present-day New Mexico. The massive pueblo was the center of Anasazi culture, serving both political and religious functions, and it is estimated that its complex structures may have housed as many as fifteen thousand people. The Anasazi sustained their agriculture through a huge, technologically sophisticated network of irrigation canals that carried water long distances. They also constructed a transportation system connecting Chaco Canyon by road to more than seventy outlying villages. Some of the highways were almost a hundred miles long. During this period equally impressive urban centers developed throughout the Ohio and Mississippi valleys. In present-day southern Ohio, the Adena and Hopewell peoples— names assigned by archaeologists to distinguish differences in material culture—built large ceremonial mounds, where they buried the families of local elites. Approximately a thousand years after the birth of Christ, the groups gave way to the Mississippian culture, a loose collection of communities dispersed along the Mississippi River from Louisiana to Illinois that shared similar technologies and beliefs. Cahokia, a huge fortification and ceremonial site in Illinois that originally rose high above the river, represented the greatest achievement of the Mississippian peoples. Covering almost twenty acres, Cahokia once supported a population of almost twenty thousand, a city rivaling in size many encountered in late medieval Europe. As one archaeologist observed, Cahokia was “as spectacular as any of the magnificent Mexican civilizations that were its contemporaries.” Recent research reveals that the various Native American peoples did not live in isolated communities. To be sure, over the millennia they developed many different cultural and social practices, reflecting the specific constraints of local ecologies. More than three hundred separate languages had evolved in North America before European conquest. But members of the groups traded goods over extremely long distances. Burial mounds found in the Ohio Valley, for example, have yielded obsidian from western Wyoming, shells from Florida, mica quarried in North Carolina and Tennessee, and copper found near Lake Superior. Yet however advanced the Native American cultures of the southwest and Mississippi Valley may have been, both cultures disappeared mysteriously just before the arrival of the Europeans. No one knows what events brought down the great city of Cahokia or persuaded the Anasazi to abandon Chaco Canyon. Some scholars have suggested that climatic changes coupled with continuing population growth put too much pressure on food supplies; others insist that chronic warfare destabilized the social order. It has even been argued that diseases carried to the New World by the first European adventurers ravaged the cultures. About one point modern commentators are in full agreement: The breakdown of Mississippian culture caused smaller bands to disperse, construct new identities, and establish different political structures. They were the peoples who first encountered the Europeans along the Atlantic coast and who seemed to the newcomers to have lived in the same places and followed the same patterns of behavior since the dawn of time.

Aztec Dominance
 The stability resulting from the Agricultural Revolution allowed the Indians of Mexico and Central America to structure their societies in more complex ways. Like the Inca who lived in what is now known as Peru, the Mayan and Toltec peoples of Central Mexico built vast cities, formed government bureaucracies that dominated large tributary populations, and developed hieroglyphic writing as well as an accurate solar calendar. Their cities, which housed several hundred thousand people, greatly impressed the Spanish conquerors. Bernal Díaz del Castillo reported, “When we saw all those [Aztec] towns and villages built in the water, and other great towns on dry land, and that straight and level causeway leading to Mexico, we were astounded. . . . Indeed, some of our soldiers asked whether it was not all a dream.” Not long before Columbus began his first voyage across the Atlantic, the Aztec, an aggressive, warlike people, swept through the Valley of Mexico, conquering the great cities that their enemies had constructed. Aztec warriors ruled by force, reducing defeated rivals to tributary status. In 1519, the Aztecs’ main ceremonial center, Tenochtitlán, contained as many as two hundred fifty thousand people as compared with only fifty thousand in Seville, the port from which the early Spaniards had sailed. Elaborate human sacrifice associated with Huitzilopochtli, the Aztec sun god, horrified Europeans, who apparently did not find the savagery of their own civilization so objectionable. The Aztec ritual killings were connected to the agricultural cycle, and the Indians believed the blood of their victims possessed extraordinary fertility powers.

Eastern Woodland Cultures
 In the northeast region along the Atlantic coast, the Indians did not practice intensive agriculture. These peoples, numbering less than a million at the time of conquest, generally supplemented

 Aztec human sacrifice depicted in the Codex Magliabechiano, a sixteenth-century Spanish account of the lives of the native Mexicans. The ritual sacrifices performed by Aztec priests were associated with worship of the sun god—each offering was considered a sacred debt payment.

Native American Histories Before the Conquest


 a R.

 farming with seasonal hunting and gathering. Most belonged to what ethnographers term the Eastern Woodland Cultures. Small bands formed villages during the warm summer months. The women cultivated maize and other crops while the men hunted and fished. During the winter, difficulties associated with feeding so many people forced the communities to disperse. Each family lived off the land as best it could. Seventeenth-century English settlers were most likely to have encountered the Algonquian-speaking peoples who occupied much of the territory along the Atlantic coast from North Carolina to Maine. Included in this large linguistic family were the Powhatan of Tidewater Virginia, the Narragansett of Rhode Island, and the Abenaki of northern New England. Despite common linguistic roots, however, the scattered Algonquian communities would have found communication extremely difficult. They had developed very different dialects. A sixteenth-century Narragansett, for example, would have found it hard to comprehend a Powhatan. The major groups of the Southeast, such as the Creek, belonged to a separate language group (Muskogean); the Indians of the eastern Great Lakes region and upper St. Lawrence Valley generally spoke Iroquoian dialects. Linguistic ties had little effect on Indian politics. Algonquian groups who lived in different regions, exploited different resources, and spoke different dialects did not develop

 lum bi

 i ipp Mississ

Pawnee


Chumash
Serrano


Mohave


Cahuilla


Yavapi
Yuma
Papago


Equator
Cochimi


 o ad lor Co

GREAT PLAINS

Ute


Kansa


Navajo
Hopi Pueblo
 Zuñi

Jicarilla
Apache


Missouri


Mescalero
Apache


Yaqui


Tutelo


Powhatan
Tuscarora


Cherokee


Catawba


ATLANTIC OCEAN

 SOUTHEAST

Wichita
Caddo


Choctaw


Natchez
Tonkawa


Creek


Yamasee
Timucua


Biloxi


Apalachee


Atakapa


R
 de an Gr

Cahita


 io R. Oh Shawnee

 io

Tarahumara


Susquehannock


Chickasaw


Concho


Inca


Massachusetts
Wampanoag
Narragansett


Lenni-Lenape
(Delaware)


Quapaw


Lipan
Apache


Opata
Seri


Pennacook


Osage


Kiowa


SOUTHWEST
Pima Maricopa Western Apache 
Erie


Illinois
R.


Southern
Paiute


Miami


 is

 uo Iroq

 ican

 WOODLAND

Iowa


Arapaho


R.


Huron
 k

Abenaki


 awk Moheida a On ndag Ono uga Cay eca Sen

Cheyenne
Ponca
Omaha


Comanche


 a

Fox
Potawatomi
Winnebago
EASTERN
Kickapoo 
GREAT BASIN

Maya


PACIFIC OCEAN

L


Sauk


Shoshoni


Miwok


SOUTH AMERICA

Ottawa


 t

Menominee
Sioux


Kiowa
Goshute


Costanoan
Yokuts


Algonquin


 ea

Mah


Mandan


Bannock
Northern
Paiute


 CALIFORNIA

Gr


Hidatsa


Klamath


Modoc
Shasta


NORTH AMERICA

Chippewa
(Ojibwa)


Arikara


Maidu
Pomo


Aztec


Missouri R.


 s

Hupa


R.


Gros Ventre


Cayuse
Yurok


Malecite


Assiniboin


 e

PACIFIC OCEAN

Blackfoot


Nez Flathead
Perce


Umpqua


Micmac


 PLATEAU

Colville
Spokane
Yakima


Chinook
Tillamook


Chippewa
(Ojibwa)


 en ce

Quinault
Chehalis


 SUB-ARCTIC

Okanagan
Kutenai


La
 wr

Co


Makah


 strong ties of mutual identity, and when their own interests were involved, they were more than willing to ally themselves with Europeans or “foreign” Indians against other Algonquian speakers. Divisions among Indian groups would in time facilitate European conquest. Local Native American peoples greatly outnumbered the first settlers, and had the Europeans not forged alliances with the Indians, they could not so easily have gained a foothold on the continent. However divided the Indians of eastern North America may have been, they shared many cultural values and assumptions. Most Native Americans, for example, defined their place in society through kinship. Such personal bonds determined the character of economic and political relations. The farming bands living in areas eventually claimed by England were often matrilineal, which meant, in effect, that the women owned the planting fields and houses, maintained tribal customs, and had a role in tribal government. Among the native communities of Canada and the northern Great Lakes, patrilineal forms were much more common. In these groups, the men owned the hunting grounds that the family needed to survive. Eastern Woodland communities organized diplomacy, trade, and war around reciprocal relationships that impressed Europeans as being extraordinarily egalitarian, even democratic. Chains of native authority were loosely structured. Native leaders were such renowned public speakers because

St
.


NORTHWEST COAST



NORTHERN MEXICO

Karankawa


Gulf of Mexico


Calusa


THE FIRST AMERICANS: LOCATION OF MAJOR INDIAN GROUPS AND CULTURE AREAS IN THE 1600S
Native Americans had complex social structures, religious systems, and sophisticated agricultural techniques before they came into contact with Europeans. 


 300 miles

 300 kilometers



 CHAPTER 1

NEW WORLD ENCOUNTERS

 persuasive rhetoric was often their only effective source of power. It required considerable oratorical skills for an Indian leader to persuade independent-minded warriors to support a certain policy. Before the arrival of the white settlers, Indian wars were seldom very lethal. Young warriors attacked neighboring bands largely to exact revenge for a previous insult or the death of a relative, or to secure captives. Fatalities, when they did occur, sparked cycles of revenge. Some captives were tortured to death; others were adopted into the community as replacements for fallen relatives.

A
World Transformed  How did Europeans and Native Americans interact during the period of first contact?

 bring astonishment. Think, then, what must be the effect on me and mine, the sight of you and your people, whom we have at no time seen . . . things so altogether new, as to strike awe and terror to our hearts.” What Indians desired most was peaceful trade. The earliest French explorers reported that natives waved from shore, urging the Europeans to exchange metal items for beaver skins. In fact, the Indians did not perceive themselves at a disadvantage in these dealings. They could readily see the technological advantage of guns over bows and arrows. Metal knives made daily tasks much easier. And to acquire such goods they gave up pelts, which to them seemed in abundant supply. “The English have no sense,” one Indian informed a French priest. “They give us twenty knives like this for one Beaver skin.” Another native announced that “the Beaver does everything perfectly well: it makes kettles, hatchets, swords, knives, bread . . . in short, it makes everything.” The man who recorded these observations reminded French readers—in case they had missed the point—that the Indian was “making sport of us Europeans.” Trading sessions along the eastern frontier were really cultural seminars. The Europeans tried to make sense out of Indian customs, and although they may have called the natives “savages,” they quickly discovered that the Indians drove hard bargains. They demanded gifts; they set the time and place of trade.

 The arrival of large numbers of white men and women on the North American continent profoundly altered Native American cultures. Change did not occur at the same rates in all places. Indian villages located on the Atlantic coast came under severe pressure almost immediately; inland groups had more time to adjust. Wherever they lived, however, Indians discovered that conquest strained traditional ways of life, and as daily patterns of experience changed almost beyond recognition, native peoples had to devise new answers, View the Closer Look new responses, and new ways to survive in physical and social environments that eroded tradition. Historian James Merrell reminded us that the Indians found themselves living in a world that from their perspective was just as “new” as that which greeted the European invaders.

An Early European Image of Native Americans


Cultural Negotiations
 Native Americans were not passive victims of geopolitical forces beyond their control. So long as they remained healthy, they held their own in the early exchanges, and although they eagerly accepted certain trade goods, they generally resisted other aspects of European cultures. The earliest recorded contacts between Indians and explorers suggest curiosity and surprise rather than hostility. A Southeastern Indian who encountered Hernando de Soto in 1540 expressed awe (at least that is what a Spanish witness recorded): “The things that seldom happen

 Europeans first learned of Native Americans from the sailors who followed Columbus. Images, such as this one from 1505, show the Indians as lustful, scantily-clad, cannibals. The fact that the male subjects in this image have beards—common on European men at the time, but virtually unknown among Native Americans—confirms that the artist had never actually laid eyes on the people he meant to portray.

A
World Transformed 

 The Indians used the occasions to study the newcomers. They formed opinions about the Europeans, some flattering, some less so, but they never concluded from their observations that Indian culture was inferior to that of the colonizers. They regarded the beards worn by European men as particularly revolting. As an eighteenth-century Englishman said of the Iroquois, “They seem always to have Looked upon themselves as far Superior to the rest of Mankind and accordingly Call themselves Ongwehoenwe, i.e., Men Surpassing all other men.” For Europeans, communicating with the Indians was always an ordeal. The invaders reported having gained deep insight into Native American cultures through sign languages. How much accurate information explorers and traders took from these crude improvised exchanges is a matter of conjecture. In a letter written in 1493, Columbus expressed frustration: “I did not understand those people nor they me, except for what common sense dictated, although they were saddened and I much more so, because I wanted to have good information concerning everything.” In the absence of meaningful conversation, Europeans often concluded that the Indians held them in high regard, perhaps seeing the newcomers as gods. Such one-sided encounters involved a good deal of projection, a mental process of translating alien sounds and gestures into messages that Europeans wanted to hear. Sometimes the adventurers did not even try to communicate, assuming from superficial observation—as did the sixteenthcentury explorer Giovanni da Verrazzano—“that they have no religion, and that they live in absolute freedom, and that everything they do proceeds from Ignorance.” Ethnocentric Europeans tried repeatedly to “civilize” the Indians. In practice that meant persuading natives to dress like the colonists, attend white schools, live in permanent structures, and, most important, accept Christianity. The Indians listened more or less patiently, but in the end, they usually rejected European values. One South Carolina trader explained that when Indians were asked to become more English, they said no, “for they thought it hard, that we should desire them to change their manners and customs, since they did not desire us to turn Indians.” To be sure, some Indians were strongly attracted to Christianity, but most paid it lip service or found it irrelevant to their needs. As one Huron told a French priest, “It would be useless for me to repent having sinned, seeing that I never have sinned.” Another Huron announced that he did not fear punishment after death since “we cannot tell whether everything that appears faulty to Men, is so in the Eyes of God.” Among some Indian groups, gender figured significantly in a person’s willingness to convert to Christianity. Native men who traded animal skins for European goods had more frequent contact with the whites, and they proved more receptive to the arguments of missionaries. But native women jealously guarded traditional culture, a system that often sanctioned polygamy— a husband having several wives—and gave women substantial authority over the distribution of food within the village. French Jesuits seemed especially eager to undermine the independence of Native American women. Among other demands, missionaries insisted on monogamous marriages, an institution based on



 Christian values but that made little sense in Indian societies where constant warfare against the Europeans killed off large numbers of young males and increasingly left native women without sufficient marriage partners. The white settlers’ educational system proved no more successful than their religion was in winning cultural converts. Young Indian scholars deserted stuff y classrooms at the first chance. In 1744, Virginia offered several Iroquois boys a free education at the College of William and Mary. The Iroquois leaders rejected the invitation because they found that boys who had gone to college “were absolutely good for nothing being neither acquainted with the true methods of killing deer, catching Beaver, or surprising an enemy.” Even matrimony seldom eroded the Indians’ attachment to their own customs. When Native Americans and whites married—unions the English found less desirable than did the French or Spanish—the European partner usually elected to live among the Indians. Impatient settlers who regarded the Indians simply as an obstruction to progress sometimes developed more coercive methods, such as enslavement, to achieve cultural conversion. Again, from the white perspective, the results were disappointing. Indian slaves ran away or died. In either case, they did not become Europeans.

Threats to Survival: Trade and Disease
 Over time, cooperative encounters between the Native Americans and Europeans became less frequent. The Europeans found it almost impossible to understand the Indians’ relation to the land and other natural resources. English planters cleared the forests and fenced the fields and, in the process, radically altered the ecological systems on which the Indians depended. The European system of land use inevitably reduced the supply of deer and other animals essential to traditional native cultures. Dependency also came in more subtle forms. The Indians welcomed European commerce, but like so many consumers throughout recorded history, they discovered that the objects they most coveted inevitably brought them into debt. To pay for the trade goods, the Indians hunted more aggressively and even further reduced the population of fur-bearing mammals. Commerce eroded Indian independence in other ways. After several disastrous wars—the Yamasee War in South Carolina (1715), for example—the natives learned that demonstrations of force usually resulted in the suspension of normal trade, on which the Indians had grown quite dependent for guns and ammunition, among other things. A hardened English businessman made the point quite bluntly. When asked if the Catawba Indians would harm his traders, he responded that “the danger would be . . . little from them, because they are too fond of our trade to lose it for the pleasure of shedding a little English blood.” It was disease, however, that ultimately destroyed the cultural integrity of many North American tribes. European adventurers exposed the Indians to bacteria and viruses against which they possessed no natural immunity. Smallpox, measles, and influenza decimated the Native American population. Other diseases such as alcoholism took a terrible toll.



CHAPT ER 1

NEW WORLD ENCOUNTERS

View the Map


 ASIA

Native American Population Loss, 1500–1700


ARCTIC OCEAN GREENLAND
on R 
Beufort
Sea


.


Ma


R.


Baffin
Island


 ARCTIC

Great
Slave L.


 SUBARCTIC

Pe
At
 ha ba sc aR .

 e R. ac

L.
Athabasca


Co


T


 chewan R skat . Sa South

 PLATEAU

L.
Winnipeg


 ssouri R. Mi

 lba

Arka
 nsas R. San Juan Taos

Santa Fe
Gila


R.


 s zo ra

 os

 SOUTHEAST

SOUTHWEST
San Pedro De Lagunas 
Charles Town


San Mateo
St. Augustine


R.


 de R. ran oG Ri

El Paso
Del Norte


R ed
B R.


Pe
 c

Miss
 is

R.


 sipp i

 s

 o rad

 ri

 lo Co

 t

 ke La

GREAT BASIN

 PLAINS ou Miss

 NIA

 CALIFOR

Sn
 ake R .

 ny R.

 Québec Sault Trois Rivières Ste. Marie Ft. Pentagoet Montreal Ft. La Pointe Portsmouth Ft. Orange Boston Ft. Good Hope Plymouth NORTHEAST Providence New Haven Ft. Crèvecoeur . R New Amsterdam Ft. Casimir Ft. Christina R. io R. ATLANTIC St. Mary’s Oh Jamestown OCEAN Roanoke Edenton

Grea


PACIFIC OCEAN

Labrador
Sea


Hudson
Bay


Nor
 th

.


 lum bia R

Vancouver I.


 rd Lia

Victoria
Island


Great
Bear L.


 ckenzie R.

S
EST COA NORTHW

Gulf of
Alaska


Baffin
Bay


A


Yu
 k

San Miguel Gulf of Mexico
Del Aguayo
Arctic and Subarctic
Northwest Coast
California
Southwest
Great Basin
Plateau
Plains
Northeast
Southeast
 Represents 4 people per 100 km

Caribbean Sea


 Extent of European settlement, 1700 Major trading centers and settlements POPULATION LOSS TO 1700 Areas of minimal population loss More than 40% 800 miles More than 50% 800 kilometers More than 60% 0

SOUTH AMERICA

NATIVE AMERICAN POPULATION LOSS, 1500–1700
This interactive map demonstrates the pervasive Native American population loss in North America during the first two hundred years of their contact with Europeans. The map further illustrates that the highest percentage of Native American population loss occurred in North American regions initially under Spanish rule. 
 Within a generation of initial contact with Europeans, the Carib Indians, who gave the Caribbean its name, were virtually extinct. The decimation of Native American peoples was an aspect of ecological transformation known as the Columbian Exchange. European conquerors exposed the Indians to several new fatal diseases; the Indians introduced the invaders to marvelous plants such as corn and potatoes, which altered the course of European history. (See the Feature Essay, “The Columbian Exchange and the Global Environment: Ecological Revolution,” pp. 12–13.)

 The Algonquian communities of New England experienced appalling rates of death. One Massachusetts colonist reported in 1630 that the Indian peoples of his region “above twelve years since were swept away by a great & grievous Plague . . . so that there are verie few left to inhabite the Country.” Settlers possessed no knowledge of germ theory—it was not formulated until the midnineteenth century—and speculated that a Christian God had providentially cleared the wilderness of heathens. Historical demographers now estimate that some tribes suffered a 90 to 95 percent population loss within the first century

West Africa: Ancient and Complex Societies


 of European contact. The population of the Arawak Indians of Santo Domingo, for example, dropped from about 3,770,000 in 1496 to only 125 in 1570. The death of so many Indians decreased the supply of indigenous laborers, who were needed by the Europeans to work the mines and to grow staple crops such as sugar and tobacco. The decimation of native populations may have persuaded colonists throughout the New World to seek a substitute labor force in Africa. Indeed, the enslavement of blacks has been described as an effort by Europeans to “repopulate” the New World. Indians who survived the epidemics often found that the fabric of traditional culture had come unraveled. The enormity of the death toll and the agony that accompanied it called traditional religious beliefs and practices into question. The survivors lost not only members of their families, but also elders who might have told them how properly to bury the dead and give spiritual comfort to the living. Some native peoples, such as the Iroquois, who lived a long way from the coast and thus had more time to adjust to the challenge, withstood the crisis better than did those who immediately confronted the Europeans and Africans. Refugee Indians from the hardest hit eastern communities were absorbed into healthier western groups. However horrific the crisis may have been, it demonstrated powerfully just how much the environment—a source of opportunity as well as devastation—shaped human encounters throughout the New World.



 sophisticated trade networks that linked the villagers of Senegambia with urban centers in northwest Africa, Morocco, Tunisia, and Cyrenaica. Great camel caravans regularly crossed the Sahara carrying trade goods that were exchanged for gold and slaves. Sub-Saharan Africa’s well-developed links with Islam surprised a French priest who in 1686 observed African pilgrims going “to visit Mecca to visit Mahomet’s tomb, although they are eleven or twelve hundred leagues distance from it.” West Africans spoke many languages and organized themselves into diverse political systems. Several populous states, sometimes termed “empires,” exercised loose control over large areas. Ancient African empires such as Ghana were vulnerable to external attack as well as internal rebellion, and the oral and written histories of this region record the rise and fall of several large kingdoms. When European traders first arrived, the list of

West Africa: Ancient and
Complex Societies
 What was the character of the West African societies that European traders first encountered? During the era of the European slave trade, roughly from the late fifteenth through the mid-nineteenth centuries, a number of enduring myths about sub-Saharan West Africa were propagated. Even today, commentators claim that the people who inhabited this region four hundred years ago were isolated from the rest of the world and had a simple, self-sufficient economy. Indeed, some scholars still depict the vast region stretching from the Senegal River south to modern Angola as a single cultural unit, as if at one time all the men and women living there must have shared a common set of African political, religious, and social values. Sub-Saharan West Africa defies such easy generalizations. The first Portuguese who explored the African coast during the fifteenth century encountered a great variety of political and religious cultures. Many hundreds of years earlier, Africans living in this region had come into contact with Islam, the religion founded by the Prophet Muhammad during the seventh century. Islam spread slowly from Arabia into West Africa. Not until ad 1030 did a kingdom located in the Senegal Valley accept the Muslim religion. Many other West Africans, such as those in ancient Ghana, resisted Islam and continued to observe traditional religions. As Muslim traders from North Africa and the Middle East brought a new religion to parts of West Africa, they expanded

 Artists in West Africa depicted the European traders who arrived in search of gold and slaves. This sixteenth-century Benin bronze relief sculpture shows two Portuguese men.

 Complete the Assignment The Columbian Exchange and the Global Environment Ecological Revolution on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


M


 odern Americans often speak of the degradation of the global environment in apocalyptic terms, as if the current generation confronts a unique challenge in world history. No doubt, many chemical compounds produced during the twentieth century have proved far more toxic than their inventors ever imagined. But contemporary concerns about the future of the planet should not cause us to lose sight of the historical sweep of these problems. We are certainly not the first society to experience a massive ecological transformation caused by the inevitable intervention of human beings into the processes of nature. Recapturing an earlier moment of environmental history—known as the Columbian Exchange—reminds us that the moral dimensions of change are often a matter of perspective. What one group proclaims as providential progress may strike others as utter disaster. The first major “ecological revolution” occurred as a direct result of New World exploration during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The earliest explorers had expected America to be an extension of Europe, a place inhabited by familiar plants and animals. They were surprised. The exotic flora of the New World, sketched from sixteenth-century drawings, included the food staple maize and the succulent pineapple. Equally strange to European eyes were buffalo, rattle snakes, catfish, and the peculiar absence of horses and cattle. No domestic animal was common to both sides of the Atlantic except the dog. And perhaps the most striking difference was between

The Columbian Exchange
 and the Global Environment Ecological Revolution the people themselves. Both Native Americans and Europeans found each other to be the most exotic people they had ever encountered. The most immediate biological consequence of contact between the people of Europe, Africa, and the New World was the transfer of disease. Within a year of Columbus’s return from the Caribbean, a new and more virulent strain of syphilis appeared in Europe and became identified as the American disease. By 1505, syphilis had spread all the way to China. The effect of Old World diseases in the Americas was catastrophic. Native Americans had little natural immunity to common African and European diseases because America remained biologically isolated after the reimmersion of the Bering land bridge. When they were exposed to influenza, typhus, measles, and especially smallpox, they died by the millions. Indeed, European exploration of America set off the worst demographic disaster in world history. Within fifty years of the first contact, epidemics had virtually exterminated the native population of Hispaniola and devastated the densely populated Valley of Mexico. Also unsettling, but by no means as destructive, was the transfer of plants and animals from the Old World to the New. Spanish colonizers carried sugar and bananas across the Atlantic, and in time these crops transformed the economies of Latin America. Even more spectacular was the success of European animals in America. During the sixteenth century, pigs, sheep, and cattle arrived as passengers on European ships, and in the fertile New World environment, they multiplied more rapidly than they had in Europe.

 Some animals survived shipwrecks. On Sable Island, a small, desolate island off the coast of Nova Scotia, one can still see the small, longhaired cattle, the successors of the earliest cattle transported to America. Other animals escaped from the ranches of New Spain, generating new breeds such as the fabled Texas longhorn. No European animal more profoundly affected Native American life than the horse. Once common in North America, the horse mysteriously disappeared from the continent sometime during the last Ice Age. The early Spanish explorers reintroduced the horse to North America, and the sight of this large, powerful animal at first terrified the Indians. Mounted conquistadores discovered that if they could not frighten Indian foes into submission, they could simply outmaneuver them on horseback. The Native Americans of the Southwest quickly adapted the horse to their own use. Sedentary farmers acquired new hunting skills, and soon the Indians were riding across the Great Plains in pursuit of buffalo. The Comanche, Apache, Sioux, and Blackfoot tribes—just to name a few—became dependent on the horse. Mounted Indian warriors galloped into battle, unaware that it was their white adversaries who had brought the horse to America. Equally dramatic was the effect of American crops on European and African societies. From his first trip to the New World, Columbus brought back a plant that revolutionized the diets of both humans and animals— maize. During the next century, American beans, squash, and sweet potatoes appeared on European tables. The pepper and tomato, other New World discoveries, added a distinctive

View the Closer Look Columbian Exchange


 flavor to Mediterranean cooking. Despite strong prohibitions on the use of tobacco (in Russia, a user might have his nose amputated), European demand for tobacco grew astronomically during the seventeenth century. The potato caught on more slowly in Europe because of a widespread fear that root crops caused disease. The most rapid acceptance of the white potato came in Ireland, where it became a diet staple in the 1600s. Irish immigrants—unaware of the genealogy of this native American crop—reintroduced the potato into

Massachusetts Bay in 1718. And in
 West Africa, corn gradually replaced traditional animal feeds of low yield. These sweeping changes in agriculture and diet helped reshape the Old World economies. Partly because of the rich new sources of nutrition from America, the population of Europe, which had long been relatively stable, nearly doubled in the eighteenth century. Even as cities swelled and industries flourished, European farmers were able to feed the growing population. In many ways, the seeds and plants of the New World were far more valuable

 in Western economic development than all the silver of Mexico and Peru.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
How did the transfer of diseases, plants, and animals affect the peoples of Europe and the Americas? 2. Why did the reintroduction of the horse transform the Native American societies of the Southwest and the Great Plains? 3. How did American crops affect the Old World? 


CHAPT ER 1

NEW WORLD ENCOUNTERS

Ca


 were generally settled by clan elders. The senior leaders allocated economic View the Map African Slave Trade, 1500–1870 and human resources. They determined who received land and who might take a wife—critical decisions because within the EUROPE villages of West Africa, women and chilFRANCE dren cultivated the fields. The communities were economically self-sufficient. Not Black Sea only were they able to grow enough food SPAIN to feed themselves, but they also produced PORTUGAL trade goods, such as iron, kola, and gum. The first Europeans to reach the TUNISIA Me d ALGIERS iterran ean Sea West African coast by sail were the TRI MOROCCO PO Portuguese. Strong winds and currents LI along the Atlantic coast moved southCYRENAICA S A H ARA DESERT ward, which meant a ship could sail with the wind from Portugal to West Africa without difficulty. The problem was returning. Advances in maritime MALI technology allowed the Portuguese to GHANA overcome these difficulties. By conJOLOFF SENEGAMBIAN structing a new type of ship, one unitSTATES ing European hull design with lateen SENEGAL AFRICA VALLEY Slave Coast (triangular) sails from the Middle East, Gold Coast BENIN Portuguese caravels were able to navigate BIAFRA y C oast successfully against African winds and r o Iv currents. During the fi fteenth century, Equator Portuguese sailors discovered that by sailing far to the west, often as far as the INDIAN Azores, they could, on their return trips KONGO OCEAN AT L A N T I C to Europe, catch a reliable westerly wind. OCEAN Columbus was evidently familiar with ANGOLA the technique. Before attempting to cross the Atlantic Ocean, he sailed to the Gold Coast, and on the way, he undoubtedly studied the wind patterns that would 1000 miles carry his famed caravels to the New 1000 kilometers World and back again. The Portuguese journeyed to Africa Portuguese French in search of gold and slaves. Mali and Dutch British Joloff officials were willing partners in this Major overland commerce but insisted that Europeans trade routes respect trade regulations established by Africans. They required the Europeans TRADE ROUTES IN AFRICA African trade routes were well established by the late 1600s. to pay tolls and other fees and restricted Trade restrictions—and a deadly disease environment—confined European settlements primarily to the foreign traders to conducting their coastal regions. business in small forts or castles located at the mouths of the major rivers. Local merchants acquired some slaves and gold in the interior and major states would have included Mali, Benin, and Kongo. Many transported them to the coast where they were exchanged for other Africans lived in what are known as stateless societies, really European manufactures. Transactions were calculated in terms of largely autonomous communities organized around lineage struclocal African currencies: A slave would be offered to a European tures. In these respects, African and Native American cultures had trader for so many bars of iron or ounces of gold. much in common. European slave traders accepted these terms largely because Whatever the form of government, men and women they had no other choice. The African states fielded formidable constructed their primary social identity within well-defined linarmies, and outsiders soon discovered they could not impose eage groups, which consisted of persons claiming descent from a their will on the region simply by demonstrations of force. common ancestor. Disputes among members of lineage groups a spi

 n Se

 a

Europe on the Eve of Conquest


 Moreover, local diseases proved so lethal for Europeans—six out of ten of whom would die within a single year’s stay in Africa— that they were happy to avoid dangerous trips to the interior. The slaves were usually men and women taken captive during wars; others were victims of judicial practices designed specifically to supply the growing American market. By 1650, most West African slaves were destined for the New World rather than the Middle East. Even before Europeans colonized the New World, the Portuguese were purchasing almost a thousand slaves a year on the West African coast. The slaves were frequently forced to work on the sugar plantations of Madeira (Portuguese) and the Canaries (Spanish), Atlantic islands on which Europeans experimented with forms of unfree labor that would later be more fully and more ruthlessly established in the American colonies. It is currently estimated that approximately 10.7 million Africans were taken to the New World as slaves. The figure for the eighteenth century alone is about 5.5 million, of which more than one-third came from West Central Africa. The Bight of Benin, the Bight of Biafra, and the Gold Coast supplied most of the others. The peopling of the New World is usually seen as a story of European migrations. But in fact, during every year between 1650 and 1831, more Africans than Europeans came to the Americas. As historian Davis Eltis wrote, “In terms of immigration alone . . . America was an extension of Africa rather than Europe until late in the nineteenth century.”

Europe on the Eve of Conquest
 How do you explain Spain’s central role in New World exploration and colonization? In ancient times, the West possessed a mythical appeal to people living along the shores of the Mediterranean Sea. Classical writers speculated about the fate of Atlantis, a fabled Western civilization that was said to have sunk beneath the ocean. Fallen Greek heroes allegedly spent eternity in an uncharted western paradise. But because the ships of Greece and Rome were ill designed to sail the open ocean, the lands to the west remained the stuff of legend and fantasy. In the fifth century, an intrepid Irish monk, St. Brendan, reported finding enchanted islands far out in the Atlantic. He even claimed to have met a talking whale named Jasconius, who allowed the famished voyager to cook a meal on his back. In the tenth century, Scandinavian seafarers known as Norsemen or Vikings actually established settlements in the New World, but almost a thousand years passed before they received credit for their accomplishment. In the year 984, a band of Vikings led by Eric the Red sailed west from Iceland to a large island in the North Atlantic. Eric, who possessed a fine sense of public relations, named the island Greenland, reasoning that others would more willingly colonize the icebound region “if the country had a good name.” A few years later, Eric’s son Leif founded a small settlement he named Vinland at a location in northern Newfoundland now called L’ Anse aux Meadows. At the time, the Norse voyages went unnoticed by other Europeans.



 The hostility of Native Americans, poor lines of communication, climatic cooling, and political upheavals in Scandinavia made maintenance of these distant outposts impossible. At the time of his first voyage in 1492, Columbus seemed to have been unaware of these earlier exploits.

Building New Nation-States
 At the time of the Viking settlement, other Europeans were unprepared to sponsor transatlantic exploration. Nor would they be in a position to do so for several more centuries. Medieval kingdoms were loosely organized, and until the early fifteenth century, fierce provincial loyalties, widespread ignorance of classical learning, and dreadful plagues such as the Black Death discouraged people from thinking expansively about the world beyond their own immediate communities. In the fifteenth century, however, these conditions began to change. Europe became more prosperous, political authority was more centralized, and the Renaissance fostered a more expansive outlook among literate people in the arts and sciences. The Renaissance encouraged—first in Italy and later throughout Europe—bold new creative thinking that challenged the orthodoxies of the Middle Ages. A major element in the shift was the slow but steady growth of population after 1450. Historians are uncertain about the cause of the increase—after all, neither the quality of medicine nor sanitation improved much—but the result was a substantial rise in the price of land, since there were more mouths to feed. Landlords profited from these trends, and as their income expanded, they demanded more of the luxury items, such as spices, silks, and jewels, that came from distant Asian ports. Economic prosperity created powerful new incentives for exploration and trade. This period also witnessed the centralization of political authority under a group of rulers whom historians refer to collectively as the New Monarchs. Before the mid-fifteenth century, feudal nobles dominated small districts throughout Europe. Conceding only nominal allegiance to larger territorial leaders, the local barons taxed the peasants and waged war pretty much as they pleased. They also dispensed what passed for justice. The New Monarchs challenged the nobles’ autonomy. The changes that accompanied the challenges came slowly, and in many areas violently, but the results altered traditional political relationships between the nobility and the crown, and between the citizen and the state. The New Monarchs of Europe recruited armies and supported these expensive organizations with revenues from national taxes. They created effective national courts. While these monarchs were often despotic, they personified the emergent nation-states of Europe and brought a measure of peace to local communities weary of chronic feudal war. The story was the same throughout most of western Europe. The Tudors of England, represented by Henry VII (r. 1485– 1509), ended a long civil war known as the War of the Roses. Louis XI, the French monarch (r. 1461–1483), strengthened royal authority by reorganizing state finances. The political unification of Spain began in 1469 with the marriage of Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile, setting off a nation-building process that involved driving both the Jews and Muslims out



CHAPT ER 1

NEW WORLD ENCOUNTERS

 of Spain. These strong-willed monarchs forged nations out of groups of independent kingdoms. If political centralization had not occurred, the major European countries could not possibly have generated the financial and military resources necessary for worldwide exploration. A final prerequisite to exploration was reliable technical knowledge. Ptolemy (second century ad) and other ancient geographers had mapped the known world and had even demonstrated that the world was round. During the Middle Ages, however, Europeans lost effective contact with classical tradition. Within Arab societies, the old learning had survived, indeed flourished, and when Europeans eventually rediscovered the classical texts during the Renaissance, they drew heavily on the work of Arab scholars. This “new” learning generated great intellectual curiosity about the globe and about the world that existed beyond the Mediterranean. The invention of printing from movable type by Johann Gutenberg in the 1440s greatly facilitated the spread of technical knowledge. Indeed, printing sparked a communications revolution whose impact on the lives of ordinary people was as far-reaching as that caused by telephones, television, and computers in modern times. Sea captains published their findings as quickly as they could engage a printer, and by the beginning of the sixteenth century, a small, though growing, number of educated readers throughout Europe were well informed about the exploration of the New World. The printing press invited Europeans to imagine exciting opportunities that they had hardly perceived when the Vikings sailed the North Atlantic.

Imagining a New World
 How did Spanish conquest of Central and South America transform Native American cultures? By 1500, centralization of political authority and advances in geographic knowledge brought Spain to the first rank as a world power. In the early fifteenth century, though, Spain consisted of several autonomous kingdoms. It lacked rich natural resources and possessed few good seaports. In fact, there was little about this land to suggest its people would take the lead in conquering and colonizing the New World. By the end of the century, however, Spain suddenly came alive with creative energy. The union of Ferdinand and Isabella sparked a drive for political consolidation that, because of the monarchs’ fervid Catholicism, took on the characteristics of a religious crusade. Spurred by the militant faith of their monarchs, the armies of Castile and Aragon waged holy war—known as the Reconquista—against the independent states in southern Spain that earlier had been captured by Muslims. In 1492, the Moorish (Islamic) kingdom of Granada fell, and, for the first time in centuries, the entire Iberian peninsula was united under Christian rulers. Spanish authorities showed no tolerance for people who rejected the Catholic faith. During the Reconquista, thousands of Jews and Moors were driven from the country. Indeed, Columbus undoubtedly encountered such refugees as he was preparing for his famous voyage. From this volatile social and political environment came the conquistadores, men eager for personal glory and material gain,

 uncompromising in matters of religion, and unswerving in their loyalty to the crown. They were prepared to employ fire and sword in any cause sanctioned by God and king, and these adventurers carried European culture to the most populous regions of the New World. Long before Spaniards ever reached the West Indies, they conquered the indigenous peoples of the Canary Islands, a strategically located archipelago in the eastern Atlantic. The harsh labor systems the Spanish developed in the Canaries served as models of subjugation in America. Indeed, the Spanish experience paralleled that of the English in Ireland. An early fifteenth-century Spanish chronicle described the Canary natives as “miscreants . . . [who] do not acknowledge their creator and live in part like beasts.” Many islanders quickly died of disease; others were killed in battle or enslaved. The new Spanish landholders introduced sugar, a laborintensive plantation crop. The landowners forced slaves captured in Africa to provide the labor. This oppressive process was driven by dreams of great wealth, and would be repeated many times by European colonists through the centuries.

Myths and Reality
 If it had not been for Christopher Columbus (Cristoforo Colombo), of course, Spain might never have gained an American empire. Little is known about his early life. Born in Genoa in 1451 of humble parentage, Columbus soon devoured the classical learning that had so recently been rediscovered and made available in printed form. He mastered geography, and—perhaps while sailing the coast of West Africa—he became obsessed with the idea of voyaging west across the Atlantic Ocean to reach Cathay, as China was then known. In 1484, Columbus presented his plan to the king of Portugal. However, while the Portuguese were just as interested as Columbus in reaching Cathay, they elected to voyage around the continent of Africa instead of following the route suggested by Columbus. They suspected that Columbus had substantially underestimated the circumference of the earth and that for all his enthusiasm, he would almost certainly starve before reaching Asia. The Portuguese decision eventually paid off quite handsomely. In 1498, one of their captains, Vasco da Gama, returned from the coast of India carrying a fortune in spices and other luxury goods. Undaunted by rejection, Columbus petitioned Isabella and Ferdinand for financial backing. They were initially no more interested in his grand design than the Portuguese had been. But time was on Columbus’s side. Spain’s aggressive New Monarchs envied the success of their neighbor, Portugal. Columbus boldly played on the rivalry between the countries, talking of wealth and empire. Indeed, for a person with little success or apparent support, he was supremely confident. One contemporary reported that when Columbus “made up his mind, he was as sure he would discover what he did discover, and find what he did find, as if he held it in a chamber under lock and key.” Columbus’s stubborn lobbying on behalf of the “Enterprise of the Indies” gradually wore down opposition in the Spanish court, and the two sovereigns provided him with a small fleet that contained two of the most famous caravels ever constructed, the Niña and the Pinta, as well as the square-rigged nao Santa Maria. The

Imagining a New World


Watch the Video




How Should We Think of Columbus?


 Cristoforo Columbo, better known to Americans as Christopher Columbus, was a fifteenth-century sailor from Genoa. Dreaming of reaching the rich markets of Asia by sailing west from Europe, he instead stumbled upon the islands of the Caribbean Sea. In so doing, he ushered in a new age of sustained contact between the peoples of the Americas and the peoples of Europe, Africa, and Asia.

 indomitable admiral set sail for Cathay in August 1492, the year of Spain’s unification. Educated Europeans of the fifteenth century knew the world was round. No one seriously believed that Columbus and his crew would tumble off the edge of the earth. The concern was with size, not shape. Columbus estimated the distance to the mainland of Asia to be about 3,000 nautical miles, a voyage his small ships would have no difficulty completing. The actual distance is 10,600 nautical miles, however, and had the New World not been in his way, he and his crew would have run out of food and water long before they reached China, as the Portuguese had predicted. After stopping in the Canary Islands to refit the ships, Columbus continued his westward voyage in early September. When the tiny Spanish fleet sighted an island in the Bahamas after only thirtythree days at sea, the admiral concluded he had reached Asia. Since his mathematical calculations had obviously been correct, he assumed he would soon encounter the Chinese. It never occurred

 to Columbus that he had stumbled upon a new world. He assured his men, his patrons, and perhaps himself that the islands were indeed part of the fabled “Indies.” Or if not the Indies themselves, then they were surely an extension of the great Asian landmass. He searched for the splendid cities Marco Polo had described, but instead of meeting wealthy Chinese, Columbus encountered Native Americans, whom he appropriately, if mistakenly, called “Indians.” After his first voyage of discovery, Columbus returned to the New World three more times. But despite his considerable courage and ingenuity, he could never find the treasure his financial supporters in Spain angrily demanded. Columbus died in 1506 a frustrated but wealthy entrepreneur, unaware that he had reached a previously unknown continent separating Asia from Europe. The final disgrace came in 1500 with the publication of a sensationalist account of Amerigo Vespucci’s travels across the Atlantic that contained falsified dates to suggest that Vespucci had visited the mainland prior to other explorers such as Columbus and Henry Cabot.



CHAPT ER 1

NEW WORLD ENCOUNTERS

 This misleading account convinced German mapmakers that it was Vespucci who had proved America to be a new continent distinct from Asia. Before the misconception could be corrected, the name America gained general acceptance throughout Europe. Only two years after Columbus’s first voyage, Spain and Portugal almost went to war over the anticipated treasure of Asia. Pope Alexander VI negotiated a settlement that pleased both kingdoms. Portugal wanted to exclude the Spanish from the west coast of Africa and, what was more important, from Columbus’s new route to “India.” Spain insisted on maintaining complete control over lands discovered by Columbus, which then still were regarded as extensions of China. The Treaty of Tordesillas (1494) divided the entire world along a line located 270 leagues west of the Azores. Any new lands discovered west of the line belonged to Spain. At the time, no European had ever seen Brazil, which turned out to be on Portugal’s side of the line. (To this day, Brazilians speak Portuguese.) The treaty failed to discourage future English, Dutch, and French adventurers from trying their luck in the New World.

 society in the New World. Rather, they came for instant wealth, preferably in gold, and were not squeamish about the means they used to obtain it. Bernal Díaz, one of the first Spaniards to migrate to the region, explained he had traveled to America “to serve God and His Majesty, to give light to those who were in darkness, and to grow rich, as all men desire to do.” In less than two decades, the Indians who had inhabited the Caribbean islands had been exterminated, victims of exploitation and disease. For a quarter century, the conquistadores concentrated their energies on the major islands that Columbus had discovered. Rumors of fabulous wealth in Mexico, however, aroused the interest of many Spaniards, including Hernán Cortés, a minor government functionary in Cuba. Like so many members of his class, he dreamed of glory, military adventure, and riches that would transform him from an ambitious court clerk into an honored hidalgo. On November 18, 1518, Cortés and a small army left Cuba to verify the stories of Mexico’s treasure. Events soon demonstrated that Cortés was a leader of extraordinary ability. His adversary was the legendary Aztec emperor, Montezuma. The confrontation between the two powerful personalities is one of the more dramatic of early American history. A fear of competition from rival conquistadores coupled with a burning desire to conquer a vast new empire drove Cortés forward. Determined to push his men through any obstacle, he scuttled the ships that had carried them to Mexico in order to

The Conquistadores: Faith and Greed


Line of Demarcation
Treaty of Tordesillas 1494


 Spain’s new discoveries unleashed a horde of conquistadores on the Caribbean. These independent adventurers carved out small settlements on Cuba, Hispaniola, Jamaica, and Puerto Rico in the 1490s and early 1500s. They were not interested in creating a permanent

NORTH AMERICA

Gilbert
Cabot


 Cortés 1519 Tenochtitlán

EUROPE
France 
 ASIA

Columbus 1492


 AFRICA

 n 1521

SOUTH AMERICA

 s 14



 ama da G–1498

PA C I F I C OCEAN

PA C I F I C OCEAN

Equator


Dia




Hispaniola


Magella


Equator


–15


Maya
Empire


PA C I F I C OCEAN

 Cortés

 lan 1

Cuba


Portugal Spain


 de Soto 1539–1542

Mag
 el

 s umbu Col 492

England


Cartier 1535
Verrazano 1524


Coronado
1540–1542


Vera Cruz


Aztec
Empire
Frobisher


La Salle
1679–1682


PA C I F I C OCEAN

Gulf of
Mexico


INDIAN OCEAN
ano del C 2 
AT L A N T I C OCEAN

English
French
Portuguese
Spanish


VOYAGES OF EUROPEAN EXPLORATION
The routes of the major voyagers to the New World and Asia. Early explorers established land claims for the competing European states. 
 AUSTRALIA

Imagining a New World


Read the Document


Bartolomé de las Casas,
“Of the Island of Hispaniola”




 In matters of war, Cortés possessed obvious technological superiority over the Aztec troops. The sound of gunfire initially frightened the Indians. Moreover, Aztec troops had never seen horses, much less armored horses carrying sword-wielding Spaniards. But these elements would have counted for little had Cortés not also gained a psychological advantage over his opponents. At first, Montezuma thought that the Spaniards were gods, representatives of the fearful plumed serpent, Quetzalcoatl. Instead of resisting immediately, the emperor hesitated. When Montezuma’s resolve hardened, it was too late. Cortés’s victory in Mexico, coupled with other conquests in South America, transformed Spain, at least temporarily, into the wealthiest state in Europe.

From Plunder to Settlement


 The Virgin of Guadalupe is perhaps the best-known religious symbol of Mexico. The image reflects the sixteenth-century encounter between Europeans and Indians. The Virgin Mary was already an important religious figure among the Spanish when they arrived in America. Like the Indian Juan Diego to whom she is said to have appeared and offered hope, comfort, and protection, the Virgin is dark skinned. This 1531 representation shows her clothed in a robe adorned with stars and surrounded by a crown of sunrays. Each year hundreds of thousands of people visit the shrine of the Virgin at Tepeyac, outside Mexico City.

 prevent them from retreating. Cortés led his band of six hundred followers across rugged mountains and on the way gathered allies from among the Tlaxcalans, a tributary people eager to free themselves from Aztec domination.

 Following the conquest of Mexico, renamed New Spain, the Spanish crown confronted a difficult problem. Ambitious conquistadores, interested chiefly in their own wealth and glory, had to be brought under royal authority, a task easier imagined than accomplished. Adventurers like Cortés were stubbornly independent, quick to take offense, and thousands of miles away from the seat of imperial government. The crown found a partial solution in the encomienda system. The monarch rewarded the leaders of the conquest with Indian villages. The people who lived in the settlements provided the encomenderos with labor tribute in exchange for legal protection and religious guidance. The system, of course, cruelly exploited Indian laborers. One historian concluded, “The first encomenderos, without known exception, understood Spanish authority as provision for unlimited personal opportunism.” Cortés alone was granted the services of more than twenty-three thousand Indian workers. The encomienda system made the colonizers more dependent on the king, for it was he who legitimized their title. In the words of one scholar, the new economic structure helped to transform “a frontier of plunder into a frontier of settlement.” Spain’s rulers attempted to maintain tight personal control over their American possessions. The volume of correspondence between the two continents, much of it concerning mundane matters, was staggering. All documents were duplicated several times by hand. Because the trip to Madrid took many months, a year often passed before receipt of an answer to a simple request. But somehow the cumbersome system worked. In Mexico, officials appointed in Spain established a rigid hierarchical order, directing the affairs of the countryside from urban centers. The Spanish also brought Catholicism to the New World. The Dominicans and Franciscans, the two largest religious orders, established Indian missions throughout New Spain. Some friars tried to protect the Native Americans from the worst forms of exploitation. One courageous Dominican, Fra Bartolomé de las Casas, published an eloquent defense of Indian rights, Historia de las Indias, which among other things questioned the legitimacy of European conquest of the New World. Las Casas’s work provoked heated debate in Spain, and while the crown had no intention of repudiating the vast American empire, it did initiate certain reforms designed to bring greater “love and moderation” to Spanish-Indian relations. It is impossible to ascertain how many converts the friars made. In 1531, however, a newly converted



CHAPT ER 1

NEW WORLD ENCOUNTERS

 Christian reported a vision of the Virgin, a dark-skinned woman of obvious Indian ancestry, who became known throughout the region as the Virgin of Guadalupe. This figure—the result of a creative blending of Indian and European cultures—served as a powerful symbol of Mexican nationalism in the wars for independence fought against Spain almost three centuries later. About two hundred fifty thousand Spaniards migrated to the New World during the sixteenth century. Another two hundred thousand made the journey between 1600 and 1650. Most colonists were single males in their late twenties seeking economic opportunities. They generally came from the poorest agricultural regions of southern Spain—almost 40 percent migrating from Andalusia. Since so few Spanish women migrated, especially in the sixteenth century, the men often married Indians and blacks, unions which produced mestizos and mulattos. The frequency of interracial marriage indicated that, among other things, the people of New Spain were more tolerant of racial differences than were the English who settled in North America. For the people of New Spain, social standing was affected as much, or more, by economic worth as it was by color. Persons born in the New World, even those of Spanish parentage (criollos), were regarded as socially inferior to natives of the mother country (peninsulares). Spain claimed far more of the New World than it could possibly manage. Spain’s rulers regarded the American colonies primarily as a source of precious metal, and between 1500 and 1650, an estimated 200 tons of gold and 16,000 tons of silver were shipped back to the Spanish treasury in Madrid. This great wealth, however, proved a mixed blessing. The sudden acquisition of so much money stimulated a horrendous infl ation that hurt ordinary Spaniards. They were hurt further by long, debilitating European wars funded by American gold and silver. Moreover, instead of developing its own industry, Spain became dependent on the annual shipment of bullion from America, and in 1603, one insightful Spaniard declared, “The New World conquered by you, has conquered you in its turn.” This somewhat weakened, although still formidable, empire would eventually extend its territorial claims north to California and the Southwest (see Chapter 4).

 de Champlain resettle this region for France. He founded Quebec in 1608. As was the case with other colonial powers, the French declared they had migrated to the New World in search of wealth as well as in hopes of converting the Indians to Christianity. As it turned out, these economic and spiritual goals required full cooperation between the French and the Native Americans. In contrast to the English settlers, who established independent farms and who regarded the Indians at best as obstacles in the path of civilization, the French viewed the natives as necessary economic partners. Furs were Canada’s most valuable export, and to obtain the pelts of beaver and other animals, the French were absolutely dependent on Indian hunters and trappers. French traders lived among the Indians, often taking native wives and studying local cultures. Frenchmen known as coureurs de bois (forest runners), following Canada’s great river networks, paddled deep into the heart of the continent in search of fresh sources of furs. Some intrepid traders penetrated beyond the Great Lakes into the Mississippi Valley. In 1673, Père Jacques Marquette journeyed down the

Read the Document


Jacques Cartier: First
 Contact with the Indians (1534)

The French Claim Canada
 What was the character of the French empire in Canada? French interest in the New World developed slowly. More than three decades after Columbus’s discovery, King Francis I sponsored the unsuccessful efforts of Giovanni da Verrazzano to find a short water route to China, via a northwest passage around or through North America. In 1534, the king sent Jacques Cartier on a similar quest. The rocky, barren coast of Labrador depressed the explorer. He grumbled, “I am rather inclined to believe that this is the land God gave to Cain.” Discovery of a large, promising waterway the following year raised Cartier’s spirits. He reconnoitered the Gulf of Saint Lawrence, traveling up the magnificent river as far as modern Montreal. Despite his high expectations, however, Cartier got no closer to China, and discouraged by the harsh winters, he headed home in 1542. Not until sixty-five years later did Samuel

 This seventeenth-century woodcut depicts Samuel de Champlain’s fortified camp at Quebec on the St. Lawrence River. Champlain founded Quebec for France in 1608. Source: North Wind Picture Archives.

The English Enter the Competition


 Mississippi River, and nine years later, Sieur de La Salle traveled all the way to the Gulf of Mexico. In the early eighteenth century, the French established small settlements in Louisiana, the most important being New Orleans. The spreading French influence worried English colonists living along the Atlantic coast, for it appeared the French were about to cut them off from the trans-Appalachian west. Catholic missionaries also depended on Indian cooperation. Canadian priests were drawn from two orders, the Jesuits and the Recollects, and although measuring their success in the New World is difficult, it seems they converted more Indians to Christianity than did their English Protestant counterparts to the south. Like the fur traders, the missionaries lived among the Indians and learned to speak their languages. The French dream of a vast American empire suffered from serious flaws. The crown remained largely indifferent to Canadian affairs. Royal officials stationed in New France received limited and sporadic support from Paris. An even greater problem was the decision to settle what seemed to many rural peasants and urban artisans a cold, inhospitable land. Throughout the colonial period, Canada’s European population remained small. A census of 1663 recorded a mere 3,035 French residents. By 1700, the figure had reached only 15,000. Men far outnumbered women, thus making it hard for settlers to form new families. Moreover, because of the colony’s geography, all exports and imports had to go through Quebec. It was relatively easy, therefore, for crown officials to control that traffic, usually by awarding fur-trading monopolies to court favorites. Such practices created political tensions and hindered economic growth.

The English Enter the Competition
 Why did England not participate in the early competition for New World colonies? The first English visit to North America remains shrouded in mystery. Fishermen working out of Bristol and other western English ports may have landed in Nova Scotia and Newfoundland as early as the 1480s. The codfish of the Grand Banks undoubtedly drew vessels of all nations, and during the summer months some sailors probably dried and salted their catches on Canada’s convenient shores. John Cabot (Giovanni Caboto), a Venetian sea captain, completed the first recorded transatlantic voyage by an English vessel in 1497, while attempting to find a northwest passage to Asia. Cabot died during a second attempt to find a direct route to Cathay in 1498. Although Sebastian Cabot continued his father’s explorations in the Hudson Bay region in 1508–1509, England’s interest in the New World waned. For the next three-quarters of a century, the English people were preoccupied with more pressing domestic and religious concerns. When curiosity about the New World revived, however, Cabot’s voyages established England’s belated claim to American territory.

Birth of English Protestantism
 At the time of Cabot’s death, England was not prepared to compete with Spain and Portugal for the riches of the Orient. Although Henry VII, the first Tudor monarch, brought peace to England



 after a bitter civil war, the country still contained too many mighty subjects, powerful local magnates who maintained armed retainers and who often paid little attention to royal authority. Henry possessed no standing army; his small navy intimidated no one. To be sure, the Tudors gave nominal allegiance to the pope in Rome, but unlike the rulers of Spain, they were not crusaders for Catholicism. A complex web of international diplomacy also worked against England’s early entry into New World colonization. In 1509, to cement an alliance between Spain and England, the future Henry VIII married Catherine of Aragon. As a result of this marital arrangement, English merchants enjoyed limited rights to trade in Spain’s American colonies, but any attempt by England at independent colonization would have threatened those rights and jeopardized the alliance. By the end of the sixteenth century, however, conditions within England had changed dramatically, in part as a result of the Protestant Reformation. As they did, the English began to consider their former ally, Spain, to be the greatest threat to English aspirations. Tudor monarchs, especially Henry VIII (r. 1509–1547) and his daughter Elizabeth I (r. 1558–1603), developed a strong central administration, while England became more and more a Protestant society. The merger of English Protestantism and English nationalism affected all aspects of public life. It helped propel England into a central role in European affairs and was crucial in creating a powerful sense of an English identity among all classes of people. Popular anticlericalism helped spark religious reformation in England. Although they observed traditional Catholic ritual, the English people had long resented paying monies to a pope who lived in far-off Rome. Early in the sixteenth century, criticism of the clergy grew increasingly vocal. Cardinal Thomas Wolsey, the most powerful prelate in England, flaunted his immense wealth and unwittingly became a symbol of spiritual corruption. Parish priests were objects of ridicule. Poorly educated men for the most part, they seemed theologically ignorant and perpetually grasping. Anticlericalism did not run as deep in England as it had in Martin Luther’s Germany, but by the late 1520s, the Catholic Church could no longer take for granted the allegiance of the great mass of the population. The people’s growing anger is central to an understanding of the English Reformation. Put simply, if ordinary men and women throughout the kingdom had not accepted separation from Rome, then Henry VIII could not have forced them to leave the church. The catalyst for Protestant Reformation in England was the king’s desire to rid himself of his wife, Catherine of Aragon, who happened to be the daughter of the former king of Spain. Their marriage had produced a daughter, Mary, but, as the years passed, no son. The need for a male heir obsessed Henry. He and his counselors assumed a female ruler could not maintain domestic peace, and England would fall once again into civil war. The answer seemed to be remarriage. Henry petitioned Pope Clement VII for a divorce (technically, an annulment), but the Spanish had other ideas. Unwilling to tolerate the public humiliation of Catherine, they forced the pope to procrastinate. In 1527, time ran out. The passionate Henry fell in love with Anne Boleyn, who later bore him a daughter, Elizabeth. The king decided to divorce Catherine with or without papal consent.



CHAPT ER 1

NEW WORLD ENCOUNTERS

 The final break with Rome came swiftly. Between 1529 and 1536, the king, acting through Parliament, severed all ties with the pope, seized church lands, and dissolved many of the monasteries. In March 1534, the Act of Supremacy boldly announced, “The King’s Majesty justly and rightfully is supreme head of the Church of England.” The entire process, which one historian termed a “state reformation,” was conducted with impressive efficiency. Land formerly owned by the Catholic Church passed quickly into private hands, and within a short period, property holders throughout England had acquired a vested interest in Protestantism. Beyond breaking with the papacy, Henry showed little enthusiasm for theological change. Many Catholic ceremonies survived. The split with Rome, however, opened the door to increasingly radical religious ideas. The year 1539 saw the publication of the first Bible in English. Before then the Scripture had been available only in Latin, the language of an educated elite. For the first time in English history, ordinary people could read the word of God in the vernacular. It was a liberating experience that persuaded some men and women that Henry had not sufficiently reformed the English church. With Henry’s death in 1547, England entered a period of acute political and religious instability. Edward VI, Henry’s young son by his third wife, Jane Seymour, came to the throne, but he was still a child and sickly besides. Militant Protestants took advantage of the political uncertainty, insisting the Church of England remove every trace of its Catholic origins. With the death of young Edward in 1553, these ambitious efforts came to a sudden halt. Henry’s eldest daughter, Mary, next ascended the throne. Fiercely loyal to the Catholic faith of her mother, Catherine of Aragon, Mary I vowed to return England to the pope. However misguided were the queen’s plans, she possessed her father’s iron will. Hundreds of Protestants were executed; others scurried off to the safety of Geneva and Frankfurt, where they absorbed the most radical Calvinist doctrines of the day. When Mary died in 1558 and was succeeded by Elizabeth, the “Marian exiles” flocked back to England, more eager than ever to rid the Tudor church of Catholicism. Mary had inadvertently advanced the cause of Calvinism by creating so many Protestant martyrs, reformers burned for their faith and now celebrated in the woodcuts of the most popular book of the period, John Foxe’s Acts and Monuments, commonly known as the Book of Martyrs (1563). The Marian exiles served as the leaders of the Elizabethan church, an institution that remained fundamentally Calvinist until the end of the sixteenth century.

Militant Protestantism
 By the time Mary Tudor came to the throne, the vast popular movement known as the Reformation had swept across northern and central Europe, and as much as any of the later great political revolutions, it had begun to transform the character of the modern world. The Reformation started in Germany when, in 1517, a relatively obscure German monk, Martin Luther, publicly challenged the central tenets of Roman Catholicism. Within a few years, the religious unity of Europe was permanently shattered. The Reformation divided kingdoms, sparked bloody wars, and unleashed an extraordinary flood of religious publication.

Read the Document


 Henry VII, Letters of Patent Granted to John Cabot

 King Henry VII’s seizure of the throne of England in 1485 brought an end to a series of civil wars that had torn England apart for almost thirty years. Along with bringing stability to the kingdom, Henry VII also established England’s first claims to the Americas by sponsoring the explorations of Captain John Cabot.

 Luther’s message was straightforward, one ordinary people could easily comprehend. God spoke through the Bible, Luther maintained, not through the pope or priests. Scripture taught that women and men were saved by faith alone. Pilgrimages, fasts, alms, indulgences—none of the traditional ritual observances could assure salvation. The institutional structure of Catholicism was challenged as Luther’s radical ideas spread rapidly across northern Germany and Scandinavia. After Luther, other Protestant theologians—religious thinkers who would determine the course of religious reform in England, Scotland, and the early American colonies—mounted an even more strident attack on Catholicism. The most influential of these was John Calvin, a lawyer turned theologian, who lived most of his

The English Enter the Competition


 adult life in the Swiss city of Geneva. Calvin stressed God’s omnipotence over human affairs. The Lord, he maintained, chose some persons for “election,” the gift of salvation, while condemning others to eternal damnation. A man or woman could do nothing to alter this decision. Common sense suggests that such a bleak doctrine—known as predestination—might lead to fatalism or hedonism. After all, why not enjoy the world’s pleasures to the fullest if such actions have no effect on God’s judgment? But many sixteenth-century Europeans did not share modern notions of what constitutes common sense. Indeed, Calvinists were constantly “up and doing,” searching for signs that they had received God’s gift of grace. The uncertainty of their eternal state proved a powerful psychological spur, for as long as people did not know whether they were scheduled for heaven or hell, they worked diligently to demonstrate that they possessed at least the seeds of grace. John Calvin’s Institutes of the Christian Religion (1536) contained a powerful statement of the new faith, and his teachings spawned religious movements in most northern European countries. In France, the reformed Protestants were known as Huguenots. In Scotland, people of Calvinist persuasion founded the Presbyterian Church. And in seventeenth-century England and America, most of those who put Calvin’s teachings into practice were called Puritans.

Woman in Power
 Queen Elizabeth demonstrated that Henry and his advisers had been mistaken about the capabilities of female rulers. She was a woman of such talent that modern biographers find little to criticize in her decisions. She governed the English people from 1558 to 1603, an intellectually exciting period during which some of her subjects took the first halting steps toward colonizing the New World. Elizabeth recognized her most urgent duty as queen was to end the religious turmoil that had divided the country for a generation. She had no desire to restore Catholicism. After all, the pope openly referred to her as a woman of illegitimate birth. Nor did she want to re-create the church exactly as it had been in the final years of her father’s reign. Rather, Elizabeth established a unique institution, Catholic in much of its ceremony and government but clearly Protestant in doctrine. Under her so-called Elizabethan settlement, the queen assumed the title “Supreme Head of the Church.” Some churchmen who had studied with Calvin in Geneva urged her to drop immediately all Catholic rituals, but she ignored these strident reformers. The young queen understood she could not rule effectively without the full support of her people, and as the examples of Edward and Mary before her demonstrated, neither radical change nor widespread persecution gained a monarch lasting popularity. The state of England’s religion was not simply a domestic concern. One scholar aptly termed this period of European history “the Age of Religious Wars.” Catholicism and Protestantism influenced the way ordinary men and women across the continent interpreted the experiences of everyday life. Religion shaped political and economic activities. Protestant leaders, for example, purged the English calendar of the many saints’ days



 that had punctuated the agricultural year in Catholic countries. The Reformation certainly had a profound impact on the economic development of Calvinist countries. Max Weber, a brilliant German sociologist of the early twentieth century, argued in his Protestant Ethic and Spirit of Capitalism that a gnawing sense of self-doubt created by the doctrine of “predestination” drove Calvinists to extraordinary diligence. They generated large profits, not because they wanted to become rich, but because they wanted to be doing the Lord’s work, to show they might be among God’s “elect.” Indeed, it is helpful to view Protestantism and Catholicism as warring ideologies, bundles of deeply held beliefs that divided countries and families much as communism and capitalism did during the late twentieth century. The confrontations between the two faiths affected Elizabeth’s entire reign. Soon after she became queen, Pope Pius V excommunicated her, and in his papal bull Regnans in Exelsis (1570), he stripped Elizabeth of her “pretended title to the kingdom.” Spain, the most fervently Catholic state in Europe, vowed to restore England to the “true” faith, and Catholic militants constantly plotted to overthrow the Tudor monarchy.

Religion, War, and Nationalism
 Slowly, but steadily, English Protestantism and English national identity merged. A loyal English subject in the late sixteenth century loved the queen, supported the Church of England, and hated Catholics, especially those who happened to live in Spain. Elizabeth herself came to symbolize this militant new chauvinism. Her subjects adored the Virgin Queen, and they applauded when her famed “Sea Dogs”—dashing figures such as Sir Francis Drake and Sir John Hawkins—seized Spanish treasure ships in American waters. The English sailors’ raids were little more than piracy, but in this undeclared state of war, such instances of harassment passed for national victories. There seemed to be no reason patriotic Elizabethans should not share in the wealth of the New World. With each engagement, each threat, each plot, English nationalism took deeper root. By the 1570s, it had become obvious the English people were driven by powerful ideological forces similar to those that had moved the Spanish subjects of Isabella and Ferdinand almost a century earlier. In the mid-1580s, Philip II, who had united the empires of Spain and Portugal in 1580, decided that England’s arrogantly Protestant queen could be tolerated no longer. He ordered the construction of a mighty fleet, hundreds of transport vessels designed to carry Spain’s finest infantry across the English channel. When one of Philip’s lieutenants viewed the Armada at Lisbon in May 1588, he described it as la felicissima armada, the invincible fleet. The king believed that with the support of England’s oppressed Catholics, Spanish troops would sweep Elizabeth from power. It was a grand scheme; it was an even grander failure. In 1588, a smaller, more maneuverable English navy dispersed Philip’s Armada, and severe storms finished it off. Spanish hopes for Catholic England lay wrecked along the rocky coasts of Scotland and Ireland. English Protestants interpreted victory in providential terms: “God breathed and they were scattered.”



CHAPT ER 1

NEW WORLD ENCOUNTERS

An Unpromising Beginning:
Mystery at Roanoke
 What role did the Spanish play in the failure of the Roanoke colony? By the 1570s, English interest in the New World had revived. An increasing number of wealthy gentlemen were in an expansive mood, ready to challenge Spain and reap the profits of Asia and America. Yet the adventurers who directed Elizabethan expeditions were only dimly aware of Cabot’s voyages, and their sole experience in settling distant outposts was in Ireland. Over the last three decades of the sixteenth century, English adventurers made almost every mistake one could possibly imagine. They did, however, acquire valuable information about winds and currents, supplies and finance. Sir Walter Ralegh’s experience provided all English colonizers with a sobering example of the difficulties that awaited them in America. In 1584, he dispatched two captains to the coast of present-day North Carolina to claim land granted to him by Elizabeth. The men returned with glowing reports, no doubt aimed in part at potential financial backers. “The soile,” declared Captain Arthur Barlow, “is the most plentifull, sweete, fruitfull, and wholesome of all the world.” Ralegh diplomatically renamed this marvelous region Virginia, in honor of his patron, the Virgin Queen. Indeed, highly gendered vocabulary figured prominently in the European conquest of the New World. As historian Kathleen M. Brown explained, “Associations of the land with virgin innocence reinforced the notion that Virginia had been saved from the Spaniard’s lust to be conquered by the chaste English.” Elizabeth encouraged Ralegh in private conversation but rejected his persistent requests for money. With rumors of war in the air, she did not want to alienate Philip II unnecessarily by sponsoring a colony on land long ago claimed by Spain. Ralegh finally raised the funds for his adventure, but his enterprise seemed ill-fated from the start. Despite careful planning, everything went wrong. The settlement was poorly situated. Located inside the Outer Banks—perhaps to avoid detection by the Spanish—the Roanoke colony proved extremely difficult to reach. Even experienced navigators feared the treacherous currents and storms off Cape Hatteras. Sir Richard Grenville, the leader of the expedition, added to the colonists’ troubles by destroying an entire Indian village in retaliation for the suspected theft of a silver cup. Grenville hurried back to England in the autumn of 1585, leaving the colonists to fend for themselves. Although they coped quite well, a peculiar series of accidents transformed Ralegh’s settlement into a ghost town. In the spring of 1586, Sir Francis Drake was returning from a Caribbean voyage and decided to visit Roanoke. Since an anticipated shipment of supplies was overdue, the colonists climbed aboard Drake’s ships and went home. In 1587, Ralegh launched a second colony. This time he placed in charge John White, a veteran administrator and talented artist, who a few years earlier had produced a magnificent sketchbook of the Algonquian Indians who lived near Roanoke.

Read the Document


John White, Letter to
Richard Hakluyt and Description of Voyage to the
Lost Colony (1590)


 John White depicted fishing techniques practiced by the Algonquian Indians of the present-day Carolinas. In the canoe, dip nets and multipronged spears are used. In the background, Indians stab at fish with long spears. At left, a weir traps fish by taking advantage of the river current’s natural force.

 Once again, Ralegh’s luck turned sour. The Spanish Armada severed communication between England and America. Every available English vessel was pressed into military service, and between 1587 and 1590, no ship visited the Roanoke colonists. When rescuers eventually reached the island, they found the village deserted. The fate of the “lost” colonists remains a mystery. The best guess is that they were absorbed by neighboring groups of natives, some from as far as the southern shore of the James River.

STUDY RESOURCES

Conclusion: Campaign to
Sell America
 Had it not been for Richard Hakluyt the Younger, who publicized explorers’ accounts of the New World, the dream of American colonization might have died in England. Hakluyt, a supremely industrious man, never saw America. Nevertheless, his vision of the New World powerfully shaped English public opinion. He interviewed captains and sailors upon their return from distant voyages and carefully collected their stories in a massive book titled The Principall Navigations, Voyages, and Discoveries of the English Nation (1589). The work appeared to be a straightforward description of what these sailors had seen across the sea. That was its strength. In reality, Hakluyt edited each piece so it would drive home the book’s central point: England needed American colonies. Indeed, they were essential to the nation’s prosperity and independence. In Hakluyt’s America, there were no losers. “The earth bringeth fourth all things in aboundance, as in the first creations without toil or labour,” he wrote of Virginia. His blend of piety, patriotism, and self-interest proved immensely popular, and his Voyages went through many editions.



 Hakluyt’s enthusiasm for the spread of English trade throughout the world may have blinded him to the aspirations of other peoples who actually inhabited those distant lands. He continued to collect testimony from adventurers and sailors who claimed to have visited Asia and America. In an immensely popular new edition of his work published between 1598 and 1600 and entitled Voyages, he catalogued in extraordinary detail the commercial opportunities awaiting courageous and ambitious English colonizers. Hakluyt’s entrepreneurial perspective served to obscure other aspects of the European Conquest, which within only a short amount of time would transform the face of the New World. He paid little attention, for example, to the rich cultural diversity of the Native Americans; he said not a word about the pain of the Africans who traveled to North and South America as slaves. Instead, he and many other polemicists for English colonization led the ordinary men and women who crossed the Atlantic to expect nothing less than a paradise on earth. By fanning such unrealistic expectations, Hakluyt persuaded European settlers that the New World was theirs for the taking, a self-serving view that invited ecological disaster and continuous human suffering.

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 1 New World Encounters on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 24,000–17,000 B.C.
Indians cross the Bering Strait into North America 2000–1500 B.C. Agricultural Revolution transforms Native American life A.D. 1001 Norsemen establish a small settlement in Vinland (Newfoundland) 1030 Death of War Jaabi (king of Takrur), first Muslim ruler in West Africa 1450 Gutenberg perfects movable type 1469 Marriage of Isabella and Ferdinand leads to the unification of Spain 1481 Portuguese build castle at Elmina on the Gold Coast of Africa 1492 Columbus lands at San Salvador 1497 Cabot leads first English exploration of North America 1498 Vasco da Gama of Portugal reaches India by sailing around Africa 
 1502 Montezuma becomes emperor of the Aztecs 1506 Columbus dies in Spain after four voyages to America 1517 Martin Luther’s protest sparks Reformation in Germany 1521 Cortés defeats the Aztecs at Tenochtitlán 1529–1536 Henry VIII provokes English Reformation 1534 Cartier claims Canada for France 1536 Calvin’s Institutes published 1540 Coronado explores the Southwest for Spain 1558 Elizabeth I becomes queen of England 1585 First Roanoke settlement established on coast of North Carolina Spanish Armada defeated by the English

 1608 Champlain founds Quebec



CHAPT ER 1

CHAPTER REVIEW

CHAPTER REVIEW
Native American Histories Before the Conquest 
Imagining a New World


 What explains cultural differences among Native American groups before European conquest?

 How did Spanish conquest of Central and South America transform Native American cultures?

 Paleo-Indians crossed into North America from Asia 20,000 years ago. During the migrations, they divided into distinct groups, often speaking different languages. The Agricultural Revolution sparked population growth, allowing some groups, such as the Aztecs, to establish complex societies. The Eastern Woodland Indians, who lived along the Atlantic coast, had just begun to practice agriculture when the Europeans arrived. (p. 4)

 Spanish conquistadores conquered vast territories in the Caribbean, Mexico, and Central and South America during the sixteenth century. Catholic missionaries followed the conquistadores to convert the Indians to Christianity. Although the Spanish conquerors cruelly exploited the Indians as laborers, intermarriage between the groups created a new culture blending Spanish and Indian elements. (p. 16)

A
World Transformed 

The French Claim Canada


 How did Europeans and Native Americans interact during the period of first contact?

 What was the character of the French empire in Canada?

 Native Americans initially welcomed the opportunity to trade with the Europeans. The newcomers insisted on “civilizing” the Indians. Neither Christianity nor Europeanstyle education held much appeal for Native Americans, and they resisted efforts to transform their cultures. Contagious Old World diseases, such as smallpox, decimated the Indians, leaving them vulnerable to cultural imperialism. (p. 8)

 The French in Canada focused on building a trading empire rather than on settlement. The coureurs de bois and Catholic missionaries lived among the Indians, learning their languages and customs. French explorers followed the extensive river networks of North America and claimed vast stretches of land along the St. Lawrence and Mississippi Rivers. (p. 20)

West Africa: Ancient and Complex Societies


The English Enter the Competition
 Why did England not participate in the early competition for New World colonies?

 What was the character of the West African societies that European traders first encountered? West Africans had learned of Islam long before European traders arrived looking for slaves. The earliest Europeans found powerful local rulers who knew how to profit from commercial exchange. Slaves who had been captured in distant wars were taken to so-called slave factories where they were sold to Europeans and then shipped to the New World. (p. 11)

Europe on the Eve of Conquest


 During the early 1500s, religious turmoil preoccupied England’s monarchs. After ascending the throne in 1558, Queen Elizabeth I ended internal religious struggle by establishing an English Church that was Protestant in doctrine but Catholic in ceremony. Under Elizabeth, English nationalism merged with anti-Catholicism to challenge Spanish control of the Americas. (p. 21)

An Unpromising Beginning: Mystery
 at Roanoke

 How do you explain Spain’s central role in New World exploration and colonization? The unification of Spain under Ferdinand and Isabella, and the experience of the Reconquista, provided Spain with advantages in its later conquest of the New World. The Spanish crown supported the explorations of Christopher Columbus, who thought he had discovered a new route to Asia. His voyages gave the Spanish a head start in claiming American lands. (p. 15)

 What role did the Spanish play in the failure of the Roanoke colony? The second Roanoke colony was founded in 1587, but the following year, the Spanish Armada severed communications between England and America. When an English ship was finally able to reach Roanoke in 1590, the rescuers found the settlement there deserted. (p. 24)

KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Beringia Land bridge formerly connecting Asia and North America that is now submerged beneath the Bering Sea. p. 4 Agricultural Revolution The gradual shift from hunting and gathering to cultivating basic food crops that occurred worldwide from 7,000 to 9,000 years ago. p. 5 Eastern Woodland Cultures Term given to Indians from the Northeast region who lived on the Atlantic coast and supplemented farming with seasonal hunting and gathering. p. 7 
 Columbian Exchange The exchange of plants, animals, and diseases between Europe and the Americas from first contact throughout the era of exploration. p. 10 Conquistadores Sixteenth-century Spanish adventurers, often of noble birth, who subdued the Native Americans and created the Spanish empire in the New World. p. 16 Treaty of Tordesillas Treaty negotiated by the pope in 1494 that divided the world along a north–south line in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, granting Spain all lands west of the line and Portugal lands east of the line. p. 18

STUDY RESOURCES



 Encomienda system An exploitative system by Spanish rulers that granted conquistadors control of Native American villages and their inhabiatants’ labor. p. 19

 Protestant Reformation Sixteenth-century religious movement to reform and challenge the spiritual authority of the Roman Catholic Church. p. 21

 Virgin of Guadalupe Apparition of the Virgin Mary that has become a symbol of Mexican nationalism. p. 20

The Spanish Armada
1588. p. 24


 Spanish fleet sent to invade England in

 Coureurs de bois Fur trappers in French Canada who lived among the Native Americans. p. 20

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
How did native American societies experience substantial change prior 
 3. How would you contrast the role of religion and economics in the

 to European conquest?

 development of the Spanish, French and English empires?

 2. How would you compare the relationships Europeans formed with

 4. How did a relatively small European nation like England rise to a

 West Africans to the ones they formed with Native Americans?

 position of world power?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 1 on MyHistoryLab Native American Histories Before the Conquest ◾

View the Closer Look


An Early European Image of


Native Americans p. 8


West Africa: Ancient and Complex Societies
Complete the Assignment The Columbian Exchange and


 the Global Environment: Ecological Revolution p. 12 View the Closer Look

Columbian Exchange p. 13


African Slave Trade, 1500–1870 p. 14


Imagining a New World
◾


 Jacques Cartier: First Contact with

 the Indians (1534) p. 20

Native American Population Loss,
1500–1700 p. 10


View the Map


Bartolomé de las Casas, “Of the
Island of Hispaniola” p. 19


Read the Document


View the Map


◾


Read the Document


The French Claim Canada


A
World Transformed 

◾


◾


Watch the Video


Columbus? p. 17


How Should We Think of


The English Enter The Competition
Read the Document


 Henry VII, Letters of Patent Granted

 to John Cabot p. 22

An Unpromising Beginning: Mystery at Roanoke
Read the Document


John White, Letter to Richard Hakluyt
 and Description of Voyage to the Lost Colony (1590) p. 24

◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




New World Experiments:
 England’s Seventeenth-Century Colonies

Contents and Learning Objectives
BREAKING AWAY PG. 30

QUAKERS IN AMERICA PG. 46

 What were some of the social problems facing Britain in the 16th and 17th centuries that helped push English colonists to cross the Atlantic?

 How did the Quaker religion influence the development of Pennsylvania?

THE CHESAPEAKE: DREAMS OF WEALTH PG. 31

 How did the Barbadian background of the early settlers shape the economic development of the Carolinas?

 Why did the Chesapeake colonies not prosper during the earliest years of settlement?

THE FOUNDING OF GEORGIA PG. 50

REFORMING ENGLAND IN AMERICA PG. 37
How did differences in religion affect the founding of the New England colonies? 
PLANTING THE CAROLINAS PG. 48

 How was the founding of the Carolinas different from the founding of Georgia? ◾ FEATURE ESSAY The Children Who Refused to Come Home: Captivity and Conversion

DIVERSITY IN THE MIDDLE COLONIES PG. 44
How did ethnic diversity shape the development of the Middle Colonies? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

