Chapter 11 Slaves and Masters


 Nat Turner’s Rebellion: A Turning Point in the Slave South On August 22, 1831, the worst nightmare of southern slaveholders became reality. A group of slaves in Southampton County, Virginia, rose in open and bloody rebellion. Their leader was Nat Turner, a preacher and prophet who believed God had given him a sign that the time was ripe to strike for freedom; a vision of black and white angels wrestling in the sky had convinced him that divine wrath was about to be visited upon the white oppressor. Beginning with a few followers and rallying others as he went along, Turner led his band from plantation to plantation and oversaw the killing of nearly sixty whites. After only forty-eight hours, white forces dispersed the rampaging slaves. The rebels were then rounded up and executed, along with dozens of other slaves who were vaguely suspected of complicity. Nat Turner was the last to be captured, and he went to the gallows unrepentant, convinced he had acted in accordance with God’s will. After the initial panic and rumors of a wider insurrection had passed, white Southerners went about making sure such an incident would never happen again. Their anxiety and determination were

 strengthened by the fact that 1831 also saw the emergence of a more militant northern abolitionism. Just two years after African American abolitionist David Walker published his Appeal to the Colored Citizens of the World, calling for blacks to take up arms against slavery, William Lloyd Garrison put out the first issue of his newspaper, The Liberator, the first publication by a white author to demand immediate abolition of slavery rather than gradual emancipation. Nat Turner and William Lloyd Garrison were viewed as two prongs of a revolutionary attack on the southern way of life. Although no evidence came to light that Turner was directly influenced by abolitionist propaganda, many whites believed that he must have been or that future rebels might be. Consequently, they launched a massive campaign to quarantine the slaves from possible exposure to antislavery ideas and attitudes. A series of new laws severely restricted the rights of slaves to move about, assemble without white supervision, or learn to read and write. The wave of repression did not stop at the color line; laws and the threat of mob action prevented white dissenters from

Read the Document


The Confessions of Nat Turner (1831)


A
Ride for Liberty—The Fugitive Slaves by Eastman Johnson depicts a slave family in flight to the North. Source: Brooklyn Museum of Art. Gift of Gwendolyn O.L. Conkling—40.59a—A Ride for Liberty—The Fugitive Slaves by Eastman Johnson, ca. 1862. Oil on paper board, 22 × 26 1/4 in. 
 publicly criticizing or even questioning the institution of slavery. Loyalty to the region was firmly identified with defense of it, and proslavery agitators sought to create a mood of crisis and danger requiring absolute unity and single-mindedness among the white

 population. This embattled attitude lay behind the growth of a more militant sectionalism and inspired threats to secede from the Union unless the South’s peculiar institution could be made safe from northern or abolitionist attack.



 CHAPTER 11

SLAVES AND MASTERS

 he campaign for repression after the Nat Turner rebellion apparently achieved its original aim. Between 1831 and the Civil War, there were no further uprisings resulting in the mass killing of whites. This fact once led some historians to conclude that African American slaves were brainwashed into a state of docility. But resistance to slavery simply took less dangerous forms. The brute force employed in response to the Turner rebellion and the elaborate precautions taken against its recurrence provided slaves with a more realistic sense of the odds against direct confrontation with white power. As a result, they sought and perfected other methods of asserting their humanity. The heroic effort to endure slavery without surrendering to it gave rise to an African American culture of lasting value. This culture combined unique family arrangements, religious ideas of liberation, and creative responses to the oppression of servitude. Among white Southerners, the need to police and control the huge population of enslaved people influenced every aspect of daily life and produced an increasingly isolated, divided, and insecure society. While long-standing racial prejudice contributed to the divided society, the determination of whites to preserve the institution of slavery derived in large part from the important role slavery played in the southern economy.

T


The Divided Society of the
Old South
 What were the divisions within black society in the Old South? Slavery would not have lasted as long as it did—and Southerners would not have reacted so strongly to real or imagined threats to its survival—if an influential class of whites had not had a vital and growing economic interest in this form of human exploitation. Since the early colonial period, forced labor had been considered essential to the South’s plantation economy. In the period between the 1790s and the Civil War, plantation agriculture expanded enormously, and so did dependence on slave labor; unfree blacks were the only workers readily available to landowners who sought to profit from expanding market opportunities by raising staple crops on a large scale. As slavery increased in its importance to the southern economy and society, the divisions within that society grew increasingly apparent. Most fundamentally, the fact that all whites were free and most blacks were slaves created a sharp cleavage between the races in southern society. Indeed, during the last decades before the Civil War, the racial divide grew ever more congruent with the split between free and unfree. Yet the overwhelming importance of race gives an impression of a basic equality within the “master race” that some would say is an illusion. The truth may lie somewhere in between. In the language of sociologists, inequality in the Old South was determined in two ways: by class (differences in status resulting from unequal access to wealth and productive resources) and by caste (inherited advantages or disadvantages associated with racial ancestry). Awareness of both systems of social ranking is necessary for an understanding of southern society. White society was divided by class and by region; both were important for determining a white Southerner’s relationship to the institution of slavery. The large planters were the dominant class,

 and nonslaveholders were of lower social rank. Planters (defined as those who owned twenty or more slaves) tended to live in the plantation areas of the “Cotton Belt” stretching from Georgia across Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Texas, as well as the low country of South Carolina. In upcountry and frontier areas lived yeoman farmers who owned few or no slaves. In 1860, only one-quarter of all white Southerners belonged to families owning slaves. Even in the Cotton Belt, slaveholders were a minority of whites on the eve of the Civil War—about 40 percent. Planters were the minority of a minority, just 4 percent of the total white population of the South in 1860. Twenty percent of whites owned twenty slaves or less, and the remaining majority, three-fourths of all whites, owned no slaves at all. Thus, southern society was dominated by a planter class that was a numerical and geographically isolated minority; inequalities of class created regional divisions. There were also divisions within black society. Most African Americans in the South were slaves, but a small number, about 6 percent, were free. Even free blacks faced increasing restrictions on their rights during the antebellum era. Among slaves, the great majority lived on plantations and worked in agriculture, but a small number worked either in industrial jobs or in a variety of tasks in urban settings. Even on plantations, there were some differences in status and experience between field hands and servants who worked in the house or in skilled jobs such as carpentry or blacksmithing. Yet because all blacks, even those who were free, suffered under the yoke of racial prejudice and legal inequality, these diverse experiences did not translate into the kind of class divisions that caused rifts within white southern society. Rather, most blacks shared the goal of ending slavery.

The World of Southern Blacks
 What factors made living conditions for southern blacks more or less difficult? The majority of slaves lived on units of land owned by planters who had twenty or more slaves. On the other hand, only 2.4 percent lived on very large plantations of more than two hundred slaves. Few slaves lived in all-black worlds like those of some Caribbean plantations, where it was possible to create autonomous black communities with little white intervention in daily life. Most Southern slaves lived in close contact with their masters and suffered their masters’ strenuous efforts to maintain control over all aspects of their lives. The masters of these agrarian communities sought to ensure their personal safety and the profitability of their enterprises by using physical and psychological means to make slaves docile and obedient. By word and deed, they tried to convince the slaves that whites were superior and had a right to rule over blacks. Masters also drew constant attention to their awesome power and ability to deal harshly with rebels and malcontents. As increasing numbers of slaves were converted to Christianity and attended white-supervised services, they were forced to hear, repeatedly, that God had commanded slaves to serve and obey their masters. Despite these pressures, most African Americans managed to retain an inner sense of their own worth and dignity. When conditions

The World of Southern Blacks


 were right, they openly asserted their desire for freedom and equality and showed their disdain for white claims that slavery was a “positive good.” Some historians have argued that a stress on the strength of slave culture obscures the harshness and cruelty of the system and its damaging effect on the African American personality. Slavery was often a demoralizing and even brutalizing experience, providing little opportunity for learning about the outside world, developing mental skills, and exercising individual initiative. Compared with serfs in Russia or even with slaves on some of the large sugar plantations of the Caribbean, slaves on the relatively small southern plantations or farms, with their high turnover of personnel, had less chance to develop communal ties of the kind associated with peasant villages. Nevertheless, their sense of being part of a distinctive group with its own beliefs and ways of doing things, fragile and precarious though it may have been, made psychic survival possible and helped engender an African American ethnicity that would be a source of strength in future struggles. Although slave culture did not normally provoke violent resistance to the slaveholders’ regime, the inner world that slaves made for themselves gave them the spiritual strength to thwart the masters’ efforts to take over their hearts and minds. After emancipation, this resilient cultural heritage would combine with the tradition of open protest created by rebellious slaves and free black abolitionists to inspire and sustain new struggles for equality.

Slaves’ Daily Life and Labor
 Slaves’ daily life varied enormously depending on the region in which they lived and the type of plantation or farm on which they worked. By the time of the Civil War, 90 percent of the South’s four million slaves worked on plantations or farms, with the remainder working in industry or in cities. Slaves were close to half of the total population in the “Black Belt” or “Cotton Belt” of the lower South— South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, Arkansas, and Texas—and many lived in plantation regions with a slave majority. In the upper South—North Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Missouri—whites outnumbered slaves by more than three to one, and slaves were far more likely to live on farms where they worked side by side with an owner. On large plantations in the Cotton Belt, most slaves worked in “gangs” under an overseer. White overseers, sometimes helped by black “drivers,” enforced a workday from sunup to sundown, six days a week. Cotton cultivation required year-round labor, so there was never a slack season under “King Cotton.” Enslaved women and children were expected to work in the fields as well, often bringing babies and young children to the fields where they could be cared for by older children, and nursed by their mothers during brief breaks. Some older children worked in “trash gangs,” doing lighter tasks such as weeding and yard cleaning. Life on the sugar plantations was even harsher, sometimes entailing work well into the night during the harvest season. Mortality rates in some parts of sugar-growing Louisiana were very high. In the low country of South Carolina and Georgia, slaves who cultivated rice worked under a “task system” that gave them more control over the pace of labor. With less supervision, many were able to complete their tasks within an eight-hour day. Likewise, slaves who lived on small farms often worked side by side with their



 masters rather than in large groups of slaves, although such intimacy did not necessarily mean a leveling of power relationships. Yet despite masters’ efforts to control the pace of work, even under the gang system, slaves resisted working on “clock” time, enforcing customary rights to take breaks and especially to take Sunday off completely. While about three-quarters of slaves were field workers, slaves performed many other kinds of labor. They dug ditches, built houses, worked on boats and in mills (often hired out by their masters for a year at a time), and labored as house servants. Some slaves also worked within the slave community as preachers, caretakers of children, and healers, especially women. While white masters sometimes treated domestic workers or other personal servants as having a special status, it would be a mistake to assume that slaves shared their ranking system. Evidence suggests that those with the highest status within slave communities were preachers and healers, people whose special skills and knowledge directly benefited their communities. A small number of slaves, about 5 percent, worked in industry in the South. The closest thing to a factory in the Old South was the Tredegar Iron Works in Richmond, Virginia, staffed almost entirely by slaves. Slaves also built most of the railroads that existed in the southern states, but these were few relative to the North before the Civil War. Overall, the South remained predominantly agricultural throughout the antebellum era, and most slaves worked in the fields. Slaves in cities took on a wider range of jobs than plantation slaves, and in general enjoyed more autonomy. Some urban slaves even lived apart from their masters and hired out their own time, returning a portion of their wages to their owners. They also worked in eating and drinking establishments, hotels, and as skilled laborers in tradesmen’s shops. In addition to the work they did for their masters in the fields or in other jobs, most slaves kept gardens or small farm plots to supplement their daily food rations. They also fished, hunted, and trapped animals. Many slaves also worked “overtime” for their own masters on Sundays or holidays in exchange for money or goods, or hired out their overtime hours to others. This “underground economy” suggests slaves’ overpowering desire to provide for their families, sometimes even raising enough funds to purchase their freedom.

Slave Families, Kinship, and
Community
 More than any other, the African American family was the institution that prevented slavery from becoming utterly demoralizing. Contrary to what historians and sociologists used to believe, slaves had a strong and abiding sense of family and kinship. The nature of the families or households that predominated on particular plantations or farms varied. On large plantations with relatively stable slave populations, a substantial majority of slave children lived in two-parent households, and many marriages lasted for as long as twenty to thirty years. They were more often broken up by the death or sale of one of the partners than by voluntary dissolution of the union. Here mothers, fathers, and children were closely bonded, and parents shared child-rearing responsibilities (within the limits allowed by the masters). Marital fidelity was encouraged by masters who believed that stable unions produced more offspring and by Christian churches that viewed adultery and divorce as sinful.



 CHAPTER 11

SLAVES AND MASTERS

Read the Document


 Overseer’s Report from Chicora Wood Plantation

 Chicora Wood was an extremely successful rice plantation in South Carolina owned by Robert Allston. Allston owned several plantations and, of course, many slaves. In 1850 he owned 401 slaves; by 1860 that number had increased to 603.

 But in areas where most slaves lived on farms or small plantations, and especially in areas of the upper South where the trading and hiring out of slaves was frequent, a different pattern seems to have prevailed. Under these circumstances, slaves frequently had spouses who resided on other plantations or farms, often some distance away, and ties between husbands and wives were looser and more fragile. The result was that female-headed families were the norm, and responsibility for child rearing was vested in mothers, assisted in most cases by female relatives and friends. Mothercentered families with weak conjugal ties were a natural response to the infrequent presence of fathers and to the prospect of their being moved or sold beyond visiting distance. Where the breakup of unions by sale or relocation could be expected at any time, it did not pay to invest all of one’s emotions in a conjugal relationship. But whether the basic family form was nuclear or matrifocal (female-headed), the ties that it created were infinitely precious to its members. Masters acquired great leverage over the behavior of slaves by invoking the threat of family breakup through sale. The terrible anguish that usually accompanied the breakup of families through sale showed the depth of kinship feelings. Masters knew that the first place to look for a fugitive was in the neighborhood of a family member who had been sold away. Indeed, many slaves tried to shape their own sales in order to be sold with family members or to the same neighborhood. These efforts were fraught with danger. As one ex-slave recalled, “The mistress asked her which she loved the best her mammy or her daddy and she thought it would please her daddy to say that she loved him the best so she said ‘my daddy’ but she regretted it very much when she found this caused her to be sold [along with her father] the

 next day.” Harriet Jacobs, an escaped slave famous for her published autobiography, hid in her grandmother’s attic for seven years while attempting to secure her children’s freedom. (For more on Harriet Jacobs, see the Feature Essay “Harriet Jacobs and Maria Norcom: Women of Southern Households,” pp. 252–253.) Feelings of kinship and mutual obligation extended beyond the primary family. Grandparents, uncles, aunts, and even cousins were often known to slaves through direct contact or family lore. A sense of family continuity over three or more generations was revealed in the names that slaves gave to their children or took for themselves. Infants were frequently named after grandparents, and those slaves who assumed surnames often chose that of an ancestor’s owner rather than the family name of a current master. Kinship ties were not limited to blood relations. When families were broken up by sale, individual members who found themselves on plantations far from home were likely to be “adopted” into new kinship networks. Orphans or children without responsible parents were quickly absorbed without prejudice into new families. Soon after the Civil War, one Reconstruction official faced an elderly exslave named Roger, who demanded land “to raise crop on” for his “family of sixty ‘parents,’ that is, relations, children included.” A family with sixty parents made no sense to this official, but it made sense in a community in which families were defined by ties of affection and cooperation rather than “blood” relation. For some purposes, all the slaves on a plantation were in reality members of a single extended family, as their forms of address clearly reveal. Elderly slaves were addressed by everyone else as “uncle” and “aunty,” and younger unrelated slaves commonly called each other “brother” or “sister.” Strong kinship ties, whether real or fictive, meant slaves could depend on one another. The kinship network also provided a vehicle for the transmission of African American folk traditions from one generation to the next.

African American Religion
 From the realm of culture and fundamental beliefs, African Americans drew the strength to hold their heads high and look beyond their immediate condition. Religion was the cornerstone of this emerging African American culture. Black Christianity may have owed its original existence to the efforts of white missionaries, but it was far from a mere imitation of white religious forms and beliefs. This distinctive variant of evangelical Protestantism incorporated elements of African religion and emphasized those portions of the Bible that spoke to the aspirations of an enslaved people thirsting for freedom. Most slaves did not encounter Christianity in a church setting. There were a few independent black churches in the antebellum South, which mainly served free blacks and urban slaves with indulgent masters. Free blacks who seceded from white congregations that discriminated against them formed a variety of autonomous Baptist groups as well as southern branches of the highly successful African Methodist Episcopal (AME) Church, organized as a national denomination under the leadership of the Reverend Richard Allen of Philadelphia in 1816. But the mass of blacks did not have access to the independent churches. Plantation slaves who were exposed to Christianity either attended the neighboring white churches or worshiped at home.

The World of Southern Blacks


 On large estates, masters or white missionaries often conducted Sunday services. But the narratives and recollections of ex-slaves reveal that white-sanctioned religious activity was only a superficial part of the slaves’ spiritual life. The true slave religion was practiced at night, often secretly, and was led by black preachers. Historian Albert J. Raboteau has described this underground black Christianity as “the invisible institution.” This covert slave religion was a highly emotional affair that featured singing, shouting, and dancing. In some ways, the atmosphere resembled a backwoods revival meeting. But much of what went on was actually an adaptation of African religious beliefs and customs. The chanting mode of preaching—with the congregation responding at regular intervals—and the expression of religious feelings through rhythmic movements, especially the counterclockwise movement known as the ring shout, had clear African origins. The black conversion experience was normally a state of ecstasy more akin to possession by spirits—a major form of African religious expression—than to the agony of those

Read the Document




 “struck down” at white revivals. The emphasis on sinfulness and fear of damnation that were core themes of white evangelicalism played a lesser role among blacks. For them, religion was more an affirmation of the joy of life than a rejection of worldly pleasures and temptations. Slave sermons and religious songs spoke directly to the plight of a people in bondage and implicitly asserted their right to be free. The most popular of all biblical subjects was the deliverance of the children of Israel from slavery in Egypt in the book of Exodus. In one moving spiritual, God commands Moses to “tell Old Pharaoh” to “let my people Go.” Many sermons and songs refer to the crossing of Jordan and the arrival in the Promised Land. “Oh Canaan, sweet Canaan, I am bound for the land of Canaan” and “Oh brothers, don’t get weary. . . . We’ll land on Canaan’s shore” are typical of lines from spirituals known to have been sung by slaves. Other songs invoke the liberation theme in different ways. One recalls that Jesus had “set poor sinners free,” and another prophesies, “We’ll soon be free, when the Lord will call us home.”

Frances E. W. Harper, “The Slave Mother”


 On large plantations, slave men and women formed stable monogamous unions that often lasted until the couple was broken up by the death or sale of one of the partners. This painting by Christian Mayr portrays a slave wedding celebrated in White Sulphur Springs, Virginia, in 1838. The wedding couple wears white attire.

 Complete the Assignment Harriet Jacobs and Maria Norcom: Women of Southern Households on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


Harriet Jacobs and
Maria Norcom
Women of Southern Households


 This 1836 engraving from an antislavery novel depicts a plantation mistress scolding a slave woman while the master looks on. Though white women were also subjugated to the authority of white men in southern society, the divide of race prevented plantation ladies and slaves from finding potential solidarity as women.

H


 arriet Jacobs, born enslaved in North Carolina in 1813, became a slave in James and Maria Norcom’s household in 1825. James began to “whisper foul words” in Harriet’s ears when she was a young teenager. Harriet had no one to whom she could turn, except for her free black grandmother, who lived in the town. Although her grandmother had been a slave, Harriet’s master “dreaded her scorching rebukes” and furthermore “he did not wish to have his villainy made public.” For a time, this wish to “keep up some outward show of decency” protected Harriet. Harriet Jacobs’s grandmother was an unusual woman, who had worked extra for years to buy her children’s freedom, only to be cheated out of her earnings at the end. Like most free black



 women, Harriet’s grandmother was the unmarried head of her own household, separated long ago from the father of her children. Running their own households gave some free black women a measure of autonomy, but also left them with little support in the daily struggle against poverty and racism. Maria Norcom, as the wife of a prominent doctor and large plantation owner, lived a life very different from Harriet’s or her grandmother’s. Yet it was not the life of carefree luxury sometimes portrayed in movies and books about the Old South. Compared to poorer women in the South, Maria had more access to education and periods of recreation and relaxation. But as a lady of the upper class, she was expected to master strict rules of womanhood that demanded moral purity and virtue. She also had to learn the personal and

 managerial skills necessary to oversee a household staffed by slaves. Most southern white women worked hard to keep households and families together, and they all lived within a social system that denied them legal rights by placing them under the domination of husbands and fathers. James Norcom’s behavior, while it certainly violated his vows of marriage, was not egregious enough to have won Maria a divorce under the laws of North Carolina. Whether they were rich or poor, free or enslaved, women were, to a large degree, defined by their relationship to the head of the household, nearly always a white man. Although there were expectations that husbands would protect and care for their wives, women had little recourse against husbands who departed from those expectations. For example, Marion S. D. Converse, a woman from a prominent South Carolina family, dreaded her abusive second husband, Augustus. Through years of beatings and jealous tirades, Marion was unable to escape the bonds of marriage because Augustus’s deplorable conduct fell short of legal grounds for divorce in South Carolina (only abandonment or impotence). Yet Marion Converse was able to gain aid and protection from her prominent family, who shielded her from the worst consequences of an abusive marriage. When Maria Norcom discovered her husband’s overtures toward Harriet, she was distraught and took Harriet to sleep in her own room. Yet, as Harriet later described it, Maria “pitied herself as a martyr; but she was incapable of feeling for the condition of shame and misery in which her unfortunate, helpless slave was placed.” Harriet often woke to find Maria bending over her, and came to fear for her safety

 around this “jealous mistress.” Harriet Jacobs’s and Maria Norcom’s story illustrates that planters ruled their wives as well as their slaves. All southern women were embedded in a social system that gave authority over their lives and choices to men. Despite this commonality, few women were able to reach across the divides of race and class to recognize these similarities. Tormented by jealousy and humiliation, Maria came to blame the slave rather than her husband for their intimacy, imagining that Harriet herself had seduced him. Harriet managed to elude her master’s advances, in part due to Maria’s vigilance. Enslaved women such as Harriet Jacobs were the most vulnerable of southern women. They were subject to a level of violence and sexual assault that was unknown to other women in the South; and when they were victims of violence, they lacked even the limited legal defenses that were open to poor white women. Because black women were considered unable to give or withhold consent, it was not a crime to rape a black woman. And had Harriet fought back physically against her master’s advances, she risked criminal prosecution and even death. When the slave Celia killed the master who had been raping her for years, her court-appointed lawyer argued that she should not be criminally liable, based on a Georgia statute allowing women to use force to defend their “honor” against a rapist. The court, however, decreed that black women were not “women” within the meaning of the statute. Celia had no honor that the law recognized. She was thus convicted of murder, sentenced to death, and hanged.

 Excluding black women from the laws of rape also reinforced common images of black women as either sexually aggressive “Jezebels” or sexless, nurturing “Mammies.” The first stereotype justified the sexual exploitation of slave women and the second fed the slaveowners’ fantasy that their slaves loved and cared for them. Of course, neither of these images corresponded to the realities and hardships of slave life. Enslaved women were often assigned backbreaking labor that paid little attention to common distinctions about “women’s work.” They were expected to do all of the normal tasks assigned to women—sewing, washing, child care—as well as working a full day in the fields. Despite these brutal conditions, slave women organized communities and households, and tried to protect them against the worst excesses of the slave system. Harriet and her grandmother were involved in a complicated network of extended kin, and invested a great deal of energy in protecting brothers and sons from sale “up the river.” Harriet eventually escaped from the Norcoms in 1835, hiding in her grandmother’s attic for seven years. Escaped from the bonds of slavery, Harriet eventually joined the battle to abolish it. Her book, Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, the Autobiography of Linda Brent, was published in 1861, with the help of abolitionist novelist Lydia Maria Child. For many years, critics dismissed the narrative as either a work of fiction or the product of Child’s own pen; but historians today have laid those charges to rest, recognizing Harriet Jacobs’s important

 contribution to the struggle against slavery and to American literature. We know much less about what happened to Maria Norcom, who neither kept a diary nor wrote her own story. All that we know is that she continued in her unhappy marriage to James Norcom. Her daughter Mary Matilda, when she came of age, pursued and attempted to reclaim Harriet as her slave under the Fugitive Slave Act. To thwart this effort, Harriet allowed an abolitionist friend to buy her and set her free. In slaveholding households like that of the Norcoms, all the women, whether white or black, free or enslaved, were subject to the will of the master of the household. Most southern women depended on white men legally and socially, giving them little recourse against men like James Norcom, who burst the bounds of “decency.” Despite their shared submission to James, an impassable gulf separated Harriet and Maria, and its name was race. After the Civil War, southern women, white and black, reorganized their households in a changed society, but it would still be another century before they began to bridge that gulf.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
How did race affect the lives of southern women like Harriet Jacobs and Maria Norcom? 2. Why did slaveholding white men like James Norcom have so much power over their slaves and wives? 3. Why were male slaveholders able to sexually abuse black women without having to face legal consequences in the South? 




 CHAPTER 11

SLAVES AND MASTERS

Listen to the Audio File


When the Roll is


Called up Yonder


 Free blacks in the North established African Methodist Episcopalian churches like the Bethel A.M.E. Church in Philadelphia, founded by the minister Richard Allen. Today, it is the oldest church property continuously owned by African Americans.

 Most of the songs of freedom and deliverance can be interpreted as referring exclusively to religious salvation and the afterlife—and this was undoubtedly how slaves hoped their masters would understand them. But the slaves did not forget that God had once freed a people from slavery in this life and punished their masters. The Bible thus gave African Americans the hope that they, as a people, would repeat the experience of the Israelites and be delivered from bondage. Besides being the basis for a deep-rooted hope for eventual freedom, religion helped the slaves maintain their sense of inner worth. Unless their masters were unusually pious, religious slaves could regard themselves as superior to their owners. Some slaves even believed that all whites were damned because of their unjust treatment of blacks, while all slaves would be saved because any sins they committed were the involuntary result of their condition. More important, the “invisible institution” of the church gave African Americans a chance to create and control a world of their own. Preachers, elders, and other leaders of slave congregations could acquire a sense of status within their own community that had not been conferred by whites; the singers who improvised the spirituals found an outlet for independent artistic expression. Although religion seldom inspired slaves to open rebellion, it must be regarded as a prime source of resistance to the dehumanizing effects of enslavement.

Resistance and Rebellion
 Open rebellion, the bearing of arms against the oppressors by organized groups of slaves, was the most dramatic and clear-cut form of slave resistance. In the period between 1800 and 1831, a number of slaves participated in revolts that showed their willingness to risk their lives in a desperate bid for liberation. In 1800,

 a Virginia slave named Gabriel Prosser mobilized a large band of his fellows to march on Richmond. But a violent storm dispersed “Gabriel’s army” and enabled whites to suppress the uprising without any loss of white life. In 1811, several hundred Louisiana slaves marched on New Orleans brandishing guns, waving flags, and beating drums. It took three hundred soldiers of the U.S. Army, aided by armed planters and militiamen, to stop the advance and to end the rebellion. In 1822, whites in Charleston, South Carolina, uncovered an extensive and well-planned conspiracy, organized by a free black man named Denmark Vesey, to seize local armories, arm the slave population, and take possession of the city. Although the Vesey conspiracy was nipped in the bud, it convinced South Carolinians that blacks were “the Jacobins of the country [a reference to the militants of the French Revolution] against whom we should always be on guard.” Only a year after the Vesey affair, whites in Norfolk County, Virginia, complained of the activities of a marauding band of runaway slaves that had killed several whites. The militia was sent out and captured the alleged leader—a fugitive of several years’ standing named Bob Ferebee. Groups of runaways, who hid for years in places such as the Great Dismal Swamp of Virginia, continued to raid plantations throughout the antebellum period and were inclined to fight to the death rather than be recaptured. As we have already seen, the most bloody and terrifying of all slave revolts was the Nat Turner insurrection of 1831. Although it was the last slave rebellion of this kind during the pre–Civil War period, armed resistance had not ended. Indeed, the most sustained and successful effort of slaves to win their freedom by force of arms took place in Florida between 1835 and 1842, when hundreds of black fugitives fought in the Second Seminole War alongside the Indians who had given them a haven. The Seminoles were resisting removal to Oklahoma, but for the blacks who took part, the war was a struggle for their own freedom, and when it ended, most of them were allowed to accompany their Indian allies to the transMississippi West. Only a tiny fraction of all slaves ever took part in organized acts of violent resistance. Most realized that the odds against a successful revolt were very high, and bitter experience had shown them that the usual outcome was death to the rebels. As a consequence, they characteristically devised safer or more ingenious ways to resist white dominance. One way of protesting against slavery was to run away, and thousands of slaves showed their discontent and desire for freedom in this fashion. Most fugitives never got beyond the neighborhood of the plantation; after “lying out” for a time, they would return, often after negotiating immunity from punishment. But many escapees remained free for years by hiding in swamps or other remote areas, and a fraction made it to freedom in the North or Mexico. Some fugitives stowed away aboard ships heading to northern ports; others traveled overland for hundreds of miles, avoiding patrols and inquisitive whites by staying off the roads and moving only at night. Some were able to escape with the help of the Underground Railroad, an informal network of sympathetic free blacks (and a few whites) who helped fugitives make their way North. Light-skinned blacks sometimes made it to freedom by passing for white, and one resourceful slave even had himself packed in a box and shipped to the North.

The World of Southern Blacks


Watch the Video




Underground Railroad


 Between 1815 and 1860, it is estimated that 130,000 refugees (out of 4 million slaves) escaped the slave South on the “Underground Railroad.” The railroad had as many as 3,200 active workers. By the 1850s, substantial numbers of Northerners had been in open violation of federal law by hiding runaways for a night.

 The typical fugitive was a young, unmarried male from the upper South. For the majority of slaves, however, flight was not a real option. Either they lived too deep in the South to have any chance of reaching free soil, or they were reluctant to leave family and friends behind. Slaves who did not or could not leave the plantation had to register their opposition to the masters’ regime while remaining enslaved. The normal way of expressing discontent was engaging in a kind of indirect or passive resistance. Many slaves worked slowly and inefficiently, not because they were naturally lazy (as whites supposed) but as a gesture of protest or alienation as conveyed in the words of a popular slave song, “You may think I’m working/But I ain’t.” Others withheld labor by feigning illness or injury. Stealing provisions—a very common activity on most plantations— was another way to show contempt for authority. According to the code of ethics prevailing in the slave quarters, theft from the master was no sin; it was simply a way for slaves to get a larger share of the fruits of their own labors. Substantial numbers of slaves committed acts of sabotage. Tools and agricultural implements were deliberately broken, animals were willfully neglected or mistreated, and barns or other

 outbuildings were set afire. Often masters could not identify the culprits because slaves did not readily inform on one another. The ultimate act of clandestine resistance was poisoning the master’s food. Some slaves, especially the “conjure” men and women who practiced a combination of folk medicine and witchcraft, knew how to mix rare, virtually untraceable poisons; and a suspiciously large number of plantation whites became suddenly and mysteriously ill. Sometimes whole families died from obscure “diseases” that did not infect the slave quarters. The basic attitude behind such actions was revealed in the folktales that slaves passed down from generation to generation. The famous Brer Rabbit stories showed how a small, apparently defenseless animal could overcome a bigger and stronger one through cunning and deceit. Although these tales often had an African origin, they also served as an allegory for the black view of the master-slave relationship. Other stories—which were not told in front of whites— openly portrayed the slave as a clever trickster outwitting the master. In one such tale, a slave reports to his master that seven hogs have died of “malitis.” Thinking this is a dread disease, the master agrees to let the slaves have all the meat. What really happened, so the story goes, was this: “One of the strongest Negroes got up early in



 CHAPTER 11

SLAVES AND MASTERS

 the morning” and “skitted to the hog pen with a heavy mallet in his hand. When he tapped Mister Hog ‘tween the eyes with that mallet, ‘malitis’ set in mighty quick.”

Free Blacks in the Old South
 Free blacks occupied an increasingly precarious position in the antebellum South. White Southerners’ fears of free blacks inciting slave revolts, and their reaction to attacks by abolitionists, led slaveholders after 1830 increasingly to defend slavery as a positive good rather than a necessary evil. Southerners articulated this defense of slavery in terms of race, emphasizing a dual image of the black person: Under the “domesticating” influence of a white master, the slave was a child, a happy Sambo; outside of this influence, he was a savage beast. Beginning in the 1830s, all of the southern states passed a series of laws cracking down on free blacks. These laws forced free people of color to register or have white guardians who were responsible for their behavior. Invariably, free Henry “Box” Brown emerges from the crate in which he escaped from slavery blacks were required to carry papers proving their free stain Richmond, Virginia, to freedom in Philadelphia. tus, and in some states, they had to obtain official permission to move from one county to another. Licensing laws were everything by taking the side of the slaves. In southern Louisiana, invoked to exclude blacks from several occupations, and attempts there was even a small group of mulatto planters who lived in luxury, by blacks to hold meetings or form organizations were frequently supported by the labor of other African Americans. blocked by the authorities. Sometimes vagrancy and apprenticeship However, although some free blacks were able to create niches laws were used to force free blacks into a state of economic depenof relative freedom, their position in southern society became dency barely distinguishable from outright slavery. increasingly precarious. Beginning in the 1830s, southern whites Although beset by special problems of their own, most free sought to draw the line between free and unfree more firmly as a blacks identified with the suffering of the slaves; when circumline between black and white. Free blacks were an anomaly in this stances allowed, they protested against the peculiar institution system; increasingly, the southern answer was to exclude, degrade, and worked for its abolition. Many of them had once been slaves and even enslave those free people of color who remained within themselves or were the children of slaves; often they had close relatheir borders. Just before the outbreak of the Civil War, a campaign tives who were still in bondage. Furthermore, they knew that the developed in some southern states to carry the pattern of repression discrimination from which they suffered was rooted in slavery and and discrimination to its logical conclusion: Several state legislatures the racial attitudes that accompanied it. So long as slavery existed, proposed laws giving free people of color the choice of emigrating their own rights were likely to be denied, and even their freedom from the state or being enslaved. was at risk; former slaves who could not prove they had been legally freed were subject to reenslavement. This threat existed even in the North: Under federal fugitive slave laws, escaped slaves could be returned to bondage. Even blacks who were born free were not White Society in the perfectly safe. Kidnapping or fraudulent seizure by slave catchers Antebellum South was always a possibility. Because of the elaborate system of control and surveillance, free What divided and united white southern society? blacks in the South were in a relatively weak position to work against Those who know the Old South only from modern novels, films, slavery. The case of Denmark Vesey showed that a prosperous and and television programs are likely to envision a land filled with well-situated free black might make a stand in the struggle for freemajestic plantations. Pillared mansions behind oak-lined carriagedom, but it also revealed the dangers of revolutionary activity and the ways are portrayed as scenes of aristocratic splendor, where courtly odds against success. The wave of repression against the free black gentlemen and elegant ladies, attended by hordes of uniformed population that followed the Vesey conspiracy heightened the danblack servants, lived in refined luxury. It is easy to conclude from gers and increased the odds. Consequently, most free blacks found such images that the typical white Southerner was an aristocrat who that survival depended on creating the impression of loyalty to the belonged to a family that owned large numbers of slaves. planter regime. In some parts of the lower South, groups of relatively The great houses existed and some wealthy slaveholders did privileged free people of color, mostly of racially mixed origin, were maintain as aristocratic a lifestyle as was ever seen in the United sometimes persuaded that it was to their advantage to preserve the States. But census returns indicate that this was the world of status quo. As skilled artisans and small-business owners depenonly a small percentage of slaveowners and a minuscule portion dent on white favors and patronage, they had little incentive to risk

White Society in the Antebellum South


 of the total white population. The number of large planters who had the means to build great houses and entertain lavishly, those who owned at least fifty slaves, comprised fewer than 1 percent of all whites. Most southern whites were nonslaveholding yeoman farmers. Yet even those who owned no slaves grew to depend on slavery in other ways, whether economically, because they hired slaves, or psychologically, because having a degraded class of blacks below them made them feel better about their own place in society. However, the class divisions between slaveholders and nonslaveholders did contribute to the political rifts that became increasingly apparent on the eve of the Civil War.

The Planters’ World
 The great planters, although few in number, had a weighty influence on southern life. They set the tone and values for much of the rest of society, especially for the less wealthy slaveowners who sought to imitate the planters’ style of living to the extent that resources allowed. Although many of them were too busy tending to their plantations to become openly involved in politics, wealthy planters held more than their share of high offices and often exerted a decisive influence on public policy. Within those regions of the South in which plantation agriculture predominated, they were a ruling class in every sense of the term. Contrary to legend, a majority of the great planters of the pre– Civil War period were self-made rather than descendants of the old colonial gentry. Some were ambitious young men who married planters’ daughters. Others started as lawyers and used their fees and connections to acquire plantations. As the Cotton Kingdom spread westward to Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana, a greater proportion of the largest slaveholders were men who began their careers in commerce, land speculation, banking, and even slave trading. Stephen Duncan of Mississippi, probably the most prosperous cotton planter in the South during the 1850s (he owned eight plantations and 1018 slaves), had invested the profits from his banking operations. Among the largest sugar planters of southern Louisiana at this time were Maunsel White and John Burnside, Irish immigrants who had prospered as New Orleans merchants, and Isaac Franklin, former king of the slave traders. To be successful, a planter had to be a shrewd entrepreneur who kept a careful eye on the market, the prices of slaves and land, and the extent of his indebtedness. Reliable “factors”—the agents who marketed the crop and provided advances against future sales— could assist him in making decisions, but a planter who failed to spend a good deal of time with his account books could end up in serious trouble. Managing the slaves and plantation production was also difficult and time consuming, even when overseers were available to supervise day-to-day activities. Hence few planters could be the men of leisure featured in the popular image of the Old South. Likewise, despite typical images of women in the Old South— full hoop skirts and wide front porches, elaborate parties in plantation houses dripping with Spanish moss, elegant ladies gossiping over tea—few women fit the stereotype of the southern belle. Not only were plantation mistresses a tiny minority of the women who lived and worked in the slave states before the Civil War, but even



 those who were part of the planter elite rarely lived lives of leisure. (See the Feature Essay “Harriet Jacobs and Maria Norcom: Women of Southern Households,” pp. 252–253.) Some of the richest and most secure plantation families did aspire to live in the manner of a traditional landed aristocracy. A few were so successful that they were accepted as equals by visiting English nobility. Big houses, elegant carriages, fancy-dress balls, and excessive numbers of house servants all reflected aristocratic aspirations. The romantic cult of chivalry, described in the popular novels of Sir Walter Scott, was in vogue in some circles and even led to the nonviolent reenactment of medieval tournaments. Dueling, despite efforts to repress it, remained the standard way to settle “affairs of honor” among gentlemen. Another sign of gentility was the tendency of planters’ sons to avoid “trade” as a primary or secondary career in favor of law or the military. Planters’ daughters were trained from girlhood to play the piano, speak French, dress in the latest fashions, and sparkle in the drawing room or on the dance floor. The aristocratic style originated among the older gentry of the seaboard slave states, but by the 1840s and 1850s it had spread southwest as a second generation of wealthy planters began to displace the rough-hewn pioneers of the Cotton Kingdom.

Planters, Racism, and Paternalism
 No assessment of the planters’ outlook or “worldview” can be made without considering their relations with their slaves. Planters, by the census definition, owned more than half of all the slaves in the South and set standards for treatment and management. It is clear from their private letters and journals, as well as from proslavery propaganda, that most planters liked to think of themselves as benevolent masters. Rather than seeing slavery as a brutal form of economic exploitation, they argued that blacks needed the slave system to ensure that they were cared for and protected. Often they referred to their slaves as if they were members of an extended patriarchal family—a favorite phrase was “our people.” According to this ideology of paternalism, blacks were a race of perpetual children requiring constant care and supervision by superior whites. Paternalistic rhetoric increased greatly after abolitionists began to charge that most slaveholders were sadistic monsters. Paternalism went hand in hand with racism. In a typical proslavery apology, Georgia lawyer Thomas Reade Cobb wrote that “a state of bondage, so far from doing violence to the law of [the African’s] nature, develops and perfects it; and that, in that state, he enjoys the greatest amount of happiness, and arrives at the greatest degree of perfection of which his nature is capable.” Slaveholders justified slavery by the supposed mental and moral inferiority of Africans. It was only in the 1830s and 1840s that a full-blown modern racism developed on both sides of the Atlantic. Racial “scientists” developed theories relating skull size to mental ability, and some proslavery apologists even developed religious theories of “polygenesis,” arguing that blacks were not descended from Adam and Eve. This racial ideology helped slaveholders believe that a benevolent Christian could justly enslave another human being. While some historians have argued that paternalism was part of a social system that was organized like a family hierarchy rather than a brutal, profit-making arrangement, there was no inconsistency between planters’ paternalism and capitalism. Slaves were



 CHAPTER 11

SLAVES AND MASTERS

 themselves a form of capital; that is, they were both the main tools of production for a booming economy as well as an asset in themselves valuable for their rising prices, like shares in the stock market today. The ban on the transatlantic slave trade in 1808 was effective enough to make it economically necessary to the continuation of slavery for the slave population to reproduce itself. Rising slave prices also inhibited extreme physical abuse and deprivation. It was in the interest of masters to see that their slave property remained in good enough condition to work hard and produce large numbers of children. Furthermore, a good return on their investment enabled southern planters to spend more on slave maintenance than could masters in less prosperous plantation economies. Much of the slaveholders’ “paternalist” writing discussed “the coincidence of humanity and interest,” by which they meant that treating slaves well (including firm discipline) was in their best economic interest. Thus, there was a grain of truth in the planters’ claim that their slaves were relatively well provided for. Recent comparative studies have suggested that North American slaves of the pre–Civil War period enjoyed a somewhat higher standard of living than those in other New World slave societies, such as Brazil and the West Indian sugar islands. Their food, clothing, and shelter were normally sufficient to sustain life and labor at slightly above a bare subsistence level, and the rapid increase of the slave population in the Old South stands in sharp contrast to the usual failure of slave populations to reproduce themselves. But some planters did not behave rationally. They failed to control their tempers or tried to work more slaves than they could afford to maintain. Consequently, there were more cases of physical abuse and undernourishment than a purely economic calculation would lead us to expect. The testimony of slaves themselves and of some independent white observers suggests that masters of large plantations generally did not have close and intimate relationships with the mass of field slaves. The kind of affection and concern associated with a father figure appears to have been limited mainly to relationships with a few favored house servants or other elite slaves, such as drivers and highly skilled artisans. The field hands on large estates dealt mostly with overseers who were hired or fired because of their ability to meet production quotas. The limits of paternalism were revealed in the slave market. Planters who looked down on slave traders as less than respectable gentlemen nevertheless broke apart families by selling slaves “down river” when they found themselves in need of money. Even slaveholders who claimed not to participate in the slave market themselves often mortgaged slaves to secure debts; as many as one-third of all slave sales in the South were court-ordered sheriff ’s auctions when such masters defaulted on their debts. While paternalism may have moderated planters’ behavior to some extent, especially when economic self-interest reinforced “humanity,” it is important to remember that most departures from unremitting labor and harsh conditions were concessions wrested from owners through slaves’ defiance and resistance, at great personal risk. Furthermore, when they were being most realistic, planters conceded that the ultimate basis of their authority was the slaves’ fear of force and intimidation, rather than the natural obedience resulting from a loving parent-child relationship. Scattered among

 their statements are admissions that they relied on the “principle of fear,” “more and more on the power of fear,” or—most graphically—that it was necessary “to make them stand in fear.” Devices for inspiring fear included whipping and the threat of sale away from family and friends. Planters’ manuals and instructions to overseers reveal that certain and swift punishment for any infraction of the rules or even for a surly attitude was the preferred method for maintaining order and productivity. When masters did abuse their power by torturing, killing, or raping their slaves, the victims had little recourse. Slaves lacked legal protection against such cruelty because their testimony was not accepted in court. Abolitionists were correct in condemning slavery on principle because it gave one human being nearly absolute power over another. This system was bound to result in atrocities and violence.

Small Slaveholders
 As we have seen, the great majority of slaveholders were not planters. Some of the small slaveholders were urban merchants or professional men who needed slaves only for domestic service, but more typical were farmers who used one or two slave families to ease the burden of their own labor. Relatively little is known about life on these small slaveholding farms; unlike the planters, the owners left few records behind. We do know that life was relatively spartan. Masters lived in log cabins or small frame cottages, and slaves lived in lofts or sheds that were not usually up to plantation housing standards. For better or worse, relations between owners and their slaves were more intimate than on larger estates. These farmers often worked in the fields alongside their slaves and sometimes ate at the same table or slept under the same roof. But such closeness did not necessarily result in better treatment. Slave testimony reveals that both the best and the worst of slavery could be found on these farms, depending on the master. Given a choice, most slaves preferred to live on plantations because they offered the sociability, culture, and kinship of the slave quarters, as well as better prospects for adequate food, clothing, and shelter. Marginal slaveholders often sank into poverty and were forced either to sell their slaves or give them short rations.

Yeoman Farmers
 Just below the small slaveholders on the social scale was a substantial class of yeoman farmers who owned land they worked themselves. Contrary to another myth about the Old South, most of these people did not fit the image of the degraded, shiftless poor white. While there were impoverished white squatters on stretches of barren or sandy soil that no one else wanted, and a significant number of tenant farmers, most were ambitious young men seeking to accumulate the capital to become landowners. The majority of the nonslaveholding rural population were proud, self-reliant farmers. If they were disadvantaged in comparison with farmers elsewhere in the United States, it was because the lack of economic development and urban growth perpetuated frontier conditions and denied them the opportunity to produce a substantial surplus for market. The yeomen were mostly concentrated in the backcountry where slaves and plantations were rarely seen. In every southern

White Society in the Antebellum South


 state, white farmers without slaves populated hilly sections unsuitable for plantation agriculture, like the foothills of the Appalachians and the Ozarks, and long stretches of piney barrens along the Gulf Coast. A somewhat distinct group were the genuine mountaineers, who lived too high up to succeed at farming and relied heavily on hunting, lumbering, and distilling whiskey. Yeoman women, much more than their wealthy counterparts, participated in every dimension of household labor. They worked in the garden, made handicrafts and clothing, and even labored in the fields when necessary. Women in the most dire economic circumstances even worked for wages in small businesses or on nearby farms. They also raised much larger families than their wealthier neighbors because having many children supplied a valuable labor pool for the family farm. There were also a greater number of lower-class women who lived outside of male-headed households. Despite the pressures of respectability, there was a greater acceptance and sympathy in less affluent communities for women who bore illegitimate children or were abandoned by their husbands. Working women created a broader definition of “proper households” and navigated the challenges of holding families together in precarious economic conditions. The lack of transportation facilities, more than some failure of energy or character, limited the prosperity of the yeomen. A large part of their effort was devoted to growing subsistence crops, mainly corn. They raised a small percentage of the South’s cotton and tobacco, but production was severely limited by

Read the Document




 the difficulty of marketing. Their main source of cash was livestock, especially hogs. Hogs could be walked to market over long distances, and massive droves from the backcountry to urban markets were commonplace. But southern livestock, which was generally allowed to forage in the woods rather than being fattened on grain, was of poor quality and did not bring high prices or big profits to raisers. Although they did not benefit directly from the peculiar institution, most yeomen and other nonslaveholders tolerated slavery and fiercely opposed abolitionism in any form. A few antislavery Southerners, most notably Hinton R. Helper of North Carolina, tried to convince the yeomen that they were victimized by planter dominance and should work for its overthrow, but they made little headway. Most yeomen were staunch Jacksonians who resented aristocratic pretensions and feared concentrations of power and wealth in the hands of the few. When asked about the gentry, they commonly voiced their disdain of “cotton snobs” and rich planters generally. In state and local politics, they sometimes expressed such feelings by voting against planter interests on issues involving representation, banking, and internal improvements. Why, then, did they fail to respond to antislavery appeals that called on them to strike at the real source of planter power and privilege? One reason was that some nonslaveholders hoped to get ahead in the world, and in the South this meant acquiring slaves of their own. Just enough of the more prosperous yeomen broke

George Fitzhugh, The Blessings of Slavery (1857)


 This proslavery cartoon of 1841 contends that the slave in America had a better life than did the working-class white in England. Supposedly, the grateful slaves were clothed, fed, and cared for in their old age by kindly and sympathetic masters, while starving English workers were mercilessly exploited by factory owners. Source: Collection of The New-York Historical Society, negative no. 3087.



 CHAPTER 11

SLAVES AND MASTERS

 into the slaveholding classes to make this dream seem believable. Planters, anxious to ensure the loyalty of nonslaveholders, strenuously encouraged the notion that every white man was a potential master. Even if they did not aspire to own slaves, white farmers often viewed black servitude as providing a guarantee of their own liberty and independence. A society that gave them the right to vote and the chance to be self-sufficient on land of their own encouraged the feeling they were fundamentally equal to the largest slaveholders. In part, their anxieties were economic; freed slaves would compete with them for land or jobs. But an intense racism deepened their fears and made their opposition to black freedom implacable. “Now suppose they was free,” a nonslaveholder told a northern traveler, “you see they’d think themselves just as good as we . . . just suppose you had a family of children, how would [you] like to hev a niggar feeling just as good as a white man? How’d you like to hev a niggar steppin’ up to your darter?” Emancipation was unthinkable because it would remove the pride and status that automatically went along with a white skin in this acutely race-conscious society. Slavery, despite its drawbacks, served to keep blacks “in their place” and to make all whites, however poor and uneducated, feel they were free and equal members of a master race.

A
Closed Mind and a Closed Society 

 institution was inherently sinful. The message was carried in a host of books, pamphlets, and newspaper editorials published between the 1830s and the Civil War. Partly, the argument was aimed at the North, as a way of bolstering the strong current of antiabolitionist sentiment. But Southerners themselves were a prime target; the message was clearly calculated to resolve the kind of doubts and misgivings that had been freely expressed before the 1830s. Much of the message may have been over the heads of nonslaveholders, many of whom were semiliterate, but some of the arguments, in popularized form, were used to arouse racial anxieties that tended to neutralize antislavery sentiment among the lower classes. The proslavery argument was based on three main propositions. The first and foremost was that enslavement was the natural and proper status for people of African descent. Blacks, it was alleged, were innately inferior to whites and suited only for slavery. Biased scientific and historical evidence was presented to support this claim. Second, slavery was held to be sanctioned by the Bible and Christianity—a position made necessary by the abolitionist appeal to Christian ethics. Ancient Hebrew slavery was held up as a divinely sanctioned model, and Saint Paul was quoted endlessly on the duty of servants to obey their masters. Southern churchmen took the lead in reconciling slavery with religion and also made renewed efforts to convert the slaves as a way of showing that enslavement could be a means for spreading the gospel. Finally, efforts were made to show that slavery was consistent with the humanitarian spirit of the nineteenth century. The premise that blacks were naturally dependent led to the notion that they

 Despite the tacit assent of most nonslaveholders, the dominant planters never lost their fear that lower-class whites would turn against slavery. They felt threatened from two sides: from the slave quarters where a new Nat Turner might be gathering his forces, and from the backcountry where yeomen and poor whites might heed the call of abolitionists and rise up against planter domination. Beginning in the Read the Document Poem, “The Slave Auction” 1830s, the ruling element tightened the screws of slavery and used their control of government and communications to create a mood of impending catastrophe designed to ensure that all southern whites were of a single mind on the slavery issue. Before the 1830s, open discussion of the rights or wrongs of slavery had been possible in many parts of the South. Apologists commonly described the institution as “a necessary evil.” In the upper South, as late as the 1820s, there had been significant support for the American Colonization Society , with its program of gradual voluntary emancipation accompanied by deportation of the freedmen. In 1831 and 1832—in the wake of the Nat Turner uprising— the Virginia state legislature debated a gradual emancipation plan. Major support for ensuring white safety by getting rid of both slavery and blacks came from representatives of the yeoman farmers living west of the Blue Ridge Mountains. But the defeat of the proposal effectively ended the discussion. The argument that slavery was “a positive good”—rather than an evil slated for This illustration of a public auction of slaves in Charleston, South Carolina in 1856 was representative gradual elimination—won the day. of the horrific treatment of slaves including the separation of the parents of slaves from their young The “positive good” defense of slavery was children. Literary and visual depictions of slave auctions were produced and widely disseminated to an answer to the abolitionist charge that the mobilize abolitionist sentiment among slavery opponents based in the North and in England.

Slavery and the Southern Economy




 needed some kind of “family government” or special regime equivabove all, slave revolt. The persistent barrage of proslavery propaganda and the course of national events in the 1850s created a alent to the asylums that existed for the small numbers of whites mood of panic and desperation. By this time, an increasing number who were also incapable of caring for themselves. The plantation of Southerners had become convinced that safety from abolitionallegedly provided such an environment, as benevolent masters ism and its associated terrors required a formal withdrawal from the guided and ruled this race of “perpetual children.” Union—secession. By the 1850s, the proslavery argument had gone beyond mere apology for the South and its peculiar institution and featured an ingenious attack on the free-labor system of the North. According Slavery and the Southern Economy to Virginian George Fitzhugh, the master-slave relationship was more humane than the one prevailing between employers and wage How was slavery related to economic success laborers in the North. Slaves had security against unemployment in the South? and a guarantee of care in old age, whereas free workers might face destitution and even starvation at any time. Worker insecurity in Southern society transformed itself according to the needs of the free societies led inevitably to strikes, bitter class conflicts, and the slave system because slavery played such a crucial role in the ecorise of socialism; slave societies, on the other hand, could more nomic life of the South. Despite the internal divisions of southern effectively protect property rights and maintain other traditional society, white Southerners from all regions and classes came to values because their laboring class was better treated and, at the perceive their interests tied up with slavery, whether because they same time, more firmly controlled. owned slaves themselves or because they believed in slavery as Proslavery Southerners attempted to seal off their region essential to the “southern way of life” or “white men’s democracy.” from antislavery ideas and influences. Whites who were bold And because slavery was the cornerstone of the southern economy, enough to criticize slavery publicly were mobbed or perseit affected white Southerners’ attitudes toward landholding and cuted. One of the last and bravest of the southern abolitionists, toward industrialization. Cassius M. Clay of Kentucky, armed himself with a brace of For the most part, the expansion of slavery—the number of pistols when he gave speeches, until the threat of mob violence slaves in the South more than tripled between 1810 and 1860 to finally forced him across the Ohio River. In 1856, a University nearly four million—can be attributed to the rise of “King Cotton.” of North Carolina professor was fired because he admitted he The cotton-growing areas of the South were becoming more and would vote for the moderately antislavery Republican Party if he more dependent on slavery, at the same time that agriculture in had a chance. Clergymen who questioned the morality of slavthe upper South was actually moving away from the institution. ery were driven from their pulpits, and northern travelers susYet slavery continued to remain important to the economy of the pected of being abolitionist agents were tarred and feathered. upper South in a different way, through the slave trade. When abolitionists tried to send their literature through the mail during the 1830s, it was seized View the Closer Look Slave Auction in Richmond, Virgina in southern post offices and publicly burned. Such flagrant denials of free speech and civil liberties were inspired in part by fears that nonslaveholding whites and slaves would get subversive ideas about slavery. Hinton R. Helper’s book The Impending Crisis of the South, an 1857 appeal to nonslaveholders to resist the planter regime, was suppressed with particular vigor; those found with copies were beaten up or even lynched. But the deepest fear was that slaves would hear the abolitionist talk or read antislavery literature and be inspired to rebel. Such anxieties rose to panic pitch after the Nat Turner rebellion. Consequently, new laws were passed making it a crime to teach slaves to read and write. Other repressive legislation aimed at slaves banned meetings unless a white man was present, severely restricted the activities of black preachers, and suppressed independent black churches. Free blacks, thought to be possible instigators of slave revolt, were denied basic civil liberties and were the object of growing surveillance and harassment. All these efforts at thought control and interThe spectacle of a slave market was commonplace in the cities of the antebellum South. Here, nal security did not allay planters’ fears of abolitionist subversion, lower-class white dissent, and, the correspondent has depicted a relaxed scene as if to evoke the prosaic nature of the event.



 CHAPTER 11

SLAVES AND MASTERS

View the Map


Slavery in the South


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)
Grea tL 
 a s ke

Boston
N.Y.
MASS. R.I. CONN.

MISSOURI TERRITORY

 PA.

New York


Philadelphia
 ILL.

N.J.


 MD.

 IND.

 DEL.

D.C.


Cincinnati


AT L A N T I C OCEAN

VA. KY. N.C. TENN. ARKANSAS TERRITORY

S.C.


Charleston
 MISS.

 ALA.

 GA.

 More than 50% slave 10% to 50% slave

NEW SPAIN

 LA.

 Less than 10% slave

New Orleans


Gulf of Mexico


 No slaves, or no statistics available



 500 miles 500 kilometers

SLAVE CONCENTRATION, 1820

 In 1820, most slaves lived in the eastern seaboard states of Virginia and South Carolina and in Louisiana on the Gulf of Mexico.

The Internal Slave Trade
 Tobacco, the original plantation crop of the colonial period, continued to be the principal slave-cultivated commodity of the upper tier of southern states during the pre–Civil War era. But markets were often depressed, and profitable tobacco cultivation was hard to sustain for very long in one place because the crop rapidly depleted the soil. During the lengthy depression of the tobacco market that lasted from the 1820s to the 1850s, tobacco farmers in Virginia and Maryland experimented with fertilizer use, crop rotation, and diversified farming, all of which increased the need for capital but reduced the demand for labor. As slave prices rose (because of high demand in the lower South) and demand for slaves in the upper South fell, the “internal” slave trade took off. Increasingly, the most profitable business for slaveholders in Virginia, Kentucky, Maryland, and the Carolinas was selling “surplus” slaves from the upper South to regions of the lower South, where staple crop production was more profitable. This interstate slave trade sent an estimated six to seven hundred thousand slaves in a southwesterly direction between 1815 and 1860. Historian Michael Tadman estimates that the chances of a slave child in the Upper South in the 1820s being “sold South” by 1860 were as high as 30 percent. Such sales were wrenching, not only splitting families, but making it especially unlikely that the slaves sold would ever see friends or family again.

 Some economic historians have concluded that the most important crop produced in the tobacco kingdom was not the “stinking weed” but human beings cultivated for the auction block. Respectable planters did not like to think of themselves as raising slaves for market, but few would refuse to sell some of their “people” if they needed money to get out of debt or make expensive improvements. For the region as a whole, the slave trade provided a crucial source of capital in a period of transition and innovation. Nevertheless, the fact that slave labor was declining in importance in the upper South meant the peculiar institution had a weaker hold on public loyalty there than in the cotton states. Diversification of agriculture was accompanied by a more rapid rate of urban and industrial development than was occurring elsewhere in the South. As a result, Virginians, Marylanders, and Kentuckians were seriously divided on whether their ultimate future lay with the Deep South’s plantation economy or with the industrializing free-labor system that was flourishing just north of their borders.

The Rise of the Cotton Kingdom
 The warmer climate and good soils of the lower tier of southern states made it possible to raise crops more naturally suited than tobacco or cereals to the plantation form of agriculture and the heavy use of slave labor. Since the colonial or revolutionary

Slavery and the Southern Economy




BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)
Grea MINN. 
 MICH.

NEBRASKA TERR.

Milwaukee


 IOWA

Chicago


Des Moines


N.Y.


MASS. R.I.

Buffalo


 PA.

Cleveland
Fort
Wayne


Harrisburg


 CONN.

Pittsburgh
Columbus


New York
Philadelphia


 OHIO

N.J.
 DEL.

ATLANTIC OCEAN

Springfield Indianapolis Washington, D.C. MD.
Cincinnati
VA.
Richmond ILL. IND. Louisville St. Louis Norfolk 
 KY.

 MO.

Evansville


New Bern


N.C.


TENN. UNORGANIZED TERR.

Boston


Detroit


Cairo


NEW MEXICO TERR.

N.H.
Portland 

Toronto


KANSAS
Topeka TERR. 
 ME.

 VT.

 WIS.

Minneapolis


UTAH TERR.

Montreal


 t L ak e s

D
ZE NI . R

UN OR G TE A R

S.C.


ARK.
Atlanta 
 MISS.

 ALA.

 More than 50% slave

Charleston


 GA.

 10% to 50% slave

Jackson


 LA.

Mobile


TEXAS
Port Arthur 
 Less than 10% slave

Jacksonville


 No slaves, or no statistics available

New Orleans


 FLA.

 Main routes of the Underground Railroad

Gulf of Mexico




 500 miles 500 kilometers

SLAVE CONCENTRATION, 1860
In 1860, slavery had extended throughout the southern states, with the greatest concentrations of slaves in the states of the Deep South. There were also sizable slave populations in the new states of Missouri, Arkansas, Texas, and Florida. periods, rice and a special long-staple variety of fine cotton had been grown profitably on vast estates along the coast of South Carolina and Georgia. In lower Louisiana, between New Orleans and Baton Rouge, sugar was the cash crop. As in the West Indies, sugar production required a large investment and a great deal of backbreaking labor: in other words, large, well-financed plantations and small armies of slave laborers. Cultivation of rice, longstaple cotton, and sugar was limited by natural conditions to peripheral, semitropical areas. It was the rise of short-staple cotton as the South’s major crop that strengthened the hold of slavery and the plantation on the southern economy. Short-staple cotton differed from the long-staple variety in two important ways: Its bolls contained seeds that were much more difficult to extract by hand, and it could be grown almost anywhere south of Virginia and Kentucky—the main requirement was a guarantee of two hundred frost-free days. Before the 1790s, the seed extraction problem had prevented short-staple cotton from becoming a major market crop. The invention of the cotton gin in 1793 resolved that difficulty, however, and the subsequent westward expansion opened vast areas for cotton cultivation. Unlike rice and sugar, cotton could be grown on small farms as well as on plantations. But large planters enjoyed certain advantages that made them the main producers. Only relatively large operators could afford their own gins or possessed the capital to acquire the fertile bottomlands that brought the highest yields. They also had lower transportation costs because they were able 
 to monopolize land along rivers and streams that were the South’s natural arteries of transportation. The first major cotton-producing regions were inland areas of Georgia and South Carolina, but the center of production shifted rapidly westward during the nineteenth century. By the 1830s, Alabama and Mississippi had surpassed Georgia and South Carolina as cotton-growing states. By the 1850s, Arkansas, northwest Louisiana, and east Texas were the most prosperous and rapidly growing plantation regions. The rise in total production that accompanied this geographic expansion was phenomenal. Between 1792 and 1817, the South’s output of cotton rose from about 13,000 bales to 461,000; by 1840, it was 1.35 million; and in 1860, production peaked at the colossal figure of 4.8 million bales. Most of the cotton went to supply the booming textile industry of Great Britain. Lesser proportions went to the manufacturers of continental Europe and the northeastern United States. “Cotton is king!” proclaimed a southern orator in the 1850s, and he was right. By that time, three-quarters of the world’s supply of cotton came from the American South, and this single commodity accounted for more than half the total dollar value of American exports. Cotton growing and the network of commercial and industrial enterprises that marketed and processed the crop constituted the most important economic interest in the United States on the eve of the Civil War. Since slavery and cotton seemed inextricably linked, it appeared obvious to many Southerners that their peculiar institution was the keystone of national wealth and economic progress.



 CHAPTER 11

SLAVES AND MASTERS

 However, the rise of the Cotton Kingdom did not bring a uniform or steady prosperity to the lower South. Many planters worked the land until it was exhausted and then took their slaves westward to richer soils, leaving depressed and ravaged areas in their wake. Planters were also beset and sometimes ruined by fluctuations in markets and prices. Boom periods and flush times were followed by falling prices and waves of bankruptcies. The great periods of expansion and bonanza profits were 1815–1819, 1832–1837, and 1849–1860. The first two booms were deflated by a fall in cotton prices resulting from overproduction and depressed market conditions. During the eleven years of rising output and high prices preceding the Civil War, however, the planters gradually forgot their earlier troubles and began to imagine they were immune to future economic disasters. Despite the insecurities associated with cotton production, most of the time the crop represented the Old South’s best chance for profitable investment. Prudent planters who had not borrowed too heavily during flush times could survive periods of depression by cutting costs, making their plantations self-sufficient by shifting acreage away from cotton, and planting subsistence crops. For those with worn-out land, two options existed: They could sell their land and move west, or they could sell their slaves to raise capital for fertilization, crop rotation, and other improvements that could help them survive where they were. Hence planters had little incentive to seek alternatives to slavery, the plantation, and dependence on a single cash crop. From a purely economic point of view, they had every reason to defend slavery and to insist on their right to expand it.

Slavery and Industrialization
 As the sectional quarrel with the North intensified, Southerners became increasingly alarmed by their region’s lack of economic self-sufficiency. Dependence on the North for capital, marketing facilities, and manufactured goods was seen as evidence of a dangerous subservience to “external” economic interests. Southern nationalists such as J. D. B. DeBow, editor of the influential DeBow’s Review, called during the 1850s for the South to develop its own industries, commerce, and shipping. As a fervent defender of slavery, DeBow did not believe such diversification would require a massive shift to free wage labor. He saw no reason for slaves not to be used as the main workforce in an industrial revolution. But his call for a diversified economy went unanswered. Men with capital were doing too well in plantation agriculture to risk their money in other ventures. It is difficult to determine whether the main factor that kept most slaves working on plantations and farms was some inherent characteristic of slavery as a labor system or simply the strong market demand for cotton and the South’s capacity to meet it. A minority of slaves—about 5 percent during the 1850s—were, in fact, successfully employed in industrial tasks such as mining, construction, and mill work. In the 1840s and 1850s, a debate raged among white capitalists over whether the South should use free whites or enslaved blacks as the labor supply for industry. William Gregg of South Carolina, the foremost promoter of cotton mills in the Old South, defended a white labor policy, arguing that factory work would provide new economic opportunities for a degraded

 class of poor whites. But other advocates of industrialization feared that the growth of a free working class would lead to social conflict among whites and preferred using slaves for all supervised manual labor. In practice, some factories employed slaves, others white workers, and a few even experimented with integrated workforces. It is clear, however, that the union of slavery and cotton that was central to the South’s prosperity impeded industrialization and left the region dependent on a one-crop agriculture and on the North for capital and marketing.

The “Profitability” Issue
 Some Southerners were making money, and a great deal of it, using slave labor to raise cotton. The great mansions of the Alabama “black belt” and the lower Mississippi could not have been built if their owners had not been successful. But did slavery yield a good return for the great majority of slaveholders who were not large planters? Did it provide the basis for general prosperity and a relatively high standard of living for the southern population in general, or at least for the two-thirds of it who were white and free? These questions have been hotly debated by economic historians. Some knowledge of the main arguments regarding its “profitability” is helpful to an understanding of the South’s attachment to slavery. For many years, historians believed that slave-based agriculture was, on the average, not very lucrative. Planters’ account books seemed to show at best a modest return on investment. In the 1850s, the price of slaves rose at a faster rate than the price of cotton, allegedly squeezing many operators. Some historians even concluded that slavery was a dying institution by the time of the Civil War. Profitability, they argued, depended on access to new and fertile land suitable for plantation agriculture, and virtually all such land within the limits of the United States had already been taken up by 1860. Hence slavery had allegedly reached its natural limits of expansion and was on the verge of becoming so unprofitable that it would fall of its own weight in the near future. A more recent interpretation, based on modern economic theory, holds that slavery was in fact still an economically sound institution in 1860 and showed no signs of imminent decline. A reexamination of planters’ records using modern accounting methods shows that during the 1850s, planters could normally expect an annual return of 8 to 10 percent on capital invested. This yield was roughly equivalent to the best that could then be obtained from the most lucrative sectors of northern industry and commerce. Furthermore, it is no longer clear that plantation agriculture had reached its natural limits of expansion by 1860. Production in Texas had not yet peaked, and construction of railroads and levees was opening up new areas for cotton growing elsewhere in the South. With the advantage of hindsight, economic historians have pointed out that improvements in transportation and flood control would enable the post–Civil War South to double its cotton acreage. Those who now argue that slavery was profitable and had an expansive future have made a strong and convincing case. But the larger question remains: What sort of economic development did a slave plantation system foster? The system may have made slaveholders wealthy, but did the benefits trickle down to the rest of the population—to the majority of whites who owned no slaves and to the slaves themselves? Did it promote

Conclusion: Worlds in Conflict


 efficiency and progressive change? Economists Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman have argued that the plantation’s success was due to an internally efficient enterprise with good managers and industrious, well-motivated workers. Other economic historians have attributed the profitability almost exclusively to favorable market conditions. Large plantation owners were the only segment of the population to enjoy the full benefits of the slave economy. Small slaveholders and nonslaveholders shared only to a very limited extent in the bonanza profits of the cotton economy. Because of various insecurities—lack of credit, high transportation costs, and a greater vulnerability to market fluctuations—they had to devote a larger share of their acreage to subsistence crops, especially corn and hogs, than did the planters. They were thus able to survive, but their standard of living was lower than that of most northern farmers. Slaves received sufficient food, clothing, and shelter for their subsistence and to make them capable of working well enough to keep the plantation afloat economically, but their living standard was below that of the poorest free people in the United States. It was proslavery propaganda rather than documented fact, to maintain that slaves were better off than northern wage laborers. The South’s economic development was skewed in favor of a single route to wealth, open only to the minority possessing both a white skin and access to capital. The concentration of capital and business energies on cotton production foreclosed the kind of diversified industrial and commercial growth that would have provided wider opportunities. Thus, in comparison to the industrializing North, the South was an underdeveloped region in which much of the population had little incentive to work hard. A lack of public education for whites and the denial of even minimal literacy



 to slaves represented a critical failure to develop human resources. The South’s economy was probably condemned so long as it was based on slavery.

Conclusion: Worlds in Conflict
 If slaves lived to some extent in a separate and distinctive world of their own, so did planters, less affluent whites, and even free blacks. The Old South was thus a deeply divided society. The northern traveler Frederick Law Olmsted, who made three journeys through the slave states in the 1850s, provided a vivid sense of how diverse in outlook and circumstances southern people could be. Visiting a great plantation, he watched the slaves stop working as soon as the overseer turned away; on a small farm, he saw a slave and his owner working in the fields together. Treatment of slaves, he found, ranged from humane paternalism to flagrant cruelty. Olmsted heard nonslaveholding whites damn the planters as “cotton snobs” but also talk about blacks as “niggars” and express fear of interracial marriages if slaves were freed. He received hospitality from poor whites living in crowded one-room cabins as well as from fabulously wealthy planters in pillared mansions, and he found life in the backcountry radically different from that in the plantation belts. He showed that the South was a kaleidoscope of groups divided by class, race, culture, and geography. What held it together and provided some measure of unity were a booming plantation economy and a web of customary relationships and loyalties that could obscure the underlying cleavages and antagonisms. The fractured and fragile nature of this society would soon become apparent when it was subjected to the pressures of civil war.



 CHAPTER 11

CHAPTER REVIEW

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 11 Slaves and Masters on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1793
Eli Whitney invents the cotton gin 1800 Gabriel Prosser leads abortive slave rebellion in 
 1837 Panic of 1837 is followed by major depression of the

Virginia
 1811 Slaves revolt in Point Coupée section of Louisiana 1822 Denmark Vesey conspiracy uncovered in Charleston, South Carolina 1829 David Walker publishes Appeal calling for slave insurrection 1830 First National Negro Convention meets 1831 Slaves under Nat Turner rebel in Virginia, killing almost sixty whites 1832 Virginia legislature votes against gradual emancipation 1835–1842 Blacks fight alongside Indians in the Second Seminole War



 cotton market Frederick Douglass publishes the North Star, a black antislavery newspaper Cotton prices rise, and a sustained boom commences Group of free blacks rescues escaped slave Shadrack from federal authorities in Boston Harriet Beecher Stowe’s antislavery novel Uncle Tom’s Cabin is published and becomes a best seller Hinton R. Helper attacks slavery on economic grounds in The Impending Crisis of the South; the book is suppressed in the southern states Cotton prices and production reach all-time peak

CHAPTER REVIEW
The Divided Society of the Old South MICH. ukee hicago 
Buff


Detroit
Cleveland
Fort
Wayne


P
Harris


Pittsb
Columbus


 OHIO

 What were the divisions within black society in the Old South?

 pringfield Indianapolis Washington, D Cincinnati VA Rich ILL. IND. Louisville

 Most African Americans in the Old South were slaves who worked on plantations and farms as agricultural laborers, domestic servants, and skilled craftsmen. Although slave servants and craftsmen enjoyed higher status than field hands, all southern blacks, even the six percent who were free, suffered from racial prejudice and severe legal inequality. (p. 248) KY.

Evansville


N


 airo

 TENN.

N


White Society in the Antebellum South
 What divided and united white southern society? While great planters were a tiny minority of the population, they set the tone for white southern society, propagating the ideology of “paternalism,” that slaves were children who required a stern but loving parent. Most whites owned few or no slaves, but a political system of “white man’s democracy” and the ideology of white supremacy united them with large slaveholders. (p. 256)

Slavery and the Southern Economy
The World of Southern Blacks
 What factors made living conditions for southern blacks more or less difficult? Living conditions were difficult because slaves performed many types of labor. Some worked from sunup to sundown in gangs; others maintained more work control through the “task system”; urban slaves and free blacks had more autonomy. Family and community helped ease slave life, while some slaves resisted oppression by running away, sabotage, and even armed rebellion. (p. 248)

 How was slavery related to economic success in the South? Slavery dominated the economy of the South: Tobacco gave way to the internal slave trade as the biggest business in the upper South, while the cotton gin made large-scale staple agriculture a booming economic machine in the Deep South, fueling the growth of a world textile industry and enriching the planter class. (p. 261)

STUDY RESOURCES



KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Old South The term refers to the slaveholding states between 1830 and 1860, when slave labor and cotton production dominated the economies of the southern states. This period is also known as the “antebellum era.” p. 248 
 Yeoman farmers Southern small landholders who owned no slaves, and who lived primarily in the foothills of the Appalachian and Ozark mountains. They were self-reliant and grew mixed crops, although they usually did not produce a substantial amount to be sold on the market. p. 258

 Vesey conspiracy An unsuccessful 1822 plot to burn Charleston, South Carolina, and initiate a general slave revolt, led by a free African American, Denmark Vesey. p. 254

 American Colonization Society Founded in 1817, the society advocated the relocation of free blacks and freed slaves to the African colony of Monrovia, present-day Liberia. p. 260

 Underground Railroad A network of safe houses organized by abolitionists (usually free blacks) to help slaves escape to the North or Canada. p. 254

 Cotton gin Invented by Eli Whitney in 1793, this device for separating the seeds from the fibers of short-staple cotton enabled a slave to clean fifty times more cotton as by hand, which reduced production costs and gave new life to slavery in the South. p. 263

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
Do you think the booming cotton economy benefited all members of southern society, or only certain segments? 
 2. What difference did it make in a slave’s life if he or she belonged to a

 3. What do you think is the connection between slavery and racism? Why did slaveholders begin defending slavery in racial terms in the 1830s?

 great planter or to a small farmer?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 11 on MyHistoryLab The Divided Society of the Old South

White Society in the Antebellum South


◾


◾


Read the Document
 p. 247

Confessions of Nat Turner (1831)


Read the Document
 p. 260

The World of Southern Blacks
 Overseer’s Report from Chicora Read the Document Wood Plantation p. 250 Read the Document Mother” p. 251 Listen to the Audio File Yonder p. 254

◾


◾


View the Closer Look
Virginia p. 261


When the Roll is Called up


◾


View the Map


Underground Railroad p. 255


Poem, “The Slave Auction”


Slavery and the Southern Economy


Frances E.W. Harper, “The Slave


Complete the Assignment Harriet Jacobs and Maria
Norcom: Women of Southern Households p. 252
Watch the Video


George Fitzhugh,
Read the Document
The Blessings of Slavery (1857) p. 259


Slave Auction in Richmond,


Slavery in the South p. 262


◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




The Pursuit of Perfection


Contents and Learning Objectives
THE RISE OF EVANGELICALISM PG. 269

REFORM TURNS RADICAL PG. 278

 How did the evangelical revivalism of the early nineteenth century spur reform movements?

 What were some of the major antebellum reform movements? ◾ FEATURE ESSAY The War Against “Demon Drink”

DOMESTICITY AND CHANGES IN THE AMERICAN FAMILY PG. 273

LAW AND SOCIETY
The Legal Rights of Married Women: Reforming the Law of Coverture 
 What was the doctrine of “separate spheres,” and how did it change family life?

INSTITUTIONAL REFORM PG. 276
How did Horace Mann change ideas about public schooling in America? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

