Chapter 25 Transition to Modern America


Wheels for the Millions
 The moving assembly line that Henry Ford perfected in 1913 for manufacture of the Model T marked only the first step toward full mass production and the beginning of America’s worldwide industrial supremacy. A year later, Ford began buying large plots of land along the Rouge River southeast of Detroit, Michigan. He already had a vision of a vast industrial tract where machines, moving through a sequence of carefully arranged manufacturing operations, would transform raw materials into finished cars, trucks, and tractors. The key would be control over the flow of goods at each step along the way—from lake steamers and railroad cars bringing in the coal and iron ore, to overhead conveyor belts and huge turning tables carrying the moving parts past the stationary workers on the assembly line. “Everything must move,” Ford commanded, and by the mid-1920s at River Rouge, as the plant became known, it did. Ford began fulfilling his industrial dream in 1919 when he built a blast furnace and foundry to make engine blocks for both the Model T and his tractors. By 1924, more than forty thousand workers were turning out nearly all the metal parts used in making Ford vehicles. One tractor factory was so efficient that it took just over twenty-eight hours to convert raw ore into a new farm implement. Visitors from all over the world came to marvel at River Rouge. Some were disturbed by the jumble of machines (by 1926, there were forty-three thousand

 in operation) and the apparent congestion on the plant floor, but industrial experts recognized that the arrangement led to incredible productivity because “the work moves and the men stand still.” A trained engineer summed it up best when he wrote that a visitor to the plant “sees each unit as a carefully designed gear which meshes with other gears and operates in synchronism with them, the whole forming one huge, perfectly-timed, smoothly-operating industrial machine of almost unbelievable efficiency.” In May 1927, after producing more than fifteen million Model Ts, Ford closed the assembly line at Highland Park. For the next six months, his engineers worked on designing a more compact and efficient assembly line at River Rouge for the Model A, which went into production in November. By then, River Rouge had more than justified Ford’s vision. “Ford had brought together everything at a single site and on a scale no one else had ever attempted,” concluded historian Geoffrey Perrett. “The Rouge plant became to a generation of engineers far more than a factory. It was a monument.” Mass production, born in Highland Park in 1913 and perfected at River Rouge in the 1920s, became the hallmark of American industry. Other car makers copied Ford’s methods, and soon his emphasis on the flow of parts moving past stationary workers became the standard in nearly every American factory. The moving assembly line—with its emphasis on uniformity, speed, precision,

 The development of the efficient and compact automobile assembly line by engineers at the Ford Motor Company in the late 1920s enabled the cost-efficient mass production of automobiles.

 and coordination—took away the last vestiges of craftsmanship and turned workers into near robots. It led to amazing efficiency that produced both high profits for manufacturers and low prices for buyers. By the mid-1920s, the cost of the Model T had dropped from $950 to $290. ost important, mass production contributed to a consumer goods revolution. American factories turned out a flood of automobiles, electrical appliances, and other items that made life easier and more pleasant for most Americans. The result was the creation of a distinctively modern America, one marked by the material abundance that has characterized American society ever since. But the abundance came at a price. The 1920s have been portrayed as a decade of escape and frivolity, and for many Americans they were just that. But those years also were an era of transition: a time when the old America of individualistic rural values gave way to a new America of conformist urban values. The transition was often wrenching, and many Americans clung desperately to the old ways. Modernity finally won, but not without a struggle.

M


The Second Industrial Revolution
 What was new about the American economy in the 1920s? The first Industrial Revolution in the late nineteenth century had catapulted the United States into the forefront among the world’s richest and most highly developed nations. With the advent of the new consumer goods industries, the American people by the 1920s enjoyed the highest standard of living of any nation on earth. After a brief postwar depression, 1922 saw the beginning of a great boom that peaked in 1927 and lasted until 1929. In this brief period, American industrial output nearly doubled, and the gross national product rose by 40 percent. Most of this explosive growth took place in industries producing consumer goods—automobiles, appliances, furniture, and clothing. Equally important, the national per capita income increased by 30 percent to $681 in 1929. American workers became the highest paid in history. Combined with the expansion of installment credit programs that allowed customers to buy now and



 CHAPTER 25

TRANSITION TO MODERN AMERICA

 pay later, this income growth allowed a purchasing spree like nothing the nation had ever experienced. The key to the new affluence lay in technology. The moving assembly line pioneered by Ford became a standard feature in nearly all American plants. Electric motors replaced steam engines as the basic source of energy in factories; by 1929, 70 percent of all industrial power came from electricity. Efficiency experts broke down the industrial process into minute parts, using time and motion studies, and then showed managers and workers how to maximize the output of their labor. Production per worker-hour increased an amazing 75 percent over the decade; in 1929, a workforce no larger than that of 1919 was producing almost twice as many goods.

The Automobile Industry
 The nature of the consumer goods revolution can best be seen in the automobile industry, which became the nation’s largest in the 1920s. Rapid growth was its hallmark. In 1920, there were ten million cars in the nation; by the end of the decade, twenty-six million were on the road. Production jumped from fewer than two million units a year to more than five million by 1929. The automobile boom, at its peak from 1922 to 1927, depended on the apparently insatiable appetite of the American people for cars. But as the decade continued, the market became saturated as more and more of those who could afford the new luxury had become car owners. Marketing became as crucial as production. Automobile makers began to rely heavily on advertising and annual model changes, seeking to make customers dissatisfied with their old vehicles and eager to order new ones. Despite these efforts, sales slumped in 1927 when Ford stopped making the Model T, picked up again the next year with the new Model A, but began to slide again in 1929. The new industry revealed a basic weakness in the consumer goods economy; once people had bought an item with a long life, they would be out of the market for a few years. In the affluent 1920s, few noticed the emerging economic instability. Instead, contemporary observers focused on the stimulating effect the automobile had on the rest of the economy. The mass production of cars required huge quantities of steel; entire new rolling mills had to be built to supply sheet steel for car bodies. Rubber factories boomed with the demand for tires, and paint and glass suppliers had more business than ever before. The auto changed the pattern of city life, leading to a suburban explosion. Real estate developers, no longer dependent on streetcars and railway lines, could now build houses in ever wider concentric circles around the central cities. The automobile had a profound effect on all aspects of American life in the 1920s. Filling stations appeared on the main streets, replacing the smithies and stables of the past. In Kansas City, Jess D. Nichols built the first shopping center, Country Club Plaza, and thus set an example quickly followed by other suburban developers. Even in smaller communities, the car ruled. In Muncie, Indiana, site of a famous sociological survey in the 1920s, one elder replied when asked what was taking place, “I can tell you what’s happening in just four letters: A-U-T-O!” A nation that had always revered symbols of movement, from the Mayflower to the covered wagon, now had a new icon to worship.

Patterns of Economic Growth
 Automobiles were the most conspicuous of the consumer products that flourished in the 1920s, but certainly not the only ones. The electrical industry grew almost as quickly. Central power stations, where massive steam generators converted coal into electricity, brought current into the homes of city and town dwellers. Two-thirds of all American families enjoyed electricity by the end of the decade, and they spent vast sums on washing machines, vacuum cleaners, refrigerators, and ranges. The new appliances eased the burdens of housework and ushered in an age of leisure. Radio broadcasting and motion picture production also boomed in the 1920s. The early success of KDKA in Pittsburgh stimulated the growth of more than eight hundred independent radio stations, and by 1929, NBC had formed the first successful radio network. Five nights a week, Amos ’n Andy, a comic serial featuring two “blackface” vaudevillians, held the attention of millions of Americans. The film industry thrived in Hollywood, reaching its maturity in the mid-1920s when in every large city there were huge theaters seating as many as four thousand people. With the advent of the “talkies” by 1929, average weekly movie attendance climbed to nearly one hundred million. Other industries prospered as well. Production of light metals such as aluminum and magnesium grew into a major business. Chemical engineering came of age with the invention of synthetics, ranging from rayon for clothing to cellophane for packaging. Americans found a whole new spectrum of products to buy—cigarette lighters, wristwatches, heat-resistant glass cooking dishes, and rayon stockings, to name just a few. The corporation continued to be the dominant economic unit in the 1920s. Growing corporations now had hundreds of thousands of stockholders; and one individual or family rarely held more than 5 percent of the stock. The enormous profits generated by the corporations enabled their managers to finance growth and expansion internally, thus freeing companies from their earlier dependence on investment bankers like J. P. Morgan. Voicing a belief in social responsibility and enlightened capitalism, the new professional class operated independently, free from outside restraint. In the final analysis, the corporate managers were accountable only to other managers. Another wave of mergers accompanied the growth of corporations during the 1920s. From 1920 to 1928, some eight thousand mergers took place as more and more small firms proved unable to compete effectively with the new giants. By the end of the decade, the two hundred largest nonfinancial corporations owned almost half of the country’s corporate wealth. The automobile industry set the example for other areas. The greatest abuses took place in public utilities; promoters such as Samuel Insull built vast paper empires by gaining control of power companies and then draining them of their assets. The most distinctive feature of the new consumer-oriented economy was the emphasis on marketing. Advertising earnings rose from $1.3 billion in 1915 to $3.4 billion in 1926. Skillful practitioners such as Edward Bernays and Bruce Barton sought to control public taste and consumer spending by identifying the good life with the possession of the latest product of American industry, whether it be a car, a refrigerator, or a brand of cigarettes. Chain stores advanced rapidly at the expense of small retail shops.

The Second Industrial Revolution


View the Closer Look




The Great White Way – Times Square


 Howard Thain’s painting, The Great White Way—Times Square, captures the bright lights and excitement of New York’s entertainment center in the Roaring Twenties. Source: Collection of The New-York Historical Society, accession number 1963.150.

 A&P dominated the retail food industry, growing from 400 stores in 1912 to 15,500 by 1932. Woolworth’s “five-and-tens” spread almost as rapidly, while such drugstore chains as Rexall and Liggetts—both owned by one huge holding company—opened outlets in nearly every town and city in the land. Uniformity and standardization, the characteristics of mass production, now prevailed. The farmer in Kansas bought the same kind of car, the same groceries, and the same pills as the factory worker in Pennsylvania. Sectional differences in dress, food, and furniture began to disappear. Even the regional accents that

 distinguished Americans in different parts of the country were threatened with extinction by the advent of radio and films, which promoted a standard national dialect devoid of any local flavor.

Economic Weaknesses
 The New Era, as business leaders labeled the decade, was not as prosperous as it first appeared. The revolution in consumer goods disguised the decline of many traditional industries in the 1920s. Railroads, overcapitalized and poorly managed, suffered from



 CHAPTER 25

TRANSITION TO MODERN AMERICA

 internal woes and from competition with the growing trucking industry. The coal industry was also troubled, with petroleum and natural gas beginning to replace coal as a fuel. The use of cotton textiles declined with the development of rayon and other synthetic fibers. The New England mills moved south in search of cheap labor, leaving behind thousands of unemployed workers and virtual ghost towns in the nation’s oldest industrial center. Hardest hit of all was agriculture. American farmers had expanded production to meet the demands of World War I, when they fed their own nation and most of Europe as well. A sharp cutback of exports in 1919 caused a rapid decline in prices. By 1921, farm exports had fallen by more than $2 billion. Throughout the 1920s, the farmers’ share of the national income dropped, until by 1929, the per capita farm income was only $273, compared to the national average of $681. Urban workers were better off than farmers in the 1920s, but they did not share fully in the decade’s affluence. The industrial labor force remained remarkably steady during this period of economic growth; technical innovations meant the same number of workers could produce far more than before. Most new jobs appeared in the lower-paying service industry. During the decade, factory wage rates rose only a modest 11 percent; in 1929, nearly half of all American families had an income of less than $1,500. At the same time, however, conditions of life improved. Prices remained stable, even dropping somewhat in the early 1920s, so workers enjoyed a gain in real wages. Organized labor proved unable to advance the interests of workers in the 1920s. Conservative leadership in the AFL neglected the task of organizing the vast number of unskilled laborers in the mass production industries. Aggressive management weakened the appeal of unions by portraying them as radical organizations after a series of strikes in 1919. Many businesses used injunctions and “yellow-dog contracts”—which forbade employees to join unions—to establish open shops and deny workers the benefits of collective bargaining. Other employers wooed their workers away from unions using techniques of welfare capitalism—spending money to improve plant conditions and winning employee loyalty with pensions, paid vacations, and company cafeterias. The net result was a decline in union membership from a postwar high of five million to less than three million by 1929. Black workers remained on the bottom, both economically and socially. Nearly half a million African Americans had migrated northward from the rural South during World War I. Some found jobs in northern industries, but many more worked in menial service areas collecting garbage, washing dishes, and sweeping floors. Yet even these jobs offered them a better life than they found on the depressed southern farms where millions of African Americans still lived in poverty, and so the migration continued. The black ghettos in northern cities grew rapidly in the 1920s; Chicago’s African American population doubled during the decade while New York’s rose from 152,467 to 327,706 with most African Americans living in Harlem. Middle- and upper-class Americans were the groups who thrived in the 1920s. The rewards of this second Industrial Revolution went to the managers—the engineers, bankers, and executives— who directed the new industrial economy. Corporate profits nearly doubled in ten years, and income from dividends rose 65 percent,

 nearly six times the rate of increase in workers’ wages. Bank accounts, reflecting the accumulated savings of the upper-middle and wealthy classes, rose from $41.1 billion to $57.9 billion. These were the people who bought the fine new houses in the suburbs and who could afford more than one car. Their conspicuous consumption helped fuel the prosperity of the 1920s, but their disposable income eventually became greater than their material wants. The result was speculation, as those with idle money began to invest heavily in the stock market to reap the gains from industrial growth. The economic trends of the decade had both positive and negative implications for the future. On one hand, there was the solid growth of new consumer-based industries. Automobiles and appliances were not passing fancies; their production and use became a part of the modern American way of life, creating a high standard of living that roused the envy of the rest of the world. The future pattern of American culture—cars and suburbs, shopping centers and skyscrapers—was determined by the end of the 1920s. But at the same time, there were ominous signs of danger. The unequal distribution of wealth, the growth of consumer debt, the saturation of the market for cars and appliances, and the rampant speculation all contributed to economic instability. The boom of the 1920s would end in a great crash; yet the achievements of the decade would survive even that dire experience to shape the future of American life.

City Life in the Jazz Age
 How did life in the cities change after World War I? The city replaced the countryside as the focal point of American life in the 1920s. The 1920 census revealed that, for the first time, slightly more than half of the population lived in cities (defined broadly to include all places of more than 2,500 people). During the decade, the metropolitan areas grew rapidly as both whites and blacks from rural areas came seeking jobs in the new consumer industries. Between 1920 and 1930, cities with populations of 250,000 or more had added some eight million people to their ranks. New York City grew by nearly 25 percent, while Detroit more than doubled its population during the decade. The skyscraper soon became the most visible feature of the city. Faced with inflated land prices, builders turned upward— developing a distinctively American architectural style in the process. New York led the way with the ornate Woolworth Building in 1913. The sleek 102-story Empire State Building, completed in 1931, was for years the tallest building in the world. Other cities erected their own jagged skylines. By 1929, there were 377 buildings more than 20 stories tall across the nation. Most significantly, the skyscraper came to symbolize the new mass culture. “The New York skyscrapers are the most striking manifestation of the triumph of numbers,” wrote one French observer. “One cannot understand or like them without first having tasted and enjoyed the thrill of counting or adding up enormous totals and of living in a gigantic, compact and brilliant world.” In the metropolis, life was different. The old community ties of home, church, and school were absent, but there were important

City Life in the Jazz Age


 gains to replace them—new ideas, new creativity, new perspectives. Some city dwellers became lost and lonely without the old institutions; others thrived in the urban environment.

Women and the Family
 The urban culture of the 1920s witnessed important changes in the American family. This vital institution began to break down under the impact of economic and social change. A new freedom for women and children seemed to be emerging in its wake. Although World War I accelerated the process of women leaving the home for work, the postwar decade witnessed a return to the slower pace of the prewar years. During the 1920s, there was no permanent gain in the number of working women. Two million more women were employed in 1930 than in 1920, but this represented an increase of only 1 percent. Most women workers, moreover, had low-paying jobs, ranging from stenographers to maids. The number of women doctors actually decreased, and even though women earned nearly one-third of all graduate degrees, only 4 percent of full professors were female. For the most part, the professions were reserved for men, with women relegated to such fields as teaching and nursing. Women had won the right to vote in 1920, but the Nineteenth Amendment proved to have less impact than its proponents had hoped. Adoption of the amendment robbed women of a unifying cause, and the exercise of the franchise itself did little to change prevailing sex roles. Men remained the principal breadwinners in the family; women cooked, cleaned, and reared the children. “The creation and fulfillment of a successful home,” a Ladies Home Journal writer advised women, “is a bit of craftsmanship that compares favorably with building a beautiful cathedral.” The feminist movement, however, still showed signs of vitality in the 1920s. Social feminists pushing for humanitarian reform won enactment of the Sheppard-Towner Act of 1921, which provided for federal aid to establish state programs for maternal and infant health care. Although the failure to enact a child labor amendment in 1925 marked the beginning of a decline in humanitarian reform, for the rest of the decade, women’s groups continued to work for good-government measures, for the inclusion of women on juries, and for consumer legislation. One group of activists, led by Alice Paul’s National Woman’s Party (NWP), lobbied for full equality for women under the law. In 1923, the NWP succeeded in having an Equal Rights Amendment introduced in Congress. The amendment stated simply, “Men and women shall have equal rights throughout the United States and every place subject to its jurisdiction.” Most other women’s organizations, notably the League of Women Voters, opposed the amendment because it threatened gender-specific legislation such as the Sheppard-Towner Act that women had fought so hard to enact. The drive for the ERA in the 1920s failed. Growing assertiveness had a profound impact on feminism in the 1920s. Instead of crusading for social progress, young women concentrated on individual self-expression by rebelling against Victorian restraints. In the larger cities, some quickly adopted what critic H. L. Mencken called the flapper image, portrayed most strikingly by artist John Held, Jr. Cutting their hair short, raising their skirts above the knee, and binding their breasts, “flappers” set out



 to compete on equal terms with men on the golf course and in the speakeasy. Young women delighted in shocking their elders—they rouged their cheeks and danced the Charleston. Women smoked cigarettes and drank alcohol in public more freely than before. The flappers assaulted the traditional double standard in sex, demanding that equality with men should include sexual fulfillment before and during marriage. New and more liberal laws led to a sharp rise in the divorce rate; by 1928, there were 166 divorces for every 1,000 marriages, compared to only 81 in 1900. The sense of woman’s emancipation was heightened by a continuing drop in the birthrate and by the abundance of consumer goods. With fewer children to care for and with washing machines and vacuum cleaners to ease their household labor, it seemed that women of the 1920s would have more leisure time. Yet appearances were deceptive. Advertisers eagerly sought out women as buyers of labor-saving consumer products, but wives exercised purchasing power only as delegated by their husbands. In addition, many women were not in the position to put the new devices to use— one-fourth of the homes in Cleveland lacked running water in the 1920s, and three-quarters of the nation’s families did not have washing machines. The typical childless woman spent between fortythree and fifty hours a week on household duties; for mothers, the average workweek was fifty-six hours, far longer than that of their husbands. And despite the talk of the “new woman,” the flappers fell victim to the sex-role conditioning of their parents. Boys continued to play with guns and grew up to head their families; girls played with dolls and looked forward to careers as wives and mothers. “In the 1920s, as in the 1790s,” concluded historian June Sochen, “marriage was the only approved state for women.” The family, however, did change. It became smaller as easier access to effective birth control methods enabled couples to limit the number of their offspring. More and more married women took jobs outside the home, bringing in an income and gaining a measure of independence (although their rate of pay was always lower than that for men). Young people, who had once joined the labor force when they entered their teens, now discovered adolescence as a stage of life. A high school education was no longer uncommon, and college attendance increased. Prolonged adolescence led to new strains on the family in the form of youthful revolt. Freed of the traditional burden of earning a living at an early age, many young people in the 1920s went on a spree. Heavy drinking, casual sexual encounters, and a constant search for excitement became the hallmarks of the upper-class youth immortalized by F. Scott Fitzgerald. “I have been kissed by dozens of men,” one of his characters commented. “I suppose I’ll kiss dozens more.” The theme of rebellion against parental authority, which runs through all aspects of the 1920s, was at the heart of the youth movement.

The Roaring Twenties
 Excitement ran high in the cities as both crime waves and highly publicized sports events flourished. Prohibition ushered in such distinctive features of the decade as speakeasies, bootleggers, and bathtub gin. Crime rose sharply as middle- and upper-class Americans willingly broke the law to gain access to alcoholic beverages. City streets became the scene of violent shoot-outs



 CHAPTER 25

TRANSITION TO MODERN AMERICA

 between rival bootleggers; by 1929, Chicago had witnessed more than Read the Document Elanor Rowland Wembridge, “Petting and the Campus” (1925) five hundred gangland murders. Underworld czars controlled illicit empires; Al Capone’s produced revenue of $60 million a year. Sports became a national mania in the 1920s as people found more leisure time. Golf boomed, with some two million men and women playing on nearly five thousand courses across the country. Spectator sports attracted even more attention. Boxing drew huge crowds to see fighters such as Jack Dempsey and Gene Tunney. Baseball attendance soared. More than twenty million fans attended games in 1927, the year Babe Ruth became a national idol by hitting sixty home runs. On college campuses, football became more popular than ever. Universities vied with each other in building massive stadiums, seating upward of seventy thousand people. In what Frederick Lewis Allen called “the ballyhoo years,” the popular yearning for excitement led people to seek vicarious thrills in all kinds of ways—applauding Charles Lindbergh’s solo flight across the Atlantic, cheering Gertrude Ederle’s swim across the English Channel, and flocking to such bizarre events as six-day bicycle races, dance marathons, and flagpole sittings. It was a time of pure pleasure seeking, when people sought to escape from the increasingly drab world of the assembly line by worshiping heroic Sheik with Sheba is the title of this John Held, Jr., drawing, which appeared on a 1925 cover of Judge magazine. Held’s drawings define the image of the “flapper” era—the young woman with rolled-down stockings individuals. Sex became another popular and rouged knees and the young man with cigarette and pocket flask at the wheel of his car. topic in the 1920s as Victorian permissiveness joyfully, with the automobile giving couples an standards began to crumble. Sophisticated city dwellers seemed easy way to escape parental supervision. to be intent on exploring a new freedom in sexual expression. There is considerable debate, however, over the extent of Plays and novels focused on adultery, and the new urban the sexual revolution in the 1920s. Later studies by Dr. Alfred C. tabloids—led by the New York Daily News—delighted in telling Kinsey showed that premarital intercourse was twice as common their readers about love nests and kept women. The popular among women born after 1900 than for those born before the songs of the decade, such as “Hot Lips” and “Burning Kisses,” turn of the century. But a contemporary survey of more than two were less romantic and more explicit than those of years before. thousand middle-class women by Katherine B. Davis found that Hollywood exploited the obsession with sex by producing only percent of those who were married had had sexual relations movies with such provocative titles as Up in Mabel’s Room, before marriage and that only 14 percent of the single women A Shocking Night, and Women and Lovers. Theda Bara and Clara had engaged in intercourse. Actual changes in sexual behavior Bow, the “vamp” and the “It” girl, set the model for feminine are beyond the historian’s reach, hidden in the privacy of the bedseductiveness while Rudolph Valentino became the heartthrob of room, but the old Victorian prudishness was a clear casualty of millions of American women. Young people embraced the new

City Life in the Jazz Age


 the 1920s. Sex was no longer a taboo subject, at least in urban areas; men and women now could discuss it openly, and many of them did.

The Flowering of the Arts
 The greatest cultural advance of the 1920s was visible in the outpouring of literature. The city gave rise to a new class of intellectuals—writers who commented on the new industrial society. Many had been uprooted by World War I. They were bewildered by the rapidly changing social patterns of the 1920s and appalled by the materialism of American culture. Some fled to Europe to live as expatriates, congregating in Paris cafés to bemoan the loss of American innocence and purity. Others stayed at home, observing and condemning the excesses of a business civilization. All shared a sense of disillusionment and wrote pessimistically of the flawed promise of American life. Yet, ironically, their body of writing revealed a profound creativity that suggested America was coming of age intellectually. The exiles included the poets T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound and the novelist Ernest Hemingway. Pound discarded rhyme and meter in a search for clear, cold images that conveyed reality. Like many of the writers of the 1920s, he reacted against World War I, expressing a deep regret for the tragic waste of a whole generation in defense of a “botched civilization.” Eliot, who was born in Missouri but became a British subject, displayed even more profound despair. In The Waste Land, which appeared in 1922, he evoked images of fragmentation and sterility that had a powerful impact on the other disillusioned writers of the decade. He reached the depths in The Hollow Men (1925), a biting description of the emptiness of modern man. Ernest Hemingway sought redemption from the modern plight in the romantic individualism of his heroes. Preoccupied with violence, he wrote of men alienated from society who found a sense of identity in their own courage and quest for personal honor. His own experiences, ranging from driving an ambulance in the war to stalking lions in Africa, made him a legendary figure; his greatest effect on other writers, however, came from his sparse, direct, and clean prose style. The writers who stayed home were equally disdainful of contemporary American life. F. Scott Fitzgerald chronicled American youth in This Side of Paradise (1920) and The Great Gatsby (1925), writing in bittersweet prose about “the beautiful and the damned.” Amid the glitter of life among the wealthy on Long Island’s North Shore came the haunting realization of emptiness and lack of human concern. Sinclair Lewis became the most popular of the critical novelists. Main Street, published in 1920, satirized the values of small-town America as dull, complacent, and narrow-minded; Babbitt, which appeared two years later, poked fun at the commercialism of the 1920s, portraying George Babbitt as the stereotype of the lazy, smug middle-class businessman who hailed the decade as a New Era. Most savage of all was H. L. Mencken, the Baltimore newspaperman and literary critic who founded American Mercury magazine in 1923. Declaring war on “Homo boobiens,” Mencken mocked everything he found distasteful in America, from the Rotary Club to the Ku Klux Klan. “From Boy Scouts, and from Home Cooking, from Odd Fellows’ funerals, from socialists,



 from Christians—Good Lord, deliver us,” he pleaded. It was not difficult to discover Mencken’s dislikes (including Jews, as his published diary makes clear); the hard part was finding out what he affirmed, other than wit and a clever turn of phrase. A born cynic, he served as a zealous guardian of public rationality in an era of excessive boosterism. The cultural explosion of the 1920s was surprisingly broad. It included novelists such as Sherwood Anderson and John Dos Passos, who described the way the new machine age undermined such traditional American values as craftsmanship and a sense of community, and playwrights such as Eugene O’Neill, Maxwell Anderson, and Elmer Rice, who added greatly to the stature of American theater. Women writers were particularly effective in dealing with regional themes. Edith Wharton continued to write penetratingly about eastern aristocrats in books such as The House of Mirth (1905) and The Age of Innocence (1921); Willa Cather and Ellen Glasgow focused on the plight of women in the Midwest and the South, respectively, in their short stories and novels. These writers portrayed their heroines in the traditional roles of wives and mothers; playwright Zona Gale, on the other hand (who won the Pulitzer Prize for drama in 1920 for Miss Lulu Bett), used her title character to depict the dilemmas facing an unmarried woman in American society. Art and especially music made significant advances as well. Edward Hopper and Charles Burchfield captured the ugliness of city life and the loneliness of its inhabitants in their realistic paintings. Aaron Copland and George Gershwin added a new vitality to American music. But African Americans migrating northward brought the most significant contribution: the spread of jazz—first to St. Louis, Kansas City, and Chicago, and finally to New York. The form of jazz known as the blues, so expressive of the suffering of African Americans, became an authentic national folk music, and performers such as Louis Armstrong enjoyed popularity around the world. The cultural growth of the 1920s was the work of blacks as well as whites. W. E. B. Du Bois, the editor of the newspaper Crisis, became the intellectual voice of the black community developing in New York City’s Harlem. In 1917, James Weldon Johnson, who had been a professor of literature at Fisk University, published Fifty Years and Other Poems, in which the title poem commented on the half century of suffering that had followed the Emancipation Proclamation, and called for the promise of that period to be redeemed: Think you that John Brown’s spirit stops? That Lovejoy was but idly slain? Or do you think those precious drops From Lincoln’s heart were shed in vain? As other African American writers gathered around them, Du Bois and Johnson became the leaders of the Harlem Renaissance. The NAACP moved its headquarters to Harlem, and in 1923, the Urban League began publishing Opportunity, a magazine devoted to scholarly studies of racial issues, including black nationalism and emigration to Africa. (See the Feature Essay, “Marcus Garvey: Racial Redemption and Black Nationalism,” pp. 596–597.) African American literature blossomed rapidly. In 1922, critics hailed the appearance of Claude McKay’s book of verses, White Shadows . In stark images, McKay expressed both his resentment against racial injustice and his pride in blackness.

 Complete the Assignment Marcus Garvey: Racial Redemption and Black Nationalism on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


Marcus Garvey
Racial Redemption and
Black Nationalism


Read the Document


Pearson Profiles, Marcus Garvey


 Marcus Garvey’s advocacy of black nationalism and independent black entrepreneurship were, in part, discredited by his trial and conviction for mail fraud. He is shown here in custody on the way to Atlanta federal prison in 1925.

“I


 n a world of wolves one should go armed,” wrote Marcus Garvey in 1919, “and one of the most powerful defensive weapons within the reach of Negroes is the practice of race first in all parts of the world.” This emphasis on black solidarity reflected Garvey’s belief that racial oppression and exploitation lay at the heart of most of the world’s societies. Negro equality, he insisted, would come not through integration or civil rights legislation, but only by transforming black heritage

 from a mark of inferiority into the basis of a program of pride and liberation. “The world has made being black a crime,” he declared, “and instead of making it a crime I hope to make it a virtue.” Nowhere did these ideas find a more enthusiastic reception than in the United States. World War I brought American blacks to northern cities in unprecedented numbers, but the postwar economic slump aggravated already existing racial tensions. Urban slums, job discrimination, disfranchisement, and segregation gave

 powerful reinforcement to black disillusionment with white America, and to Garvey’s message of black nationalism and racial redemption. Garvey’s upbringing in Jamaica, under the color-based caste system of the British-ruled West Indies, convinced him that only black solidarity could lead his race out of subjugation. Dreaming of an independent black Africa, he embraced black nationalism and economic self-help, and in 1914 he molded these ideas into a vision of the Negro race redeemed through his new organization, the United

Negro
Improvement
Association
 (UNIA). In 1916, Garvey toured the United States, and American blacks responded so strongly to his message that he moved UNIA headquarters to Harlem. With a new weekly, the Negro World, Garvey advanced his crusade for racial redemption and separatism. The paper extolled the beauty of black skin color and African features, and his editorials demanded economic selfreliance and collective black action. “Up, you mighty race,” he exhorted. “You can accomplish what you will.” Garvey put his principles into practice in 1919 when he launched the Black Star Line (BSL), a steamship corporation that he believed would demonstrate black competence in business, enhance racial pride, and strengthen the bonds among blacks worldwide. A company brochure offered every black investor the promise of easy dividends and an opportunity to climb the ladder of success for only $5 per share. In November 1919, the BSL launched its first of three ships and stock sales soared. Spirits were equally high at UNIA’s first international convention, held in New York in 1920, which brought together several thousand delegates from all forty-eight states and more than twenty countries. After leading the opening day parade, which stretched for several miles through the streets of Harlem, Garvey delivered the keynote address before a crowd of twenty-five thousand:

 inherent right . . . to possess himself of Africa.” The convention also urged the teaching of black history in schools, demanded an end to lynching and segregation, and elected Garvey as the provisional president of Africa. Garvey’s vision began to unravel with his Liberian Rehabilitation project. The black African republic welcomed his offer of financial and technical assistance through the UNIA, and in late 1920 he began to raise money for a reconstruction loan. In subsequent months, however, he diverted much of the proceeds to keep the ailing BSL afloat. With large capital outlays, poor management, and high operating costs, Garvey’s dream of a maritime empire verged on financial collapse. The “establishment” black press accused Garvey of adventurism, opportunism, and diversion from the real path of progress. His views on the Ku Klux Klan made him even more controversial. While deploring Klan terror and violence, Garvey voiced appreciation of Klan candor on race relations:

 We are the descendents of a suffering people. We are the descendents of a people determined to suffer no longer. We shall now organize the 400,000,000 Negroes of the world into a vast organization to plant the banner of freedom on the great continent of Africa….If Europe is for Europeans, then Africa shall be for the black peoples of the world.

 So stark a statement of racial separatism and suspicion of whites appalled other black leaders. W. E. B. Du Bois described him as “the most dangerous enemy of the Negro race,” and a black newspaper promised to “drive Garvey and Garveyism in all its sinister viciousness from the American soil.” Yet Marcus Garvey and his message endured; by 1921, the UNIA had more than eight hundred official and unofficial branches. Garvey’s battle with black leaders was but one of his challenges. In May 1923, he and three associates went on trial for mail fraud in the sale

 Others echoed his sentiments. UNIA delegates meeting in Harlem approved the Declaration of Rights of the Negro Peoples of the World, which declared that the black man had “an

 I regard the Klan, the Anglo-Saxon Clubs, and White American societies as better friends of the race than all other groups of hypocritical whites put together. I like honesty and fair play. You may call me a Klansman if you will, but potentially every white man is a Klansman, as far as the Negro in competition with whites socially, economically, and politically is concerned . . .

 of BSL stock. The evidence suggested that while BSL’s leaders made poor business decisions, neither Garvey nor his executives drew large salaries or lived lavishly at company expense. The BSL may have been ill-advised and badly managed, but it does not appear to have been fraudulent. The jury, however, found Garvey guilty (despite acquitting his codefendants), and the judge sentenced him to the maximum five-year term. On February 8, 1925, Garvey entered the federal penitentiary at Atlanta. Ironically, once he was behind bars, he gained the support of many of his erstwhile detractors who protested the severity of white justice. Under mounting pressure, President Coolidge commuted Garvey’s sentence in 1927. Immediate deportation followed, as required by U.S. immigration law. On December 10, 1927, Garvey returned to Jamaica, where one of the largest crowds in the island’s history greeted him with a hero’s welcome. Garvey tried in vain to revitalize the UNIA in Jamaica, but with the onset of the Great Depression, American blacks concentrated more on survival than on racial nationalism. Garvey slipped into obscurity and died in 1940 at the age of fiftytwo. Despite this end, however, his movement had inspired many blacks who were disgusted by the hypocrisy of American democracy and frustrated by the failure of gradualism to improve their lot. His appeals offered them an alternative to the legalistic approach of the more conservative black establishment, and an emphasis on pride in their heritage that influenced many black Americans in succeeding generations.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
Why did W. E. B. Du Bois and other black leaders find Marcus Garvey so threatening? 2. Why did Garvey embrace the Ku Klux Klan? 




 CHAPTER 25

TRANSITION TO MODERN AMERICA

Watch the Video


The Harlem Renaissance


 Archibald Motley, Barbecue. Motley, one of the artists of the Harlem Renaissance, combined the traditions of his native New Orleans with the energy and rhythms of 1920s Harlem.

 Countee Cullen and Langston Hughes won critical acclaim for the beauty of their poems and the eloquence in their portrayals of the black tragedy. Art and music also flourished during Harlem’s golden age. Plays and concerts at the 135th Street YMCA; floor shows at Happy Rhone’s nightclub (attended by many white celebrities); rent parties where jazz musicians played to raise money to help writers, artists, and neighbors pay their bills—all were part of the ferment that made Harlem “the Negro Capital of the World” in the 1920s. “Almost everything seemed possible above 125th Street in the early twenties for these Americans who were determined to thrive separately to better proclaim the ideals of integration,” commented historian David Lewis. “You could be black and proud, politically assertive and economically independent, creative, and disciplined—or so it seemed.” Although its most famous writers were identified with New York’s Harlem, the new African American cultural awareness spread to other cities in the form of poetry circles and theater groups. The number of African Americans graduating from college rose from 391 in 1920 to 1,903 by 1929. Although blacks were still an oppressed minority in the America of the 1920s, they had taken major strides toward achieving cultural and intellectual fulfillment.

 In retrospect, there is a striking paradox about the literary flowering of the 1920s. Nearly all the writers, black as well as white, cried out against the conformity and materialism of the contemporary scene. They were critical of mass production and reliance on the machine; they wrote wistfully of the disappearance of the artisan and of a more relaxed way of life. Few took any interest in politics or in social reform. They retreated instead into individualism, seeking an escape into their art from the prevailing business civilization. Whether they went abroad or stayed home, the writers of the 1920s turned inward to avoid being swept up in the consumer goods revolution. Yet despite their withdrawal, and perhaps because of it, they produced an astonishingly rich and varied body of work. American writing had a greater intensity and depth than in the past; American writers, despite their alienation, had placed their country in the forefront of world literature.

The Rural Counterattack
 How did conservatives resist the changes of the decade? The shift of population from the countryside to the city led to heightened social tensions in the 1920s. Intent on preserving traditional social values, rural Americans saw in the city all that

The Rural Counterattack




 was evil in contemporary life. Saloons, whorehouses, little Italys alert New York postal employee detected sixteen bombs addressed and little Polands, communist cells, free love, and atheism— to a variety of famous citizens (including John D. Rockefeller); and all were identified with the city. Accordingly, the countryside finally, on June 2, a bomb shattered the front of Attorney General struck back at the newly dominant urban areas, aiming to A. Mitchell Palmer’s home. Although the man who delivered it was restore the primacy of the Anglo-Saxon and predominantly blown to pieces, authorities quickly identified him as an Italian Protestant culture they revered. This counterattack won conanarchist from Philadelphia. siderable support in the cities from those so recently uprooted In the ensuing public outcry, Attorney General Palmer from their rural backgrounds. led the attack on the alien threat. A Quaker and progressive, Other factors contributed to the intensity of the counterattack. Palmer abandoned his earlier liberalism to launch a massive The war had unleashed a nationalistic spirit that craved unity and roundup of foreign-born radicals. In a series of raids that began conformity. In a nation where one-third of the people were foreign born, the attack on immigrants and the call for 100 percent Read the Document A. Mitchell Palmer on the Menace of Communism (1920) Americanism took on a frightening zeal. When the war was over, groups such as the American Legion tried to root out “un-American” behavior and insisted on cultural as well as political conformity. The prewar progressive reform spirit added to the social tension. Stripped of much of its former idealism, progressivism focused on such social problems as drinking and illiteracy to justify repressive measures such as prohibition and immigration restriction. The result was tragic. Amid the emergence of a new urban culture, the movements aimed at preserving the values of an earlier America succeeded only in complicating life in an already difficult period of cultural transition.

The Fear of Radicalism
 The first and most intense outbreak of national alarm, the Red Scare, came in 1919. The heightened nationalism of World War I, aimed at achieving unity at the expense of ethnic diversity, found a new target in bolshevism. The Russian Revolution and the triumph of Marxism frightened many Americans. A growing turn to communism among American radicals (especially the foreign born) accelerated these fears. Although the numbers involved were tiny—at most there were sixty thousand communists in the United States in 1919—they were highly visible. Located in the cities, their influence appeared to be magnified with the outbreak of widespread labor unrest. A general strike in Seattle, a police strike in Boston, and a violent strike in the iron and steel industry thoroughly alarmed the American people in the spring and summer of 1919. A series of bombings led to panic. First the mayor of strikebound Seattle received a small brown package containing a homemade bomb; then an

 United States Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer organized and implemented law enforcement raids against suspected communists and other radicals in 1919 and 1920. The Palmer raids, part of a nationwide Red Scare, involved the arrest of over three thousand persons and the deportation of over five hundred resident aliens.



 CHAPTER 25

TRANSITION TO MODERN AMERICA

 on November 7, federal agents seized suspected anarchists and communists and held them for deportation with no regard for due process of law. In December, 249 aliens—including such well-known radical leaders as Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman—were sent to Russia aboard the Buford, dubbed the “Soviet Ark” by the press. Nearly all were innocent of the charges against them. A month later, Palmer rounded up nearly four thousand suspected communists in a single evening. Federal agents broke into homes, meeting halls, and union offices without search warrants. Many native-born Americans were caught in the dragnet and spent several days in jail before being released; aliens rounded up were deported without hearings or trials. For a time, it seemed that the Red Scare reflected the prevailing views of the American people. Instead of condemning their government’s action, citizens voiced their approval and even urged more drastic steps. One patriot said his solution to the alien problem was simple: “S.O.S.—ship or shoot.” General Leonard Wood, the former army chief of staff, favored placing Bolsheviks on “ships of stone with sails of lead,” while evangelist Billy Sunday preferred to take “these ornery, wild-eyed socialists” and “stand them up before a firing squad and save space on our ships.” Inflamed by public statements like these, a group of legionnaires in Centralia, Washington, dragged a radical from the town jail, castrated him, and hanged him from a railway bridge. The coroner’s report blandly stated that the victim “jumped off with a rope around his neck and then shot himself full of holes.” The very extremism of the Red Scare led to its rapid demise. In early 1920, courageous government officials from the Department of Labor insisted on due process and full hearings before anyone else was deported. Prominent public leaders began to speak out against the acts of terror. Charles Evans Hughes, the defeated GOP candidate in 1916, offered to defend six socialists expelled from the New York legislature; Ohio Senator Warren G. Harding, the embodiment of middle-class values, expressed his opinion that “too much has been said about Bolshevism in America.” Finally, Palmer himself, with evident presidential ambition, went too far. In April 1920, he warned of a vast revolution to occur on May 1; the entire New York City police force, some eleven thousand strong, was placed on duty to prepare for imminent disaster. When no bombings or violence took place on May Day, the public began to react against Palmer’s hysteria. Despite a violent explosion on Wall Street in September that killed thirty-three people, the Red Scare died out by the end of 1920. Palmer passed into obscurity, the tiny Communist party became torn with factionalism, and the American people tried hard to forget their loss of balance. Yet the Red Scare exerted a continuing influence on American society in the 1920s. The foreign-born lived in the uneasy realization that they were viewed with hostility and suspicion. Two Italian aliens in Massachusetts, Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, were arrested in May 1920 for a payroll robbery and murder. They faced a prosecutor and jury who condemned them more for their ideas than for any evidence of criminal conduct and a judge who referred to them as “those anarchist bastards.” Despite a worldwide effort that became the chief liberal cause of the 1920s, the courts rejected all appeals. Sacco, a shoemaker, and Vanzetti, a fish peddler, died in the electric chair on August 23, 1927. Their fate symbolized the bigotry and intolerance that lasted through

 the 1920s and made that decade one of the least attractive in American history.

Prohibition
 In December 1917, Congress passed the Eighteenth Amendment, prohibiting the manufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages, and sent the amendment to the states for ratification. A little over a year later, in January 1919, Nebraska was the necessary thirty-sixth state to ratify, and Prohibition became the law of the land. Effective January 16, 1920, the Volstead Act, which implemented Prohibition, banned most commercial production and distribution of beverages containing more than one-half of 1 percent of alcohol by volume. (Exceptions were made for medicinal and religious uses of wine and spirits. Production for one’s own private use was also allowed.) Prohibition was the result of both a rural effort of the Anti-Saloon League, backed by Methodist and Baptist clergy men, and the urban progressive concern over the social disease of drunkenness, especially among industrial workers. The moral issue had already led to the enactment of prohibition laws in twenty-six states by 1920; the real tragedy would occur in the effort to extend this “noble experiment” to the growing cities, where it was deeply resented by ethnic groups such as the Germans and the Irish and was almost totally disregarded by the well-to-do and the sophisticated. Prohibition did in fact lead to a decline in drinking. Americans consumed much less alcohol in the 1920s than in the prewar years. Rural areas became totally dry, and in the cities, the consumption of alcoholic beverages dropped sharply among the lower classes, who could not afford the high prices for bootleg liquor. Among the middle class and the wealthy, however, drinking became fashionable. Bootleggers supplied whiskey, which quickly replaced lighter spirits such as wine and beer. The alcohol was either smuggled from abroad (a $40 million a year business by 1924) or illicitly manufactured in America. Exotic products such as Jackass Brandy, Soda Pop Moon, and Yack Yack Bourbon were common—and all could be fatal. Despite the risk of illness or death from extraordinarily high alcohol content or poorly controlled distillation, Americans consumed some 150 million quarts of liquor a year in the 1920s. Bootleggers took in nearly $2 billion annually, about 2 percent of the gross national product. Urban resistance to Prohibition finally led to its repeal in 1933. But in the intervening years, it damaged American society by breeding a profound disrespect for the law. The flamboyant excesses of bootleggers were only the more obvious evils spawned by prohibition. In city after city, police openly tolerated the traffic in liquor, and judges and prosecutors agreed to let bootleggers pay merely token fines, creating almost a system of licenses. Prohibition satisfied the countryside’s desire for vindication, yet rural and urban America alike suffered from this overzealous attempt to legislate morals.

The Ku Klux Klan
 The most ominous expression of protest against the new urban culture was the rebirth of the Ku Klux Klan. On Thanksgiving night in 1915, on Stone Mountain in Georgia, Colonel William J.

The Rural Counterattack


Read the Document


 Court Statements from Sacco and Vanzetti

 Italian immigrants Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti were accused of killing a paymaster and stealing about $16,000 in 1920. Many believed they were convicted and executed in 1927 because of their anarchistic beliefs.

 Simmons and thirty-four followers founded the modern Klan. Only “native born, white, gentile Americans” were permitted to join “the Invisible Empire, Knights of the Ku Klux Klan.” Membership grew slowly during World War I, but after 1920, fueled by postwar fears and shrewd promotional techniques, the Klan mushroomed. In villages, towns, and small cities across the nation—no longer simply in the South—Anglo-Saxon Protestant men flocked into the newly formed chapters, seeking to relieve their anxiety over a changing society by embracing the Klan’s unusual rituals and by demonstrating their hatred against those they considered a threat to American values. The Klan of the 1920s, unlike the night riders of the post– Civil War era, was not just antiblack; the threat to American



 culture, as Klansmen perceived it, came also from immigrants, Jews, and Catholics. They attributed much of the tension and conflict in society to the prewar flood of immigrants, foreigners who spoke different languages, worshiped in strange churches, and lived in distant, threatening cities. The Klansmen struck back by coming together and enforcing their own values. They punished blacks who did not know their place, women who practiced the new morality, and aliens who refused to conform. Beating, flogging, burning with acid—even murder—were condoned. They also tried more peaceful methods of coercion, formulating codes of behavior and seeking community-wide support. The Klan entered politics, at first hesitantly, then with growing confidence. The KKK gained control of the legislatures in Texas, Oklahoma, Oregon, and Indiana; in 1924, it blocked a resolution of censure at the Democratic national convention. With an estimated five million members by the mid-1920s, the Klan seemed to be fully established. Much of its appeal lay in the sanctuary it offered to people anxious about the direction of American society. Protestant to the core, the Klan provided reassurance sometimes missing in members’ churches. Members were beguiled by the titles, ranging from Imperial Wizard to Grand Dragon, and they gloried in the ritual that centered around the letter K. Thus each Klan had its own Klalendar, held its weekly Klonklave in the local Klavern, and followed the rules set forth in the Kloran. Members found a sense of identity in the group activities, whether they were peaceful picnics, ominous parades in white robes, or fiery cross burnings at night. Although it was a men’s organization, the Klan did not neglect the family. There was a Women’s Order, a Junior Order for boys, and a Tri-K Klub for girls. Members had to be born in America, but foreign-born Protestants were allowed to join a special Krusaders affiliate. Only blacks, Catholics, Jews, and prostitutes were beyond redemption to these lonely and anxious men who came together to chant: United we stick Divided we’re stuck. The better we stick The better we Klux!

 The Klan fell even more quickly than it rose. Its more violent activities—which included kidnapping, lynching, setting fire to synagogues and Catholic churches, and, in one case, murdering a priest—began to offend the nation’s conscience. Misuse of funds and sexual scandals among Klan leaders, notably in Indiana, repelled many of the rank and file; effective counterattacks by traditional politicians ousted the KKK from control in Texas and Oklahoma. Membership declined sharply after 1925; by the end of the decade, the Klan had virtually



 CHAPTER 25

TRANSITION TO MODERN AMERICA

Read the Document


Creed of Klanswomen, 1924


 A 1925 Ku Klux Klan demonstration in Cincinnati, Ohio, attended by nearly thirty thousand robed members and marked by the induction of eight thousand young boys in the Junior Order. Only native-born, white Americans “who believe in the tenets of the Christian religion” were admitted into the Klan. The original Klan, formed during the Reconstruction era to terrorize former slaves, disbanded in 1869. The Klan that formed in 1915 declined after the mid-1920s but did not officially disband until 1944. Two years later, a third Klan emerged, focusing on the civil rights movement and communism.

 disappeared. But its spirit lived on, testimony to the recurring demons of nativism and hatred that have surfaced periodically throughout the American experience.

Immigration Restriction
 The nativism that permeated the Klan found its most successful outlet in the immigration legislation of the 1920s. The sharp increase in immigration in the late nineteenth century had led to a broad-based movement, spearheaded by organized labor and by New England aristocrats such as Henry Cabot Lodge, to restrict the flow of people from Europe. In 1917, over Wilson’s veto, Congress enacted a literacy test that reduced the number of immigrants allowed into the country. The war caused a much more drastic decline—from an average of 1 million a year between 1900 and 1914 to only 110,000 in 1918. After the armistice, however, rumors began to spread of an impending flood of people seeking to escape war-ravaged Europe. Kenneth Roberts, a popular historical novelist, warned that all Europe was on the move, with only the limits of available steamship space likely to stem the flow. Worried congressmen spoke of a

 “barbarian horde” and a “foreign tide” that would inundate the United States with “dangerous and deadly enemies of the country.” Even though the actual number of immigrants, 810,000 in 1920 (fewer than the prewar yearly average), did not match these projections, Congress, in 1921, passed an emergency immigration act. The new quota system restricted immigration from Europe to 3 percent of the number of nationals from each country living in the United States in 1910. The 1921 act failed to satisfy the nativists. The quotas still permitted more than five hundred thousand Europeans to come to the United States in 1923, nearly half of them from southern and eastern Europe. The declining percentage of Nordic immigrants alarmed writers such as Madison Grant, who warned the American people the Anglo-Saxon stock that had founded the nation was about to be overwhelmed by lesser breeds with inferior genes. “These immigrants adopt the language of the native American, they wear his clothes and are beginning to take his women, but they seldom adopt his religion or understand his ideals,” Grant wrote. Psychologists, relying on primitive IQ tests used by the army in World War I, confirmed this judgment. (See the Feature Essay in Chapter 24, “Measuring the Mind,” pp. 574–575.) One senator

 Politics of the 1920s

 claimed that all the nation’s ills were due to an “intermingled and mongrelized people” as he demanded that racial purity replace the older reliance on the melting pot. In 1924, Congress adopted the National Origins Quota Act, which limited immigration from Europe to 150,000 a year; allocated most of the available slots to immigrants from Great Britain, Ireland, Germany, and Scandinavia; and banned all Asian immigrants. The measure passed Congress with overwhelming rural support. The new restrictive legislation marked the most enduring achievement of the rural counterattack. Unlike the Red Scare, prohibition, and the Klan, the quota system would survive until the 1960s, enforcing a racist bias that excluded Asians and limited the immigration of Italians, Greeks, and Poles to a few thousand a year while permitting a steady stream of Irish, English, and Scandinavian immigrants. The large corporations, no longer dependent on armies of unskilled immigrant workers, did not object to the 1924 law; the machine had replaced the immigrant on the assembly line. Yet even here the victory was not complete. A growing tide of Mexican laborers, exempt from the quota act, flowed northward across the Rio Grande to fill the continuing need for unskilled workers on the farms and in the service trades. The Mexican immigrants, as many as one hundred thousand a year, marked the strengthening of an element in the national ethnic mosaic that would grow in size and influence until it became a major force in modern American society.

The Fundamentalist Challenge
 The most significant—and, as it turned out, longest-lasting— challenge to the new urban culture was rooted in the traditional religious beliefs of millions of Americans who felt alienated from city life, from science, and from much of what modernization entailed. Sometimes this challenge was direct, as when Christian fundamentalists campaigned against the teaching of evolution in the public schools. Their success in Tennessee touched off a court battle, the Scopes trial, that drew the attention of the entire country to the small town of Dayton in the summer of 1925. (See the Law and Society essay, “The Scopes ‘Monkey’ Trial,” pp. 608–611.) Other aspects of the fundamentalist challenge were more subtle but no less important in countering the modernizing trend. As middle- and upper-class Americans drifted into a genteel Christianity that stressed good works and respectability, the Baptist and Methodist churches continued to hold on to the old faith. In addition, aggressive fundamentalist sects such as the Churches of Christ, the Pentecostals, and Jehovah’s Witnesses grew rapidly. While church membership increased from 41.9 million in 1916 to 54.5 million in 1926, the number of churches actually declined during the decade. More and more rural dwellers drove their cars into town instead of going to the local crossroads chapel. Many of those who came to the city in the 1920s brought their religious beliefs with them and found new outlets for their traditional ideas. Thus evangelist Aimee Semple McPherson enjoyed amazing success in Los Angeles with her Church of the Four-Square Gospel, building the Angelus Temple to seat more than five thousand worshipers. And in Fort Worth, the Reverend



J.
Frank Norris erected a six thousand-seat sanctuary for the First Baptist Church, bathing it in spotlights so it could be seen for thirty miles across the North Texas prairie. Far from dying out, as divinity professor Thomas G. Oden noted, biblical fundamentalism retained “remarkable grassroots strength among the organization men and the industrialized mass society of the 20th century.” The rural counterattack, while challenged by the city, did enable some older American values to survive in the midst of the new mass production culture. 
 Politics of the 1920s How did the politics of the 1920s reflect changes in the economy and in American society? The tensions between the city and the countryside also shaped the course of politics in the 1920s. On the surface, it was a Republican decade. The GOP (“Grand Old Party”) controlled the White House from 1921 to 1933 and had majorities in both houses of Congress from 1919 to 1931. The Republicans used their return to power after World War I to halt further reform legislation and to establish a friendly relationship between government and business. Important shifts were taking place, however, in the American electorate. The Democrats, although divided into competing urban and rural wings, were laying the groundwork for the future by winning over millions of new voters, especially among the ethnic groups in the cities. The rising tide of urban voters indicated a fundamental shift away from the Republicans toward a new Democratic majority.

Harding, Coolidge, and Hoover
 The Republicans regained the White House in 1920 with the election of Warren G. Harding of Ohio. A dark-horse contender, Harding won the GOP nomination when the convention deadlocked and he became the compromise choice. Handsome and dignified, Harding reflected both the virtues and blemishes of small-town America. Originally a newspaper publisher in Marion, he had made many friends and few enemies throughout his career as a legislator, lieutenant governor, and finally, after 1914, U.S. senator. Conventional in outlook, Harding was a genial man who lacked the capacity to govern and who, as president, broadly delegated power. He made some good cabinet choices, notably Charles Evans Hughes as secretary of state and Herbert C. Hoover as secretary of commerce, but two corrupt officials—Attorney General Harry Daugherty and Secretary of the Interior Albert Fall—sabotaged his administration. Daugherty became involved in a series of questionable deals that led ultimately to his forced resignation; Fall was the chief figure in the Teapot Dome scandal. Two oil promoters gave Fall nearly $400,000 in loans and bribes; in return, he helped them secure leases on naval oil reserves in Elk Hills, California, and Teapot Dome, Wyoming. The scandal came to light after Harding’s death from a heart attack in 1923. Fall eventually served a year in jail, and the reputation of the Harding administration never recovered.



 CHAPTER 25

TRANSITION TO MODERN AMERICA

Read the Document


Executive Orders and Senate Resolutions on Teapot Dome


 During the administration of William H. Taft, the U.S. government had set aside tracts of oil-rich land to be held in reserve for the U.S. Navy, to be used in case of national emergency. The land was under the control and discretion of the secretary of the Navy.

 Vice President Calvin Coolidge assumed the presidency upon Harding’s death, and his honesty and integrity quickly reassured the nation. Coolidge, born in Vermont of old Yankee stock, had first gained national attention in 1919 as governor of Massachusetts when he had dealt firmly with a Boston police strike by declaring, “There is no right to strike against the public safety by anybody, anywhere, any time.” A reserved, reticent man, Coolidge became famous for his epigrams, which contemporaries mistook for wisdom. “The business of America is business,”

 he proclaimed. “The man who builds a factory builds a temple; the man who works there worships there.” Consistent with this philosophy, he believed his duty was simply to preside benignly, not govern the nation. “Four-fifths of all our troubles in this life would disappear,” he said, “if we would just sit down and be still.” Calvin Coolidge, one observer noted, “aspired to become the least President the country ever had; he attained his desire.” Satisfied with the prosperity of the mid-1920s, the people responded favorably. Coolidge was elected to a full term by a wide margin in 1924.

 Politics of the 1920s

 When Coolidge announced in 1927 that he did not “choose to run,” Herbert Hoover became the Republican choice to succeed him. By far the ablest GOP leader of the decade, Hoover epitomized the American myth of the self-made man. Orphaned as a boy, he had worked his way through Stanford University and had gained both wealth and fame as a mining engineer. During World War I, he had displayed admirable administrative skills in directing Wilson’s food program at home and relief activities abroad. Sober, intelligent, and immensely hardworking, Hoover embodied the nation’s faith in individualism and free enterprise. As secretary of commerce under Harding and Coolidge, he had sought cooperation between government and business. He used his office to assist American manufacturers and exporters in expanding their overseas trade, and he strongly supported a trade association movement to encourage cooperation rather than cutthroat competition among smaller American companies. He did not view business and government as antagonists. Instead, he saw them as partners, working together to achieve efficiency and affluence for all Americans. His optimistic view of the future led him to declare in his speech accepting the Republican presidential nomination in 1928 that “we in America today are nearer to the final triumph over poverty than ever before in the history of any land.”

Republican Policies
 During the 1920 campaign, Warren Harding urged a return to “not heroism, but healing, not nostrums, but normalcy.” Misreading his speechwriter’s “normality,” he coined a new word that became the theme for the Republican administrations of the 1920s. Aware that the public was tired of zealous reformminded presidents such as Teddy Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson, Harding and his successors sought a return to traditional Republican policies. In some areas they were successful, but in others the Republican leaders were forced to adjust to the new realities of a mass production society. The result was a mixture of traditional and innovative measures that was neither wholly reactionary nor entirely progressive. The most obvious attempt to go back to the Republicanism of William McKinley came in tariff and tax policy. Fearful of a flood of postwar European imports, Congress passed an emergency tariff act in 1921 and followed it a year later with the protectionist Fordney-McCumber Tariff Act. The net effect was to raise the basic rates substantially over the moderate Underwood Tariff schedules of the Wilson period. Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon, a wealthy Pittsburgh banker and industrialist, worked hard to achieve a similar return to normalcy in taxation. Condemning the high wartime tax rates on businesses and wealthy individuals, Mellon pressed for repealing an excess profits tax on corporations and slashing personal rates on the very rich. Using the new budget system adopted by Congress in 1921, he reduced government spending from its World War I peak of $18 billion to just over $3 billion by 1925, thereby creating a slight surplus. Congress responded in 1926 by cutting the highest income tax bracket to a modest 20 percent.



 The revenue acts of the 1920s greatly reduced the burden of taxation; by the end of the decade, the government was collecting one-third less than it had in 1921, and the number of people paying income taxes dropped from more than 6.5 million to 4 million. Yet the greatest relief went to the wealthy. The public was shocked to learn in the 1930s that J. P. Morgan, Jr. and his nineteen partners had paid no income tax at all during the depths of the Great Depression. The growing crisis in American farming during the decade forced the Republican administrations to seek new solutions. The end of the European war led to a sharp decline in farm prices and a return to the problem of overproduction. Southern and western lawmakers formed a farm bloc in Congress to press for special legislation for American agriculture. The farm bloc supported the higher tariffs, which included protection for constituents’ crops, and helped secure passage of legislation to create federal supervision over stockyards, packinghouses, and grain trading. This special-interest legislation failed to get at the root of overproduction, however. Farmers then supported more controversial measures designed to raise domestic crop prices by having the government sell the surplus overseas at low world prices. Coolidge vetoed the legislation on grounds that it involved unwarranted government interference in the economy. Yet the government’s role in the economy increased rather than lessened in the 1920s. Republicans widened the scope of federal activity and nearly doubled the ranks of government employees. Herbert Hoover led the way in the Commerce Department, establishing new bureaus to help make American industry more efficient in housing, transportation, and mining. Under his leadership, the government encouraged corporations to develop welfare programs that undercut trade unions, and he tried to minimize labor disturbances by devising new federal machinery to mediate disputes. Instead of going back to the laissez-faire tradition of the nineteenth century, the Republican administrations of the 1920s were pioneering a close relationship between government and private business.

The Divided Democrats
 While the Republicans ruled in the 1920s, the Democrats seemed bent on self-destruction. The Wilson coalition fell apart in 1920 as pent-up dissatisfaction stemming from the war enabled Harding to win by a landslide. The pace of the second Industrial Revolution and the growing urbanization split the party in two. One faction was centered in the rural South and West. Traditional Democrats who had supported Wilson stood for Prohibition, fundamentalism, the Klan, and other facets of the rural counterattack against the city. In contrast, a new breed of Democrat was emerging in the metropolitan areas of the North and Midwest. Immigrants and their descendants began to become active in the Democratic party. Catholic or Jewish in religion and strongly opposed to Prohibition, they had little in common with their rural counterparts. The split within the party surfaced dramatically at the national convention in New York in 1924. Held in Madison Square Garden, a hall built in the 1890s and too small and



 CHAPTER 25

TRANSITION TO MODERN AMERICA

 cramped for the more than one thousand delegates, the convention soon degenerated into what one observer described as a “snarling, cursing, tenuous, suicidal, homicidal roughhouse.” City slickers mocked the “rubes and hicks” from the “sticks”; populist orators struck back by denouncing the city as “wanting in national ideals, devoid of conscience . . . rooted in corruption, directed by greed, and dominated by selfishness.” An urban resolution to condemn the Ku Klux Klan led to a spirited response from the rural faction and its defeat by a single vote. Then for nine days, in the midst of a stifling heat wave, the delegates divided between Alfred E. Smith, the governor of New York, and William G. McAdoo of California, Wilson’s secretary of the treasury. When it became clear that neither the city nor the rural candidate could win a majority, both men withdrew; on the 103rd ballot, the weary Democrats finally chose John W. Davis, a former West Virginia congressman and New York corporation lawyer, as their compromise nominee. In the ensuing election, the conservative Davis had difficulty setting his views apart from those of Republican president Calvin Coolidge. For the discontented, Senator Robert La Follette of Wisconsin offered an alternative by running on an independent Progressive Party ticket. Coolidge won easily, receiving 15 million votes to 8 million for Davis and nearly 5 million for La Follette. Davis had made the poorest showing of any Democratic candidate in the twentieth century.

Election of 1928
Electoral Vote by State


Popular Vote


REPUBLICAN
Herbert C. Hoover 


21,391,381


DEMOCRATIC
Alfred E. Smith 


15,016,443


330,725


MINOR PARTIES

36,738,549






































































THE ELECTION OF 1924

Candidate
Coolidge
Davis
La Follette


Party
Republican
Democrat
Progressive


Popular
Vote
15,725,016
8,386,503
4,822,856


Electoral
Vote


 Yet the Democrats were in far better shape than this setback indicated. Beginning in 1922, the party had made heavy inroads into the GOP majority in Congress. The Democrats took seventy-eight seats away from the Republicans in that election, many of them in the cities of the East and Midwest. In New York alone, they gained thirteen new congressmen, all but one in districts with heavy immigrant populations. Even in 1924, the Republican vote in large cities declined as many urban voters chose La Follette in the absence of an attractive Democratic candidate. In 1926, the Democrats came within one vote of controlling the Senate and picked up nine more seats in the House in metropolitan areas. The large cities were swinging clearly into the Democratic column; all the party needed was a charismatic leader who could fuse the older rural elements with the new urban voters.

The Election of 1928
 The selection of Al Smith as the Democratic candidate in 1928 indicated the growing power of the city. Born on the Lower East Side of Manhattan of mixed Irish-German ancestry, Smith was

 the prototype of the urban Democrat. He was Catholic; he was associated with a big-city machine; he was a “wet” who wanted to end Prohibition. Starting out in the Fulton Fish Market as a boy, he had joined Tammany Hall and gradually climbed the political ladder, rising from subpoena server to state legislator to governor, a post he held with distinction for nearly a decade. Rejected by rural Democrats in 1924, he still had to prove he could unite the South and West behind his leadership. His lack of education, poor grammar, and distinctive New York accent all hurt him, as did his eastern provincialism. When reporters asked him about his appeal in the states west of the Mississippi, he replied, “What states are west of the Mississippi?” The choice facing the American voter in 1928 seemed unusually clear-cut. Herbert Hoover was a Protestant, a dry, and an oldstock American, who stood for efficiency and individualism; Smith was a Catholic, a wet, and a descendant of immigrants, who was closely associated with big-city politics. Just as Smith appealed to new voters in the cities, so Hoover won the support of many oldline Democrats who feared the city, Tammany Hall, and the pope. Yet beneath the surface, as Allan J. Lichtman points out, there were “striking similarities between Smith and Hoover.” Both were self-made men who embodied the American belief in freedom of opportunity and upward mobility. Neither advocated any significant degree of economic change nor any redistribution of national wealth or power. Though religion proved to be the most important issue in the minds of the voters, hurting Smith far more than prohibition or his identification with the city, the Democratic candidate’s failure to spotlight the growing cracks in prosperity or to offer alternative economic policies ensured his defeat.

Conclusion: The Old and the New


 The 1928 election was a dubious victory for the Republicans. Hoover won easily, defeating Smith by more than six million votes and carrying such traditionally Democratic states as Oklahoma, Texas, and Florida. But Smith succeeded for the first time in winning a majority of votes for the Democrats in the nation’s twelve largest cities. A new Democratic electorate was emerging, consisting of Catholics and Jews, Irish and Italians, Poles and Greeks. Now the task was to unite the traditional Democrats of the South and West with the urban voters of the Northeast and Midwest.



Watch the Video


 Prosperity of the 1920s and the Great Depression

Conclusion: The Old and
 the New The election-night celebrations at Hoover campaign headquarters were muted by Prohibition and by the president-elect’s natural reserve. Had Hoover known what lay just ahead for the country, and for his presidency, no doubt the party would have been even more somber. During the 1920s, America struggled to enter the modern era. The economics of mass production and the politics of urbanization drove the country forward, but the persistent appeal of individualism and rural-based values held it back. Americans achieved greater prosperity than ever before, but the prosperity was unevenly distributed. Further, as the outbursts of nativism, ethnic and racial bigotry, and intolerance revealed, prosperity hardly guaranteed generosity or unity. Nor, for that matter, did it guarantee continued prosperity, even for those who benefited initially. As much as America changed during the 1920s, in one crucial respect the country remained as before. The American economy, for all its remarkable productive capacity, was astonishingly fragile. This was the message Hoover was soon to learn.

 The development of mile-long breadlines in cities and towns throughout the country following the onset of the Great Depression in 1929 symbolized the crushing end of the prosperity of the 1920s.

 Complete the Assignment The Scopes “Monkey” Trial: Contesting Cultural Differences on myhistorylab

Law and
Society


D


 uring the postwar 1920s, a “new” America emerged. Largely urban, secular, and focused on the future, the “modern” culture challenged the traditional values and familiar way of life of many Americans, especially those living in rural areas. Intense cultural conflict characterized the decade. Those who saw in modern culture numerous threats to the moral fabric of the nation increasingly turned to their faith for stability and comfort. The popularity of Protestant fundamentalism, which held to a literal interpretation of the Bible, increased dramatically during this period, particularly in the South. According to fundamentalists, one of the key modernist attacks on traditional religious beliefs came from the realm of science. Advancements in science in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries fueled modernization, and Americans increasingly placed their faith in the authority of science and progress. There was growing acceptance of Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution, which demonstrated that plants and animals—including humans—evolved from lower life forms by a process of natural selection. By the 1920s, discussion of evolution theory had entered public school classrooms. Though many Americans could reconcile a belief in evolution with their religious beliefs, fundamentalists thought the theory of evolution contradicted the Biblical story of creation and was therefore blasphemous—particularly the notion that humans evolved from a lower primate form. Fundamentalists led a charge against evolution, particularly against its teaching in the schools, and several southern states turned to



The Scopes “Monkey” Trial
Contesting Cultural Differences
 legislation to keep the scientific theory out of the classroom. Such a law was introduced in Tennessee by John W. Butler, a state representative. The statute passed both houses of the Tennessee legislature by a large majority and was signed into law by the governor in March 1925. The Butler Act, as it became known, made it unlawful for a teacher in statesupported schools “to teach any theory that denies the story of Divine Creation of man as taught in the Bible, and to teach instead that man has descended from a lower order of animals.” Violating the law was designated a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $100 to $500 for each offense. In response to the Butler Act, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) advertised for teachers in Tennessee willing to challenge the new law in court. Civic boosters in Dayton, eager to draw attention to their small town in eastern Tennessee, persuaded John Scopes, a science teacher and assistant football coach in Dayton, to accept the ACLU offer. Scopes was a logical choice. He opposed the antievolution law on philosophical grounds, and he had little to lose personally, being twenty-four and single and with no particular desire to remain in Dayton. Furthermore, he was a likable young man, popular around town and with otherwise conventional views, and so wouldn’t muddy the legal waters by provoking the judge or jury unnecessarily. Scopes admitted that anyone teaching from the state’s approved biology textbook, Hunter’s Civic Biology, which included sections on evolution of animals and humans, would be breaking the new law. Scopes had used the text as a substitute biology teacher. He agreed to be arrested to test the law in court.

 From the start, Tennessee v. John Thomas Scopes was about far more than Scopes. Supporters and opponents of the antievolution law converged on Dayton from around the country. The law’s supporters brought in the renowned orator William Jennings Bryan, a three-time Democratic nominee for president, former secretary of state, and fervent Christian fundamentalist, to assist the prosecution, headed by chief prosecutor A. Thomas Stewart, attorney general of Tennessee. Since the early 1920s Bryan had led the charge against the theories of Charles Darwin and the teaching of evolution in the schools; his syndicated newspaper column, “Weekly Bible Talks,” frequently hammered Darwinism and what Bryan considered excessive faith in science. The ACLU summoned counsel for the defense and Clarence Darrow, one of the most celebrated trial lawyers in America in the 1920s, volunteered his services as the chief defense attorney. He delighted in defending unpopular causes, including labor activists (he had defended socialist leader Eugene V. Debs in the Pullman strike of 1894), political radicals, and murder suspects. He was also an outspoken agnostic, doubting the existence of God, and a vocal critic of Christian fundamentalists, including Bryan. A small army of reporters descended upon Dayton, including journalist H. L. Mencken, widely known for his biting wit and disdain for middle America, who was writing for the Baltimore Sun and the American Mercury. From all over America and from various foreign countries the journalists came, eager to convey to their readers every detail of “the Monkey trial,” as the trial was dubbed. The new technology of radio supplemented the newspaper

 coverage, especially after Judge John Raulston agreed to allow microphones in the courtroom. The proceedings opened on Friday, July 10. To the prosecution, the case was fairly simple. They held that the state had the constitutional right to set the curriculum in state-funded schools. The question to be decided was whether Scopes had violated the Butler Act by covering the theory of evolution in his classroom. Prosecution witnesses, including a school official and several of Scopes’s students, testified that he had. Darrow and the defense argued principally that the antievolution law violated several clauses of the Tennessee constitution as well as the guarantee of freedom of speech and provision for separation of church and state in the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. Contending that the law also violated the Fourteenth Amendment’s declaration that no state was permitted to pass a law that abridged citizens’ privileges, Darrow argued, “If today you can take a thing

 like evolution and make it a crime to teach it in the public school, tomorrow you can make it a crime to teach it in the private schools, and the next year you can make it a crime to teach it to the hustings or in the church.” Darrow and the defense team wanted to introduce scientific evidence supporting the theory of evolution by summoning a number of scientists from various fields as expert witnesses. The prosecution protested opening the case to this wider issue. “I say, bar the door and not allow science to enter,” declared Stewart, the chief prosecutor. After hearing arguments from both sides and initial testimony from the defense’s first witness, the court sided with Stewart and Tennessee. “The evidence of experts would shed no light on the issues,” Judge Raulston ruled. It was Bryan’s speech for the prosecution that brought real excitement to the courtroom and the nationwide attention to Dayton that the city’s supporters had hoped for. The Great Commoner, as Bryan was known,

 commenced softly, conveying an impression of calm reason. But as he warmed to his subject, his voice rose and his words became more intense. He denied that he or most of the citizens of Tennessee advocated teaching the Bible in schools. And even if they did advocate it, the Tennessee constitution prevented them. The question at hand was different, Bryan said. The question is, can a minority in this state come in and compel a teacher to teach that the Bible is not true, and make the parents of these children pay the expenses of the teacher to tell their children what these people believe is false and dangerous? Has it come to a time when the minority can take charge of a state like Tennessee and compel the majority to pay their teachers while they take religion out of the heart of the children of the parents who pay the teachers? Bryan was a master at working an audience, and the jurors and spectators in the courtroom—and a larger

 group listening in the yard outside the court—hung on his every word. They laughed as he lampooned the Darwinians; they nodded agreement as he affirmed the teachings of the Bible. They thundered their approval of his wry observation: “The Christian believes that man came from above, but the evolutionist believes he must have come from below.” Following a loud “Amen!” from the audience, Darrow, who had been sitting silently through Bryan’s long speech, interjected: “I hope the reporters got the amens in the record. I want somewhere, at some point, to find some court where a picture of this will be painted.” Such information in the official record would ensure higher courts a more complete picture of the atmosphere in the courtroom. Denied the opportunity to call on expert witnesses to provide support for the theory of evolution, Darrow found another opportunity after the defense made an unusual request to place Bryan on the witness stand. There was some question as to whether Bryan could or should testify, as he had no firsthand knowledge of what Scopes had or hadn’t done, and was no expert on the constitutions of Tennessee or the United States. But the defense asked permission to question Bryan as an expert witness on the Bible. Bryan indicated willingness and Judge Raulston—who relished the publicity the case was generating—let the two celebrities go at each other. What resulted was one of the most dramatic courtroom scenes in American history. Darrow asked Bryan whether he had given “considerable study to the Bible.” Bryan responded, “I have studied the Bible for about fifty years, or some time more than that . . . .” Given that opening, Darrow went on to ask questions designed to undermine a strictly literal interpretation of the Bible. Darrow: Do you claim that everything in the Bible should be literally interpreted? Bryan: I believe everything in the Bible should be accepted as it is given there. Some of the Bible is

 given illustratively. For instance: “Ye are the salt of the earth.” I would not insist that man was actually salt, or that he had flesh of salt, but it is used in the sense of salt as saving God’s people. Darrow pressed on. Did Bryan believe that a whale swallowed Jonah? Bryan: When I read that a big fish swallowed Jonah—it does not say whale— Darrow: Doesn’t it? Are you sure? Bryan: That is my recollection of it. A big fish, and I believe it, and I believe in a God who can make a whale and can make a man and make both do what He pleases. Darrow continued his line of questioning, asking Bryan to interpret other passages of the Bible. Had Joshua really made the sun stand still? Bryan:

 I believe what the Bible says.

 Did that mean that the sun actually stood still, or that the Earth stopped spinning? For that matter, did Mr. Bryan believe that the Earth circled the sun, or vice versa? Bryan assured Darrow and the court that he knew that the Earth orbited the sun. But he allowed that the author of the Joshua passage might not have. “I believe that the Bible is inspired, an inspired author. Whether one who wrote as he was directed to write understood the things he was writing about, I don’t know.” Darrow interrupted, but Bryan went on: “I believe it was inspired by the Almighty, and He may have used language that could be understood at that time—instead of using language that could not be understood until Darrow was born.” Listeners, siding with Bryan but squirming under Darrow’s questioning, broke into loud applause here. When the applause recurred, Darrow said sarcastically, “Great applause from the bleachers.” Bryan: From those whom you call “yokels.” Darrow: I have never called them yokels. The exchange grew nastier.

 Bryan: Those are the people whom you insult. Darrow: You insult every man of science and learning in the world because he does not believe in your fool religion. Judge Raulston: I will not stand for that. Darrow: For what he is doing? Judge Raulston: I am talking to both of you. Such dignity as the trial initially possessed had disappeared by now. After the exchange continued for some time, Darrow asked Bryan if he had ever wondered where Cain’s wife came from. “No, sir,” Bryan replied. “I leave the agnostics to hunt for her.” Darrow asked Bryan if the six days of creation were twenty-four-hour days. Bryan allowed that they might have been longer. Finally Tom Stewart broke into Darrow’s questioning. “What is the purpose of this examination?” the chief prosecutor demanded. “The purpose is to cast ridicule on everybody who believes in the Bible,” Bryan asserted. Darrow answered differently. “We have the purpose of preventing bigots and ignoramuses from controlling the education of the United States.” Darrow was allowed to continue his questioning about creation. Might it have lasted more than a modern week? Bryan granted that it could have. How much more? “It might have continued for millions of years.” Darrow’s examination of Bryan lasted two hours. Before the end it was obvious that it had little to do with the case at hand—but everything to do with the larger issue joined by Darrow and Bryan. As a reporter for the Nashville Banner explained, “In reality, it was a debate between Darrow and Bryan on Biblical history, on agnosticism and belief in revealed religion.” Not surprisingly, judgments regarding the outcome of the debate depended on the source of those judgments. The New York Times thought Darrow scored a clear victory. “Mr. Bryan’s complete lack of interest in many of

 the things closely connected with such religious questions as he had been supporting for many years was strikingly shown again and again by Mr. Darrow,” the Times explained. The Memphis Commercial Appeal thought Bryan had held his own: “Darrow succeeded in showing that Bryan knows little about the science of the world. Bryan succeeded in bearing witness bravely to the faith which he believes transcends all the learning of men.” The reaction to the trial’s verdict was similar. Scopes, to no one’s surprise, was convicted of violating the law and Judge Raulston fined him $100. Even Darrow, intending to appeal the verdict to a higher court, recommended that the jury find Scopes guilty. Antievolutionists in Tennessee and elsewhere took the conviction as vindication of their beliefs. But to many Americans with more secular views, the conviction was simply further evidence of the wrongheadedness of Bryan and the Tennessee legislature. When Bryan died suddenly just five days after the trial ended, a southern journalist approached Darrow for comment. “People down here believe that Bryan died of a broken heart because of your questioning,” the journalist said. Darrow, referring to Bryan’s notoriously large appetite, reportedly responded, “Broken heart nothing. He died of a busted belly.” H. L. Mencken remarked, “God aimed at Darrow, missed, and hit Bryan instead.”

 The Scopes trial settled nothing. The defense appealed the conviction to the Tennessee Supreme Court, where it was set aside on a technicality. But the antievolution law was left intact, and stood for another forty years, until the Tennessee legislature repealed it in 1967. In the immediate aftermath of the Scopes trial, both sides claimed moral victory, and the rift that gave rise to the case simply grew wider. Fundamentalism was discredited in large parts of urban America, but it sank roots in the rural regions of the country, becoming stronger than ever, if sometimes less visible. Several state legislatures considered antievolution bills in the latter half of the 1920s, but only Georgia and Mississippi actually passed laws restricting teaching of Darwin’s theory. Concern over diminishing sales in the South and West, however, drove textbook publishers to revise coverage of evolution in many textbooks—deemphasizing the topic or eliminating it entirely. With or without legislation opposing its teaching, evolution did disappear from many classrooms. In 1960, the liberal New Republic declared, “The Monkey Trial is now a historical curiosity”—a judgment that proved premature when evolution reemerged as a controversial issue. The constitutional question of whether the First Amendment permitted states to ban teaching of a theory that contradicted religious beliefs had not been resolved by the Scopes case. In the 1968 case Epperson v. Arkansas,

 however, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that such bans were unconstitutional. During the 1970s and 1980s various Sunbelt school districts mandated that “creationism”—essentially the Biblical version of life’s origins, though typically without the explicit references to Genesis—be given equal time in the classroom with evolution. Arkansas and Louisiana passed such laws, but in 1987 the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Edwards v. Aguillard that these laws were also unconstitutional. Still the issue refused to die. In 1999, the Kansas school board ordered that the theory of evolution should be deemphasized in the state’s classrooms. The Kansas board eventually changed its mind, but in 2005 it reversed course again, directing teachers to point out the deficiencies in the theory of evolution, in the name of “intelligent design,” the latest variant of creationism. Other states considered similar measures, demonstrating, if nothing else, that the Scopes trial was far more than a curiosity from the past.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
Why did different observers interpret the outcome of the Scopes trial so differently? 2. Why does the issue of evolution in the public schools continue to resurface decades after laws banning its teaching were found unconstitutional? 




 CHAPTER 25

CHAPTER REVIEW

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 25 Transition to Modern America on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1919 U.S.
agents arrest 1,700 in Red Scare raids; 
 Eighteenth Amendment (Prohibition) ratified Nineteenth Amendment passed, granting women the right to vote Fordney-McCumber tariff becomes law; T. S. Eliot publishes The Waste Land Newspapers expose Ku Klux Klan graft, torture, and murder Senate probes Teapot Dome scandal; National Origins Quota Act restricts immigration from Europe and bans immigration from Asia

 1925 John Scopes convicted of teaching theory of evolution in violation of Tennessee law (July) Charles Lindbergh completes first nonstop transatlantic flight from New York to Paris (May); Sacco and Vanzetti executed (August); Babe Ruth hits 60th home run (September)



 1928 Hoover defeats Smith for president

CHAPTER REVIEW
The Second Industrial Revolution 
The Rural Counterattack


 What was new about the American economy in the 1920s?

 How did conservatives resist the changes of the decade?

 The American economy in the 1920s underwent a second industrial revolution. Powered by electricity and featuring the mass production of automobiles and other consumer goods, the second industrial revolution lifted the American standard of living to new heights. (p. 589)

 The changes of the 1920s alarmed many conservatives, who tried to resist them. The police and courts cracked down on radicals; prohibition outlawed liquor; the Ku Klux Klan attacked immigrants and minorities; Congress restricted immigration; and fundamentalist Christians decried the changing code of morality and the teaching of evolution in the schools. (p. 598)

 City life in the Jazz Age Politics in the 1920s How did life in the cities change after World War I?

 During the 1920s, the focus of American life shifted to the cities, which for the first time contained most of the American population. Women found new opportunities to express themselves, and sports, music, literature, and the arts flourished as never before. (p. 592)

























 How did the politics of the 1920s reflect changes in the economy and in American society?

 The 1920s were a decade of Republican politics. Presidents Harding, Coolidge, and Hoover favored business and the wealthy. In the election of 1928, voters had a clear choice between Hoover, the candidate of the countryside and conservatism, and Al Smith, the candidate of the cities and change, Hoover won in a landslide. (p. 603)



















KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Harlem Renaissance An African American cultural, literary, and artistic movement centered in Harlem, in New York City, in the 1920s. Harlem, the largest black community in the world outside of Africa, was considered the cultural capital of African Americans. p. 595 
 Prohibition The ban on the manufacture, sale, and transportation of alcoholic beverages in the United States. The Eighteenth Amendment, adopted in 1919, established prohibition. It was repealed by the TwentyFirst Amendment in 1933. p. 600

 Red Scare A wave of anticommunist, antiforeign, and antilabor hysteria that swept over America in 1919. It resulted in the deportation of many alien residents and violated the civil liberties of many of its victims. p. 599

 Nativism Hostility to things foreign. p. 602 National Origins Quota Act This 1924 law established a quota system that restricted immigration from Asia and southern and Eastern Europe and reduced the annual total of immigrants. p. 603

STUDY RESOURCES

 Scopes Trial Also called the “monkey trial,” the 1924 Scopes trial was a contest between modern liberalism and religious fundamentalism. John T. Scopes was prosecuted for teaching Darwinian evolution in defiance of Tennessee state law. He was found guilty and fined $100. Scopes’s conviction was later set aside on a technicality. p. 603



 Teapot Dome scandal A 1924 scandal in which Secretary of the Interior Albert Fall was convicted of accepting bribes in exchange for leasing government-owned oil lands in Wyoming (Teapot Dome) and California (Elks Hill) to private businessmen. p. 603

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
How did the automobile increase the independence of young people during the 1920s? 
 3. What did the Red Scare and the desire for immigration reform have in common?

 2. Why did the new opportunities for women upset conservatives?

 4. How did the presidential election of 1928 reflect the anxieties of the postwar era?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 25 on MyHistoryLab The Second Industrial Revolution ◾

View the Closer Look The Great White Way – Times
Square p. 591


City Life in the Jazz Age
◾


Read the Document Elanor Rowland Wembridge,
“Petting and the Campus” (1925) p. 594


◾


Complete the Assignment Marcus Garvey: Racial
Redemption and Black Nationalism p. 596
Read the Document
Garvey p. 594


◾


Pearson Profiles, Marcus


Watch the Video Watch the Video: The Harlem
Renaissance p. 598


The Rural Counterattack
Read the Document A. Mitchell Palmer on the Menace
 of Communism (1920) p. 599

Read the Document
Vanzetti p. 601


 Court Statements from Sacco and

Read the Document
(1924) p. 602


Creed of Klanswomen


 Politics of the 1920s Read the Document Executive Orders and Senate Resolutions on Teapot Dome p. 604

◾


 Watch the Video Prosperity of the 1920s and the Great Depression p. 607 Complete the Assignment The Scopes “Monkey” Trial: Contesting Cultural Differences p. 608

◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




Franklin D. Roosevelt
 and the New Deal

Contents and Learning Objectives Questions
THE GREAT DEPRESSION PG. 614

THE IMPACT OF THE NEW DEAL PG. 627

 What were the causes and effects of the Great Depression?

 What was the lasting impact of the New Deal?

FIGHTING THE DEPRESSION PG. 619

END OF THE NEW DEAL PG. 630

 How did Franklin Roosevelt fight the Depression?

 How and why did the New Deal end?

ROOSEVELT AND REFORM PG. 624

FEATURE ESSAY
Eleanor Roosevelt and the Quest for Social Justice 
 How did the New Deal reform American life?

 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

