Chapter 8 Republican Ascendancy


Limits of Equality
 British visitors often expressed contempt for Jeffersonian society. Wherever they traveled in the young republic, they met ill-mannered people inspired with a ruling passion for liberty and equality. Charles William Janson, an Englishman who lived in the United States for thirteen years, recounted an exchange he found particularly unsettling that had occurred at the home of an American acquaintance. “On knocking at the door,” he reported, “it was opened by a servant maid, whom I had never before seen.” The woman’s behavior astonished Janson. “The following is the dialogue, word for word, which took place on this occasion:—‘Is your master at home?’—‘I have no master.’—‘Don’t you live here?’—‘I stay here.’—‘And who are you then?’—‘Why, I am Mr.———’s help. I’d have you know, man, that I am no sarvant [sic]; none but negers [sic] are sarvants.’” Standing on his friend’s doorstep, Janson encountered the authentic voice of Jeffersonian republicanism—self-confident, assertive, blatantly racist, and having no intention of being relegated to low social status. The maid who answered the door believed she was her employer’s equal, perhaps not in wealth but surely in character. She may have even dreamed of someday owning a house staffed with “help.” American society fostered such ambition. In the early nineteenth century, thousands of settlers poured across the Appalachian

 Mountains or moved to cities in search of opportunity. Thomas Jefferson and individuals who stood for public office under the banner of the Republican Party claimed to speak for these people. The limits of the Jeffersonian vision were obvious even to contemporaries. The people who spoke most eloquently about equal opportunity often owned slaves. As early as the 1770s, the famed English essayist Samuel Johnson had chided Americans for their hypocrisy. “How is it,” he asked the indignant rebels, “that we hear the loudest yelps for liberty from the drivers of Negroes?” Little had changed since the Revolution. African Americans, who represented onefifth of the population of the United States, were totally excluded from the new opportunities opening up in the cities and the West. Indeed, the maid in the incident just described insisted—with no apparent sense of inconsistency—that her position was superior to that of blacks, who were brought involuntarily to lifelong servitude. t is not surprising that in this highly charged racial climate that leaders of the Federalist Party accused the Republicans, especially those who lived in the South, of disingenuousness, and in 1804, one Massachusetts Federalist sarcastically defined “Jeffersonian” as “an Indian word, signifying ‘a great tobacco planter, who had herds of black slaves.’” The race issue was always

I


Read the Document


Charles William Janson, The Stranger in America


 Charles William Janson published his book, The Stranger in America in 1807. In it, he offered a dim view of Jeffersonian America and the passion for liberty and equality it represented.



 CHAPTER 8

REPUBLICAN ASCENDANCY: THE JEFFERSONIAN VISION

 just beneath the surface of political maneuvering. Indeed, the acquisition of the Louisiana Territory and the War of 1812 fanned fundamental disagreement about the spread of slavery to the western territories. In other areas, the Jeffersonians did not fulfill even their own high expectations. As members of an opposition party during the presidency of John Adams, they insisted on a strict interpretation of the Constitution, peaceful foreign relations, and a reduction of the role of the federal government in the lives of the average citizens. But following the election of 1800, Jefferson and his supporters discovered that unanticipated pressures, foreign and domestic, forced them to moderate these goals. Before he retired from public office, Jefferson interpreted the Constitution in a way that permitted the government to purchase the Louisiana Territory when the opportunity arose; he regulated the national economy with a rigor that would have surprised Alexander Hamilton; and he led the country to the brink of war. Some Americans praised the president’s pragmatism; others felt betrayed. For a man who played a leading role in the revolt against George III, it must have been shocking in 1807 to find himself labeled a “despot” in a popular New England newspaper. “Give ear no longer to the siren voice of

 democracy and Jeffersonian liberty,” the editor shrieked. “It is a cursed delusion, adopted by traitors, and recommended by sycophants.”

Regional Identities in a New
Republic
 How did the Republic’s growth shape the market economy and relations with Native Americans? During the early decades of the nineteenth century, the population of the United States experienced substantial growth. The 1810 census counted 7,240,000 Americans, a jump of almost two million in just ten years. Of this total, approximately 20 percent were black slaves, the majority of whom lived in the South. The large population increase in the nation was the result primarily of natural reproduction, since during Jefferson’s presidency few immigrants moved to the New World. The largest single group in this society was children under the age of sixteen, boys and girls who were born after Washington’s election and who defined their own futures at a time when the nation’s boundaries were rapidly expanding. For

NORTH AMERICA IN 1800

St
L LO
 aw W re ER nc C e R . AN A

 DA

 In the 1790s, diplomatic agreements with Britain and Spain and defeat of the Native Americans at the Battle of Fallen Timbers opened the way to U.S. settlement of the land beyond the Appalachian Mountains.

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

C


 ol um b

 ia R.

Br
 i ti sh

N.H.


R.I.
 CONN.

Pittsburgh


OHIO TERR.

R.


N.J.


MD. DEL.
Potomac R. 
.
 oR O hi

 MASS.

N.Y.


Cincinnati


St. Louis


(Mass.)


 PA.

INDIANA TERR.

 LOUISIANA

 MAINE

 VT.

Battle of
Fallen Timbers


.


Ceded by Spain
 to France

D.C.
 VA.

 KY.

 do

UNITED STATES N.C.

 TENN.

E


Mi s
 siss

N


 ippi R.

 a lor Co

W


S.C.
GA. MISSISSIPPI TERR.

S


P
A


 IN

PACIFIC OCEAN

CA NA DA

 es

M


 iss ou ri R

 e

 e nc

 k La

OREGON COUNTRY
Claimed by Great Britain, Spain, and United States 
 es Pr

UP PE R

Gre
 at

 FLORIDA o Ri

 de an Gr

 MEXICO

Gulf of Mexico




 500 miles 500 kilometers

ATLANTIC OCEAN

Regional Identities in a New Republic


 white Americans, it was a time of heightened optimism, and many people possessing entrepreneurial skills or engineering capabilities aggressively made their way in a society that seemed to rate personal merit higher than family background. Even as Americans defended the rights of individual states, they were forming strong regional identifications. In commerce and politics, they perceived themselves as representatives of distinct subcultures—as Southerners, New Englanders, or Westerners. No doubt, the broadening geographic horizons reflected improved transportation links that enabled people to travel more easily within the various sections. But the growing regional mentality was also the product of defensiveness. While local writers celebrated New England’s cultural distinctiveness, for example, they were clearly uneasy about the region’s rejection of the democratic values that were sweeping the rest of the nation. Moreover, during this period people living south of the Potomac River began describing themselves as Southerners, not as citizens of the Chesapeake or the Carolinas as they had done in colonial times. This shifting focus of attention resulted not only from an awareness of shared economic interests but also from a sensitivity to outside attacks on slavery. Several times during the first fifteen years of the nineteenth century, conspirators actually advocated secession, and though the schemes failed, they revealed the powerful sectional loyalties that threatened national unity.

Westward the Course of Empire
 The most striking changes occurred in the West. Before the end of the American Revolution, only Indian traders and a few hardy settlers had ventured across the Appalachians. After 1790, however, a flood of people rushed west to stake out farms on the rich soil. Many settlers followed the so-called northern route across Pennsylvania or New York into the old Northwest Territory. Pittsburgh and Cincinnati, both strategically located on the Ohio River, became important commercial ports. In 1803, Ohio joined the Union, and territorial governments were formed in Indiana (1800), Louisiana (1805), Michigan (1805), Illinois (1809), and Missouri (1812). Southerners poured into the new states of Kentucky (1792) and Tennessee (1796). Wherever they located, Westerners depended on water transportation. Because of the extraordinarily high cost of hauling goods overland, riverboats represented the only economical means of carrying agricultural products to distant markets. The Mississippi River was the crucial commercial link for the entire region, and Westerners did not feel secure so long as New Orleans, the southern gate to the Mississippi, remained under Spanish control. Families that moved west attempted to transplant familiar eastern customs to the frontier. In some areas, such as the Western Reserve, a narrow strip of land along Lake Erie in northern Ohio, the influence of New England remained strong. In general, however, a creative mixing of peoples of different backgrounds in a strange environment generated distinctive folkways. Westerners developed their own heroes, such as Mike Fink, the legendary keelboatman of the Mississippi River; Daniel Boone, the famed trapper and Indian fighter; and the eye-gouging “alligatormen” of Kentucky and Tennessee. Americans who crossed the mountains were ambitious and self-confident, excited by the challenge of almost



 unlimited geographic mobility. A French traveler observed in 1802 that throughout the region he visited, there was not a single farm “where one cannot with confidence ask the owner from whence he had emigrated, or, according to the light manners of the Americans, ‘What part of the world do you come from?”’ These rootless people, he explained, “incline perpetually toward the most distant fringes of American settlement.”

Native American Resistance
 At the beginning of the nineteenth century, a substantial number of Native Americans lived in the greater Ohio Valley; the land belonged to them. The tragedy was that the Indians, many dependent on trade with the white people and ravaged by disease, lacked unity. Small groups of Native Americans, allegedly representing the interests of an entire tribe, sold off huge pieces of land, often for whiskey and trinkets. Such fraudulent transactions disgusted the Shawnee leaders Tenskwatawa (known as the Prophet) and his brother Tecumseh. Tecumseh rejected classification as a Shawnee and may have been the first native leader to identify himself self-consciously as “Indian.” These men desperately attempted to revitalize native cultures, and against overwhelming odds, they briefly persuaded Native Americans living in the Indiana Territory to avoid contact with whites, to resist alcohol, and, most important, to hold on to their land. White intruders saw Tecumseh as a threat to progress, and during the War of 1812, they shattered the Indians’ dream of cultural renaissance. The populous Creek nation, located in the modern states of Alabama and Mississippi, also resisted the settlers’ advance, but its warriors were crushed by Andrew Jackson’s Tennessee militia at the battle of Horseshoe Bend (March 1814). Well-meaning Jeffersonians disclaimed any intention to destroy the Indians. The president talked of creating a vast reservation beyond the Mississippi River, just as the British had talked before the Revolution of a sanctuary beyond the Appalachian Mountains. He sent federal agents to “civilize” the Indians, to transform them into yeoman farmers. But even the most enlightened white thinkers of the day did not believe the Indians possessed cultures worth preserving. In fact, in 1835, the Democratic national convention selected a vice presidential candidate whose major qualification for high office seemed to be that he had killed Tecumseh. And as early as 1780, Jefferson himself—then serving as the governor of Virginia—instructed a military leader on the frontier, “If we are to wage a campaign against these Indians the end proposed should be their extermination, or their removal beyond the lakes of the Illinois river. The same world will scarcely do for them and us.”

Commercial Life in the Cities
 Before 1820, the prosperity of the United States depended primarily on its agriculture and trade. Jeffersonian America was by no stretch of the imagination an industrial economy. The overwhelming majority of the population—84 percent in 1810—was directly involved in agriculture. Southerners concentrated on the staple crops of tobacco, rice, and cotton, which they sold on the European market. In the North, people generally produced livestock and cereal crops. Regardless of location, however, the nation’s



 CHAPTER 8

REPUBLICAN ASCENDANCY: THE JEFFERSONIAN VISION

 farmers followed a backbreaking work routine that did not differ substantially from that of their parents and grandparents. Except for the cotton gin, important chemical and mechanical inventions did not appear in the fields for another generation. The merchant marine represented an equally important element in America’s preindustrial economy. At the turn of the century, ships flying the Stars and Stripes transported a large share of the world’s trade. Merchants in Boston, New York, and Philadelphia received handsome profits from such commerce. Their vessels provided essential links between European countries and their Caribbean colonies. France, for example, relied heavily on American transport for its sugar. These lucrative transactions, coupled with the export of domestic staples, especially cotton, generated impressive fortunes. Between 1793 and 1807, the year Jefferson imposed the embargo against Britain and France, American commerce enjoyed a more than 300 percent increase in the value of exports and in net earnings. Unfortunately, the boom did not last. The success of the “carrying trade” depended in large measure on friendly relations between the United States and the major European powers. When England and France began seizing American ships—as they both did after 1805—national prosperity suffered. The cities of Jeffersonian America functioned chiefly as depots for international trade. Only about 7 percent of the nation’s population lived in urban centers, and most of these people owed their livelihoods either directly or indirectly to the carrying trade. Recent studies revealed that several major port cities

 of the early republic—New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore, for example—had some of the highest population densities ever recorded in this country’s history. In 1800, more than forty thousand New Yorkers crowded into an area of only 1.5 square miles; in Philadelphia, some forty-six thousand people were packed into less than one square mile. As one historian explained, “The cities contained disproportionate numbers of young white males, free black men and women, and white widows. These people had below-average incomes and also an increasing propensity to live on their own rather than as dependents.” As is common today, many city dwellers rented living space, and since the demand for housing exceeded the supply, the rents were high. The booming carrying trade may actually have retarded the industrialization of the United States. The lure of large profits drew investment capital—a scarce resource in a developing society—into commerce. By contrast, manufacturing seemed too risky. One contemporary complained, “The brilliant prospects held out by commerce, caused our citizens to neglect the mechanical and manufacturing branches of industry.” This man may have exaggerated slightly to make his point. Samuel Slater, an English-born designer of textile machinery, did establish several cotton-spinning mills in New England, but until the 1820s these plants employed only a small number of workers. In fact, during this period far more cloth was produced in individual households than in factories. Another farsighted inventor, Robert Fulton, sailed the first American steamship up the Hudson River in 1807. In time, this marvelous innovation opened new markets for

 Before the Industrial Revolution, national prosperity depended on commercial capitalism. Jonathan Budington’s painting of Cannon House and Wharf (1792), the busy dock area of lower Manhattan, reflects the robust maritime trade of the new republic.

Jefferson as President


 domestic manufacturers, especially in the West. At the end of the War of 1812, however, few people anticipated how greatly power generated by fossil fuel would eventually transform the character of the American economy. Ordinary workers often felt threatened by the new machines. Skilled artisans who had spent years mastering a trade and who took pride in producing an object that expressed their own personalities found the industrial workplace alienating. Moreover, they rightly feared that innovative technology designed to achieve greater efficiency might throw traditional craftspeople out of work or, if not that, transform independent entrepreneurs into dependent wage laborers. One New Yorker, for example, writing in the Gazette and General Advertiser in 1801, warned tradespeople to be on guard against those who “will screw down the wages to the last thread . . . [and destroy] the independent spirit, so distinguished at present in our mechanics, and so useful in republics.”



Read the Document


Margaret Bayard Smith,
 Reflections upon Meeting Jefferson

Jefferson as President
 How did practical politics challenge Jefferson’s political principles? The District of Columbia seemed an appropriate capital for a Republican president. At the time of Jefferson’s first inauguration, Washington was still an isolated rural village, a far cry from the crowded centers of Philadelphia and New York. Jefferson fit comfortably into Washington society. He despised formal ceremony and sometimes shocked foreign dignitaries by meeting them in his slippers or a threadbare jacket. He spent as much time as his official duties allowed in reading and reflection. Isaac, one of Jefferson’s slaves, recounted, “Old master had abundance of books: sometimes would have twenty of ’em down on the floor at once; read fust one then tother.” The president was a poor public speaker. He wisely refused to deliver annual addresses before Congress. In personal conversation, however, Jefferson exuded considerable charm. His dinner parties were major intellectual as well as social events, and in this forum, the president regaled politicians with his knowledge of literature, philosophy, and science. According to Margaret Bayard Smith, the wife of a congressman, the president “has more ease than grace—all the winning softness of politeness, without the artificial polish of courts.” Notwithstanding his commitment to the life of the mind, Jefferson was a politician to the core. He ran for the presidency in order to achieve specific goals: the reduction of the size and cost of federal government, the repeal of obnoxious Federalist legislation such as the Alien and Sedition Acts, and the maintenance of international peace. To accomplish his program, Jefferson realized he needed the full cooperation of congressional Republicans, some of whom were fiercely independent men. Over such figures Jefferson exercised political mastery. He established close ties with the leaders of both houses of Congress, and while he seldom announced his plans in public, he made certain his legislative lieutenants knew exactly what he desired. Contemporaries who described Jefferson as a weak president—and some Federalists did just that—did not read the scores of memoranda he sent to political friends or witness the

 Margaret Bayard Smith wrote about life in Washington, D.C. during its early years as the nation’s capital. She was a friend of Thomas Jefferson through her husband Samuel Harrison Smith.

 informal meetings he held at the executive mansion with important Republicans. In two terms as president, Jefferson never had to veto a single act of Congress. Jefferson carefully selected the members of his cabinet. During Washington’s administration, he had witnessed—even provoked— severe infighting; as president, he nominated only those who enthusiastically supported his programs. James Madison, the leading figure at the Constitutional Convention, became secretary of state. For the Treasury, Jefferson chose Albert Gallatin, a Swiss-born financier who understood the complexities of the federal budget. “If I had the universe to choose from,” the president announced, “I could not change one of my associates to my better satisfaction.”

Jeffersonian Reforms
 A top priority of the new government was cutting the national debt. Throughout American history, presidents have advocated such reductions, but such rhetoric has seldom yielded tangible



 CHAPTER 8

REPUBLICAN ASCENDANCY: THE JEFFERSONIAN VISION

 results. Jefferson succeeded. He and Gallatin regarded a large federal deficit as dangerous to the health of republican institutions. In fact, both men associated debt with Alexander Hamilton’s Federalist financial programs, measures they considered harmful to republicanism. Jefferson claimed that legislators elected by the current generation did not have the right to mortgage the future of unborn Americans. Jefferson also wanted to diminish the activities of the federal government. He urged Congress to repeal all direct taxes, including the tax that had sparked the Whiskey Rebellion in 1794. Secretary Gallatin linked federal income to the carrying trade. He calculated that the entire cost of national government could be borne by customs receipts. As long as commerce flourished, revenues provided sufficient sums. When international war closed foreign markets, however, the flow of funds dried up. To help pay the debt inherited from the Adams administration, Jefferson ordered substantial cuts in the national budget. The president closed several American embassies in Europe. He also slashed military spending. In his first term, Jefferson reduced the size of the U.S. Army by 50 percent. This decision left only three thousand soldiers to guard the entire frontier. In addition, he retired a majority of the navy’s warships. When New Englanders claimed the cuts left the country defenseless, Jefferson countered with a glib argument. As ships of the U.S. Navy sailed the world’s oceans, he claimed, they were liable to provoke hostilities, perhaps even war; hence, by reducing the size of the fleet, he promoted peace. More than budgetary considerations prompted Jefferson’s military reductions. He was deeply suspicious of standing armies. In the event of foreign attack, he reasoned, the militia would rise in defense of the republic. No doubt, his experiences during the Revolution influenced his thinking on military affairs, for in 1776, an aroused populace had taken up arms against the British. To ensure that the citizen soldiers would receive professional leadership in battle, Jefferson created the Army Corps of Engineers and the military academy at West Point in 1802. Political patronage was a great burden to the new president. Loyal Republicans throughout the United States had worked hard for Jefferson’s victory, and as soon as he took office, they stormed the executive mansion seeking federal employment. While the president controlled several hundred jobs, he refused to dismiss all the Federalists. To be sure, he acted quickly to remove the socalled midnight appointees, highly partisan selections that Adams had made after learning of Jefferson’s election. But to transform federal hiring into an undisciplined spoils system, especially at the highest levels of the federal bureaucracy, seemed to Jefferson to be shortsighted. Moderate Federalists might be converted to the Republican Party, and, in any case, there was a good chance they possessed the expertise needed to run the government. At the end of his first term, half of the people holding office were appointees of Washington and Adams. Jefferson’s political moderation helped hasten the demise of the Federalist Party. This loose organization had nearly destroyed itself during the election of 1800, and following Adams’s defeat, prominent Federalist spokesmen such as Fisher Ames and John Jay withdrew from national affairs. They refused to adopt the popular forms of campaigning that the Republicans had developed so successfully during the late 1790s. The mere prospect of flattering the common

 people was odious enough to drive some Federalists into political retirement. Many of them also sensed that national expansion worked against their interests. The creation of new states and congressional reapportionment inevitably seemed to increase the number of Republican representatives in Washington. By 1805, the Federalists retained only a few seats in New England and Delaware. “The power of the [Jefferson] Administration,” confessed John Quincy Adams in 1802, “rests upon the support of a much stronger majority of the people throughout the Union than the former administrations ever possessed since the first establishment of the Constitution.”

The Louisiana Purchase
 When Jefferson first took office, he was confident that Louisiana as well as Florida would eventually become part of the United States. After all, Spain owned the territory, and Jefferson assumed he could persuade the rulers of that notoriously weak nation to sell their colonies. If that peaceful strategy failed, the president was prepared to threaten forcible occupation. In May 1801, however, prospects for the easy or inevitable acquisition of Louisiana suddenly darkened. Jefferson learned that Spain had secretly transferred title to the entire region to France, its powerful northern neighbor. To make matters worse, the French leader Napoleon seemed intent on reestablishing an empire in North America. Even as Jefferson sought additional information concerning the details of the transfer, Napoleon was dispatching a large army to put down a rebellion in France’s sugar-rich Caribbean colony, Haiti. From that island stronghold in the West Indies, French troops could occupy New Orleans and close the Mississippi River to American trade. A sense of crisis enveloped Washington. Some congressmen urged Jefferson to prepare for war against France. Tensions increased when the Spanish officials who still governed New Orleans announced the closing of that port to American commerce (October 1802). Jefferson and his advisers assumed that the Spanish had acted on orders from France, but despite this serious provocation, the president preferred negotiations to war. In January 1803, he asked James Monroe, a loyal Republican from Virginia, to join the American minister, Robert Livingston, in Paris. The president instructed the two men to explore the possibility of purchasing the city of New Orleans. Lest they underestimate the importance of their diplomatic mission, Jefferson reminded them, “There is on the globe one single spot, the possessor of which is our natural and habitual enemy. It is New Orleans.” If Livingston and Monroe failed, Jefferson realized he would be forced to turn to Great Britain for military assistance. Dependence on that country seemed repellent, but he recognized that as soon as French troops moved into Louisiana, “we must marry ourselves to the British fleet and nation.” By the time Monroe joined Livingston in France, Napoleon had lost interest in establishing an American empire. The army he sent to Haiti succumbed to tropical diseases. By the end of 1802, more than thirty thousand veteran troops had died. In a fit of disgust, Napoleon announced, “Damn sugar, damn coffee, damn colonies . . . I renounce Louisiana.” The diplomats from the United States knew nothing of these developments. They were taken by complete

Jefferson as President


View the Closer Look




Co
 lumbia R.

Map of Louisiana Purchase, 1803


Ft. Mandan
 Winter quarters 1804–1805

 Lewis’s Return

 ea

 t

La


 ke

PA. NA INDIANA TERR.

 OHIO

MD M D D.. MD.

Ohio R.


SIIAN ANA LOUISIANA H HASE PURCHASE

 MASS.

R.I.
CONN. N.J. N.J. DEL.

D.C.
 VA.

St.
S
 t. Louis

KY. N.C.

S


P


A


Mis
 siss ippi R.

R.
 ad o

 o

Mis


 IN

Natural Bo
 und ary

TENN. S.C.

MISSISSIPPI TERR.

 GA.

New
Ne
N
 ew Orlea e Orleans Orleanss o Ri

ATLANTIC OCEAN

SPA SP S PA P AN NIS NI IIS SH SPANISH FL LORI RID DA FLORIDA

Gulf of Mexico


 d an Gr

 e

Louisiana Purchase


VT. N.H.

.
 u ri R so

W


NS NTAI MOU

E
 r

 (part of Mass.)

N.Y.


Y
CK RO

N
 l Co

 MAINE

 s

 rn Retu Clark's

OREGON COUNTRY

PACIFIC OCEAN

Gr


St
.L
 aw re n

Ft. Clatsop
 Winter quarters 1805–1806

 ce R

.


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

Clark
Route of Lewis and Clar
 rk





 500 miles 500 kilometers

THE LOUISIANA PURCHASE AND THE ROUTE OF LEWIS AND CLARK

 Not until Lewis and Clark had explored the Far West did citizens of the United States realize just how much territory Jefferson had acquired through the Louisiana Purchase.

 surprise, therefore, when they learned that Talleyrand, the French minister for foreign relations, had offered to sell the entire Louisiana Territory in April 1803. For only $15 million, the Americans doubled the size of the United States with the Louisiana Purchase. In fact, Livingston and Monroe were not certain how much land they had actually purchased. When they asked Talleyrand whether the deal included Florida, he responded ambiguously, “You have made a noble bargain for yourselves, and I suppose you will make the most of it.” Even at that moment, Livingston realized that the transaction would alter the course of American history. “From this day,” he wrote, “the United States take their place among the powers of first rank.” The American people responded enthusiastically to news of the Louisiana Purchase. The only criticism came from a few disgruntled Federalists in New England who thought the United States was already too large. Jefferson, of course, was immensely relieved. The nation had avoided war with France. Nevertheless, he worried that the purchase might be unconstitutional. The president

 pointed out that the Constitution did not specifically authorize the acquisition of vast new territories and the incorporation of thousands of foreign citizens. To escape this apparent legal dilemma, Jefferson proposed an amendment to the Constitution. Few persons, even his closest advisers, shared the president’s scruples. Events in France soon forced Jefferson to adopt a more pragmatic course. When he heard that Napoleon had become impatient for his money, Jefferson rushed the papers to a Senate eager to ratify the agreement, and nothing more was said about amending the Constitution. Jefferson’s fears about the incorporation of this new territory were not unwarranted. The area that eventually became the state of Louisiana (1812) contained many people of French and Spanish background who possessed no familiarity with representative institutions. Their laws had been autocratic, their local government corrupt. To allow such persons to elect a representative assembly struck the president as dangerous. He did not even know whether the population of Louisiana would remain loyal to the United States.



 CHAPTER 8

REPUBLICAN ASCENDANCY: THE JEFFERSONIAN VISION

 Jefferson, therefore, recommended to Congress a transitional government consisting entirely of appointed officials. In March 1804, the Louisiana Government Bill narrowly passed the House of Representatives. Members of the president’s own party attacked the plan. After all, it imposed taxes on the citizens of Louisiana without their consent. According to one outspoken Tennessee congressman, the bill “establishes a complete despotism.” Most troubling perhaps was the fact that the legislation ran counter to Jefferson’s well-known republican principles.

The Lewis and Clark Expedition
 In the midst of the Louisiana controversy, Jefferson dispatched a secret message to Congress requesting $2,500 for the exploration of the Far West (January 1803). How closely this decision was connected to the Paris negotiations is not clear. Whatever the case may have been, the president asked his talented private secretary, Meriwether Lewis, to discover whether the Missouri River “may offer the most direct & practicable water communication across

Watch the Video


 this continent for the purposes of commerce.” The president also regarded the expedition as a wonderful opportunity to collect precise data about flora and fauna. He personally instructed Lewis in the latest techniques of scientific observation. While preparing for this great adventure, Lewis’s second in command, William Clark, assumed such a prominent role that the effort became known as the Lewis and Clark Expedition. The effort owed much of its success to a young Shoshoni woman known as Sacagawea. She served as a translator and helped persuade suspicious Native Americans that the explorers meant no harm. As Clark explained, “A woman with a party of men is a token of peace.” The exploring party set out from St. Louis in May 1804, and after barely surviving crossing the snow-covered Rocky Mountains, with their food supply running dangerously low, the Americans reached the Pacific Ocean in November 1805. The group returned safely the following September. The results of the expedition not only fulfilled Jefferson’s scientific expectations but also reaffirmed his faith in the future economic prosperity of the United States.

 Lewis & Clark: What were they trying to accomplish?

 When Thomas Jefferson purchased Louisiana from the French in 1803, Americans knew very little about their vast new territory. The President chose naturalist Meriwether Lewis and William Clark, a soldier and cartographer, to lead a “Voyage of Discovery” to explore these new lands. This stamp commemorates the expedition’s 1804 departure up the Missouri River and into the unknown West.

 Jefferson’s Critics

 Conflict with the Barbary States During this period, Jefferson dealt with another problem. For several decades, the North African states of Tangier, Algiers, Tripoli, and Tunis—the Barbary States—had preyed on commercial shipping. (See the Feature Essay, “Barbary Pirates and American Captives: The Nation’s First Hostage Crisis,” pp. 190–191.) Most European nations paid the pirates tribute, hoping thereby to protect merchants trading in the Mediterranean. In 1801, Jefferson, responding to Tripoli’s increased demand for tribute, decided the extortion had become intolerable and dispatched a small fleet to the Barbary Coast, where, according to one commander, the Americans intended to negotiate “through the mouth of a cannon.” Tripoli put up stiff resistance, however, and in one mismanaged engagement it captured the U.S. frigate Philadelphia. Ransoming the crew cost Jefferson’s government another $60,000. An American land assault across the Libyan desert provided inspiration for the words of the “Marines’ Hymn”—“to the shores of Tripoli”—but no smashing victory. Despite a generally unimpressive American military record, a vigorous naval blockade brought hostilities to a conclusion. In 1805, the president signed a treaty formally ending the Barbary War. One diplomat crowed, “It must be mortifying to some of the neighboring European powers to see that the Barbary States have been taught their fi rst lessons of humiliation from the Western World.” Jefferson concluded his first term on a wave of popularity. He had maintained the peace, reduced taxes, and expanded the boundaries of the United States. Not surprisingly, he overwhelmed his Federalist opponent in the presidential election of 1804. In the

 electoral college, Jefferson received 162 votes to Charles Cotesworth Pinckney’s 14. Republicans controlled Congress. John Randolph, the most articulate member of the House of Representatives, exclaimed, “Never was there an administration more brilliant than that of Mr. Jefferson up to this period. We were indeed in ‘the full tide of successful experiment!”’

THE ELECTION OF 1804
Candidate Jefferson C. Pinckney 
Party
Republican
Federalist


Electoral Vote


 Jefferson’s Critics How did Jeffersonians deal with the difficult problems of party politics and slavery? At the moment of Jefferson’s greatest electoral victory, a perceptive person might have seen signs of serious division within the Republican Party and within the country. The president’s heavyhanded attempts to reform the federal courts stirred deep animosities. Republicans had begun sniping at other Republicans, and one leading member of the party, Aaron Burr, became involved in a bizarre plot to separate the West from the rest of the nation. Congressional debates over the future of the slave trade revealed the existence of powerful sectional loyalties and profound disagreement on the issue.

THE BARBARY STATES
In 1801, President Jefferson refused to continue paying the tribute that pirates of the Barbary States had received for decades. 
ATLANTIC OCEAN KINGDOM OF ITALY

 FRANCE

Black Sea


OTTOMAN EMPIRE PORTUGAL SPAIN KINGDOM OF NAPLES
Barbary Raids 
Strait of
Gibraltar
Tangier


Algiers


 MOROCCO

Tunis
U.S.S.
Philadelphia  captured Oct. 31, 1803 burned by U.S. Feb. 16, 1804

 ALGERIA

Mediterranean Sea


Derna
April 27, 1805


TUNISIA
Tripoli bombarded Summer 1804 
Barbary States




EGYPT TRIPOLI

Cairo




 CHAPTER 8

REPUBLICAN ASCENDANCY: THE JEFFERSONIAN VISION

Attack on the Judges
 Jefferson’s controversy with the federal bench commenced the moment he became president. The Federalists, realizing they would soon lose control over the executive branch, had passed the Judiciary Act of 1801. This bill created several circuit courts and sixteen new judgeships. Through his “midnight” appointments, Adams had quickly filled these positions with stalwarts of the Federalist Party. Such blatantly partisan behavior angered Jefferson. In the courts, he explained, the Federalists hoped to preserve their political influence, and “from that battery all the works of Republicanism are to be beaten down and erased.” Even more infuriating was Adams’s appointment of John Marshall as the new chief justice. This shrewd, largely self-educated Virginian of Federalist background, whose training in the law consisted of a series of lectures he attended at the College of William and Mary in 1780, was clearly a man who could hold his own against the new president. In January 1802, Jefferson’s congressional allies called for repeal of the Judiciary Act. In public debate, they studiously avoided the obvious political issue. The new circuit courts should be closed not only because they were staffed by Federalists but also, as they argued, because they were needlessly expensive. The judges did not hear enough cases to warrant continuance. The Federalists mounted an able defense. The Constitution, they observed, provided for the removal of federal judges only when they were found guilty of high crimes and misdemeanors. By repealing the Judiciary Act, the legislative branch would in effect be dismissing judges without a trial, a clear violation of their constitutional rights. This argument made little impression on the Republican Party. In March, the House, following the Senate, voted for repeal. While Congress debated the Judiciary Act, another battle erupted. One of Adams’s “midnight” appointees, William Marbury, complained that the new administration would not give him his commission for the office of justice of the peace for the District of Columbia. He sought redress before the Supreme Court, demanding that the federal justices compel James Madison, the secretary of state, to deliver the necessary papers. When they learned that Marshall had agreed to hear this case, the Republicans were furious. Apparently the chief justice wanted to provoke a confrontation with the executive branch. Marshall was too clever to jeopardize the independence of the Supreme Court over such a relatively minor issue. In his celebrated Marbury v. Madison decision (February 1803), Marshall berated the secretary of state for withholding Marbury’s commission. Nevertheless, he concluded that the Supreme Court did not possess jurisdiction over such matters. Poor Marbury was out of luck. The Republicans proclaimed victory. In fact, they were so pleased with the outcome that they failed to examine the logic of Marshall’s decision. He had ruled that part of the earlier act of Congress, the one on which Marbury based his appeal, was unconstitutional. This was the first time the Supreme Court asserted its right to judge the constitutionality of congressional acts, and while contemporaries did not fully appreciate the significance of Marshall’s doctrine, Marbury v. Madison later served as an important precedent for judicial review of federal statutes. Neither Marbury’s defeat nor repeal of the Judiciary Act placated extreme Republicans. They insisted that federal judges should be made more responsive to the will of the people. One solution,

 short of electing federal judges, was impeachment. This clumsy device provided the legislature with a way of removing particularly offensive individuals. Early in 1803, John Pickering, an incompetent judge from New Hampshire, presented the Republicans with a curious test case. This Federalist appointee suffered from alcoholism as well as insanity. While his outrageous behavior on the bench embarrassed everyone, Pickering had not committed any high crimes against the U.S. government. Ignoring such legal niceties, Jefferson’s congressional allies pushed for impeachment. Although the Senate convicted Pickering (March 1804), many senators refused to compromise the letter of the Constitution and were conspicuously absent on the day of the final vote. Jefferson was apparently so eager to purge the courts of Federalists that he failed to heed these warnings. By the spring of 1803, he had set his sights on a target far more important than John Pickering. In a Baltimore newspaper, the president stumbled on the transcript of a speech allegedly delivered before a federal grand jury. The words seemed almost treasonous. The person responsible

Read the Document


Opinion for the
Supreme Court for Marbury v. Madison


 William Marbury (1760–1835) was an American lawyer, politician, and banker. In Marbury v. Madision, Marbury sued the Jefferson administration to follow through on a judge’s commission promised him by former President John Adams. Marbury lost, but his case established the doctrine of judicial review—the Supreme Court’s authority to declare laws unconstitutional.

 Jefferson’s Critics

 was Samuel Chase, a justice of the Supreme Court, who had frequently attacked Republican policies. Jefferson leapt at the chance to remove Chase from office. In a matter of weeks, the Republicancontrolled House of Representatives indicted Chase. Chase’s trial before the U.S. Senate was one of the most dramatic events in American legal history. Aaron Burr, the vice president, organized the proceedings. For reasons known only to himself, Burr redecorated the Senate chamber so that it looked more like the British House of Lords than the meeting place of a republican legislature. In this luxurious setting, Chase and his lawyers conducted a masterful defense. By contrast, John Randolph, the congressman who served as chief prosecutor, behaved in an erratic manner, betraying repeatedly his ignorance of relevant points of law. While most Republican senators personally disliked the arrogant Chase, they refused to expand the constitutional definition of impeachable offenses to suit Randolph’s argument, and on March 1, 1805, the Senate acquitted the justice of all charges. The experience apparently convinced Chase of the need for greater moderation. After returning to the federal bench, he refrained from attacking Republican policies. His Jeffersonian opponents also learned something important. American politicians did not like tampering with the Constitution in order to get rid of specific judges, even an imprudent one like Chase.

Politics of Desperation
 The collapse of the Federalists on the national level encouraged dissension within the Republican Party. Extremists in Congress insisted on monopolizing the president’s ear, and when he listened to political moderates, they rebelled. The members of the most vociferous faction called themselves “the good old republicans”; the newspapers labeled them the “Tertium Quids,” loosely translated as “nothings” or “no accounts.” During Jefferson’s second term, the Quids argued that the president’s policies, foreign and domestic, sacrificed virtue for pragmatism. Their chief spokesmen were two members from Virginia, John Randolph and John Taylor of Caroline (the name of his plantation), both of whom were convinced that Jefferson had betrayed the republican purity of the Founders. They both despised commercial capitalism. Taylor urged Americans to return to a simple agrarian way of life. Randolph’s attacks were particularly shrill. He saved his sharpest barbs for Gallatin and Madison, Republican moderates who failed to appreciate the congressman’s self-righteous posturing. The Yazoo controversy raised the Quids from political obscurity. This complex legal battle began in 1795 when a thoroughly corrupt Georgia assembly sold 35 million acres of western land, known as the Yazoo claims, to private companies at bargain prices. It soon became apparent that every member of the legislature had been bribed, and in 1796, state lawmakers rescinded the entire agreement. Unfortunately, some land had already changed hands. When Jefferson became president, a specially appointed federal commission attempted to clean up the mess. It recommended that Congress set aside 5 million acres for buyers who had unwittingly purchased land from the discredited companies. Randolph immediately cried foul. Such a compromise, however well-meaning, condoned fraud. Republican virtue hung in the balance. For months, the Quids harangued Congress about the Yazoo business, but in the end, their impassioned oratory accomplished



 nothing. The Marshall Supreme Court upheld the rights of the original purchasers in Fletcher v. Peck (1810). The justices unanimously declared that legislative fraud did not impair private contracts and that the Georgia assembly of 1796 did not have authority to take away lands already sold to innocent buyers. This important case upheld the Supreme Court’s authority to rule on the constitutionality of state laws.

Murder and Conspiracy: The Curious
Career of Aaron Burr
 Vice President Aaron Burr created far more serious difficulties for the president. The two men had never been close. Burr’s strange behavior during the election of 1800 raised suspicions that he had conspired to deprive Jefferson of the presidency. Whatever the truth may have been, the vice president entered the new administration under a cloud. He played only a marginal role in shaping policy, a situation extremely frustrating for a person as ambitious as Burr. In the spring of 1804, Burr decided to run for the governorship of New York. Although he was a Republican, he entered into political negotiations with High Federalists who were plotting the secession of New England and New York from the Union. In a particularly scurrilous contest—and New York politics were always abusive—Alexander Hamilton described Burr as “. . . a dangerous man . . . who ought not to be trusted with the reins of government” and urged Federalists in the state to vote for another candidate. Whether Hamilton’s appeals influenced the voters is not clear. Burr, however, blamed Hamilton for his subsequent defeat and challenged him to a duel. Even though Hamilton condemned this form of violence—his own son had recently been killed in a duel— he accepted Burr’s “invitation,” describing the foolishness as a matter of personal honor. On July 11, 1804, at Weehawken, New Jersey, the vice president shot and killed the former secretary of the treasury. Both New York and New Jersey indicted Burr for murder. If he returned to either state, he would immediately be arrested. His political career lay in shambles. In his final weeks as vice president, Burr hatched an audacious scheme. On a trip down the Ohio River in April 1805, after his term as vice president was over, he hinted broadly that he was planning a private military adventure against a Spanish colony, perhaps Mexico. Burr also suggested that he envisioned separating the western states and territories from the Union. The region certainly seemed ripe for secession. The citizens of New Orleans acted as if they wanted no part of the United States. General James Wilkinson, commander of the U.S. Army in the Mississippi Valley, accepted an important role in this vaguely defined conspiracy. The general was a thoroughly corrupt opportunist. Randolph described him as “the only man that I ever saw who was from bark to the very core a villain.” In the late summer of 1806, Burr put his ill-defined plan into action. A small group of volunteers constructed riverboats on a small island in the Ohio River. By the time this armed band set out to join Wilkinson’s forces, however, the general had experienced a change of heart. He frantically dispatched letters to Jefferson denouncing Burr. Wilkinson’s betrayal destroyed any chance of success. Facing certain defeat, Burr tried to escape to Spanish Florida. It was already too late. Federal authorities arrested Burr in February 1807 and took him to Richmond to stand trial for treason.

 Complete the Assignment Barbary Pirates and American Captives on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


Barbary Pirates and
American Captives
 The Nation’s First Hostage Crisis

 Print depicting the bombardment of Tripoli by U.S. naval vessels in 1804.

F


 or more than a quartercentury after independence, terror haunted American sailors and challenged the new republic’s influence throughout the world. Pirates from North Africa preyed on commercial vessels in the Mediterranean Sea and along the European Coast. Those unlucky enough to be captured faced enslavement or death. Although such piracy had been going on for a

 very long time, American entrepreneurs were always willing to risk the dangers to make a profit. The crew of one ship, the Polly, left a record of the horrors awaiting those who encountered the Barbary pirates, North African Muslims based in Algiers, Morocco, Tunis, and Tripoli. Sailing out of Baltimore in autumn 1793, the Polly was on its way to a Spanish port when a sailor on watch reported a “strange sail.” No one seems to have anticipated trouble.

 They were in for a dreadful surprise. When the strange vessel drew alongside the Polly, someone “dressed in the Christian habit” hailed the Americans from the deck. Then, without warning, “a great number” of men “dressed in the Turkish habit” poured over the railings brandishing “scimitars and pistols . . . pikes, spears, lances, and knives.” The Americans had no defense. The pirates plundered the ship then stripped the Americans of all clothing except “a shirt and a

 pair of drawers” and chained them in preparation for the voyage to Algiers, reputed to be the cruelest “of any state in all Barbary.” The Polly’s crew had become casualties of the young republic’s first prolonged hostage crisis involving Muslim states. By the end of the year, Barbary pirates had seized the crews of at least ten other vessels. The captives were thrown into prisons, where they labored in terrible conditions alongside sailors who had been in Algiers for as long as a decade. Algerian guards beat their captives. The enslaved Americans were driven in chains each day to a quarry outside the city of Algiers. Their masters forced them to drag twenty-ton rocks to construction sites. Anyone who attempted escape faced execution. News of the captives’ ordeal offended American pride. Outraged American citizens organized charitable societies pledged to oppose the pirates, send relief to the captives, and lobby Congress to take effective action for their release. Some Americans advocated paying ransom to liberate the prisoners, but others pointed out that such a policy would only encourage more attacks on the nation’s merchant marine. The outpouring of private action and nationalist sentiment forced the U. S. government, which had championed a policy of free trade throughout the world, to adjust to the changing realities of international relations. If the United States allowed itself to be humiliated by the Barbary states— places where “bribery, treachery, rapine, murder, and all the hideous offspring of accursed tyranny, have often drenched the streets with blood”— then it could not expect other, more powerful states to respect its hard-won independence. U.S. military power frightened no one, especially not the rulers of Barbary states. Neither the French nor the British showed interest in helping the Americans. After all, they viewed them as commercial competitors in the region. In 1795, the federal government finally recognized the seriousness of the problem. President

 Washington ordered U.S. envoy Joseph Donaldson, Jr., to negotiate release of the captives and to sign treaties ensuring that Algiers would no longer molest American shipping. For these alleged favors, the United States had to promise a humiliating sum totaling nearly $1 million. The combination of debt payments and annual tribute represented about one-sixth of each year’s federal budget. Treaties with Tripoli and Tunis also included yearly payments for peace, raising the total even higher. A policy that essentially condoned blackmail continued until Thomas Jefferson won election as president in 1800. Hoping to extort a larger share of the annual ransom monies, the Pasha of Tripoli forced Jefferson’s hand by declaring war on the United States. This preemptive move confirmed belief that attempts to buy off extortionists only generated further greed. It also compelled the United States to back up its world commerce with military might, a decision congressional budget-cutters had tried to avoid. Vowing not to pay “one penny in tribute,” Jefferson dispatched U.S. naval vessels to blockade Tripoli’s harbor. Despite brave talk, American intervention proved a failure, at least initially. One battleship went aground and had to be destroyed by marines. Eventually, Commodore Edward Preble and Captain Stephen Decatur showed fighting spirit sufficient to turn defeat into a draw. The American consul at Tunis, William Eaton, even attempted an early form of “regime change,” leading a company of Mediterranean mercenaries in an unauthorized effort to depose the Pasha and install his brother. Eaton’s mission “to the shores of Tripoli” failed. In 1805, the Pasha, whose power was unshaken, decided that war was becoming too expensive, and he negotiated a peace with the United States that included a payment of $60,000 to ransom the last prisoners. During the long ordeal with the Barbary pirates, American nationalists portrayed North African states as the opposite of their free republic.

 Survivors of captivity published narratives containing lurid descriptions of the despotism and cruelty they had endured under their Muslim masters. The popular press castigated Muslims as enemies of civilized society and devoid of human compassion. Propaganda against Muslim pirates generated its own embarrassing backlash. Shrill nationalist rhetoric reminded many Americans of the uncomfortable similarities between the white slavery of the Barbary states and the African slavery that flourished throughout the southern United States. The African American abolitionist Absalom Jones could discern no real difference between “the unconstitutional bondage in which multitudes of our fellows in complexion are held” and “the deplorable . . . situation of citizens of the United States captured and enslaved . . . in Algiers.” America’s first hostage crisis produced a complex legacy. It forced ordinary citizens of the new republic to take stock of themselves within a larger international framework. The war in Tripoli encouraged Jefferson, who had always disfavored a permanent military establishment, to accept a professional navy. Preparedness, he concluded, was the price of maintaining free trade throughout the world. War provided a stark contrast between liberty and tyranny and stimulated the loud celebration of American freedom. In doing so, it also intensified debate over the republic’s most glaring domestic contradiction, the persistence of slavery within a nation that was prepared to fight in distant places in the name of liberty.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
Why did the European powers not eliminate the Barbary pirates? 2. Could U.S. leaders have ignored the challenge of the pirates? 3. How did American nationalists’ condemnation of “white slavery” in North Africa affect the debate over the enslavement of AfricanAmericans in the U.S.? 


 CHAPTER 8

REPUBLICAN ASCENDANCY: THE JEFFERSONIAN VISION

 The trial judge was John Marshall, a strong Federalist not likely to do the Republican administration any favors. He refused to hear testimony regarding Burr’s supposed intentions. “Troops must be embodied,” Marshall thundered, “men must be actually assembled.” He demanded two witnesses to each overt act of treason. Burr, of course, had been too clever to leave this sort of evidence. While Jefferson complained bitterly about the miscarriage of justice, the jurors declared on September 1, 1807, that the defendant was “not proved guilty by any evidence submitted to us.” The public was outraged, and Burr prudently went into exile in Europe. The president threatened to introduce an amendment to the Constitution calling for the election of federal judges. Nothing came of his proposal. And Marshall inadvertently helped protect the civil rights of all Americans. If the chief justice had allowed circumstantial evidence into the Richmond courtroom, if he had listened to rumor and hearsay, he would have made it much easier for later presidents to use trumped-up conspiracy charges to silence legitimate political opposition.

Read the Document


The Slave Trade
 Slavery sparked angry debate at the Constitutional Convention of 1787 (see Chapter 6). If delegates from the northern states had refused to compromise on this issue, Southerners would not have supported the new government. The slave states demanded a great deal in return for cooperation. According to an agreement that determined the size of a state’s congressional delegation, a slave counted as three-fifths of a free white male. This political formula meant that while blacks did not vote, they helped increase the number of southern representatives. The South in turn gave up very little, agreeing only that after 1808 Congress might consider banning the importation of slaves into the United States. Slaves even influenced the outcome of national elections. Had the threefifths rule not been in effect in 1800, for example, Adams would surely have had the votes to defeat Jefferson in the electoral college. In an annual message sent to Congress in December 1806, Jefferson urged the representatives to prepare legislation outlawing the slave trade. During the early months of 1807, congressmen debated various ways of ending the embarrassing commerce. It was clear that the issue cut across party lines. Northern representatives

Congress Prohibits Importation of Slaves, 1807


 Although the external slave trade was officially outlawed in 1808, the commerce in humans persisted. An estimated two hundred fifty thousand African slaves were brought illicitly to the United States between 1808 and 1860. The internal slave trade continued as well. Folk artist Lewis Miller sketched this slave coffle marching from Virginia to new owners in Tennessee under the watchful eyes of mounted white overseers.

Embarrassments Overseas


 generally favored a strong bill; some even wanted to make smuggling slaves into the country a capital offense. But there was a serious problem. The northern congressmen could not figure out what to do with black people captured by the customs agents who would enforce the legislation. To sell these Africans would involve the federal government in slavery, which many Northerners found morally repugnant. Nor was there much sympathy for freeing them. Ignorant of the English language and lacking personal possessions, these blacks seemed unlikely to long survive free in the American South. Southern congressmen responded with threats and ridicule. They explained to their northern colleagues that no one in the South regarded slavery as evil. It appeared naive, therefore, to expect local planters to enforce a ban on the slave trade or to inform federal agents when they spotted a smuggler. The notion that these culprits deserved capital punishment seemed viciously inappropriate. At one point in the debate, Peter Early, a congressman from Georgia, announced that the South wanted “no civil wars, no rebellions, no insurrections, no resistance to the authority of government.” All he demanded, in fact, was to let the states regulate slavery. To this, a Republican congressman from western Pennsylvania retorted that Americans who hated slavery would not be “terrified by the threat of civil war.” The bill that Jefferson finally signed in March 1807 probably pleased no one. The law prohibited the importation of slaves into the United States after the new year. Whenever customs officials captured a smuggler, the slaves were to be turned over to state authorities and disposed of according to local custom. Southerners did not cooperate, and for many years African slaves continued to pour into southern ports. Even more blacks would have been imported had Great Britain not outlawed the slave trade in 1807. As part of their ban of the slave trade, ships of the Royal Navy captured American slave smugglers off the coast of Africa, and when anyone complained, the British explained that they were merely enforcing the laws of the United States. Slavery was both a political and a personal issue for Jefferson. As a political leader during the Revolution, he criticized the institution. But Jefferson also believed that African Americans were inherently inferior to whites. In Notes on the State of Virginia (1785) Jefferson insisted as a matter of science that African Americans were not equal to white people “in the endowments both of body and mind,” and he worried that the “mixture” of whites and blacks would stain “the blood of the master.” It came as a surprise to his admirers when in 1802 a newspaper editor accused Jefferson of having an affair with one of his own slaves. Most historians now agree that Jefferson did indeed have a long-term relationship with Sally Hemings, a slave living at Monticello. Hemings bore Jefferson six children, four of whom survived to adulthood. Jefferson’s own life and writings illustrate dramatically the moral contradictions that lay at the heart of slavery in America.

Embarrassments Overseas
 Why did the United States find it difficult to avoid military conflict during this period? During Jefferson’s second term (1805–1809), the United States found itself in the midst of a world at war. A brief peace in Europe ended abruptly in 1803, and the two military giants of the



 age, France and Great Britain, fought for supremacy on land and sea. During the early stages of the war, the United States profited from European adversity. As “neutral carriers,” American ships transported goods to any port in the world where they could find a buyer, and American merchants grew wealthy serving Britain and France. Since the Royal Navy did not allow direct trade between France and its colonies, American captains conducted “broken voyages.” American vessels sailing out of French ports in the Caribbean would put in briefly in the United States, pay nominal customs, and then leave for France. For several years, the British did little to halt this obvious subterfuge. Napoleon’s successes on the battlefield, however, quickly strained Britain’s economic resources. In July 1805, a British admiralty court announced in the Essex decision that henceforth “broken voyages” were illegal. The Royal Navy began seizing American ships in record number. Moreover, as the war continued, the British stepped up the impressment of sailors on ships flying the U.S. flag. Estimates of the number of men impressed ranged as high as nine thousand. Beginning in 1806, the British government issued a series of trade regulations known as the Orders in Council. These proclamations forbade neutral commerce with the Continent and threatened seizure of any ship that violated these orders. The declarations created what were in effect “paper blockades,” for even the powerful British navy could not monitor the activities of every Continental port. Napoleon responded to Britain’s commercial regulations with his own paper blockade called the Continental System. In the Berlin Decree of November 1806 and the Milan Decree of December 1807, he announced the closing of all Continental ports to British trade. Since French armies occupied most of the territory between Spain and Germany, the decrees obviously cut the British out of a large market. The French emperor also declared that neutral vessels carrying British goods were liable to seizure. For the Americans there was no escape. They were caught between two conflicting systems. The British ordered American ships to stop off to pay duties and secure clearances in England on the way to the Continent; Napoleon was determined to seize any vessel that obeyed the British. This unhappy turn of international events baffled Jefferson. He had assumed that civilized countries would respect neutral rights; justice obliged them to do so. Appeals to reason, however, made little impression on states at war. “As for France and England,” the president growled, “. . . the one is a den of robbers, the other of pirates.” In a desperate attempt to avoid hostilities for which the United States was ill prepared, Jefferson ordered James Monroe and William Pinckney to negotiate a commercial treaty with Great Britain. The document they signed on December 31, 1806, said nothing about impressment, and an angry president refused to submit the treaty to the Senate for ratification. The United States soon suffered an even greater humiliation. A ship of the Royal Navy, the Leopard, sailing off the coast of Virginia, commanded an American warship to submit to a search for deserters (June 22, 1807). When the captain of the Chesapeake refused to cooperate, the Leopard opened fire, killing three men and wounding eighteen. The attack clearly violated the sovereignty of the United States. Official protests received only a perfunctory apology from the British government, and the American people demanded revenge. Despite the pressure of public opinion, however, Jefferson played for time. He recognized that the United States was unprepared for war against a powerful nation such as Great Britain. The president



 CHAPTER 8

REPUBLICAN ASCENDANCY: THE JEFFERSONIAN VISION

 worried that an expensive conflict with Great Britain would quickly undo the fiscal reforms of his first term. As Gallatin explained, in the event of war, the United States “will be poorer, both as a nation and as a government, our debt and taxes will increase, and our progress in every respect be interrupted.”

Embargo Divides the Nation
 Jefferson found what he regarded as a satisfactory way to deal with European predators with a policy he called “peaceable coercion.” If Britain and France refused to respect the rights of neutral carriers, then the United States would keep its ships at home. Not only would this action protect them from seizure, but it would also deprive the European powers of much needed American goods, especially food. The president predicted that a total embargo of American commerce would soon force Britain and France to negotiate with the United States in good faith. “Our commerce is so valuable to them,” he declared, “that they will be glad to purchase it when the only price we ask is to do us justice.” Congress passed the Embargo Act by large majorities, and it became law on December 22, 1807. “Peaceable coercion” turned into a Jeffersonian nightmare. The president apparently believed the American people would enthusiastically support the embargo. That was a naive assumption. Compliance required a series of enforcement acts that over fourteen months became increasingly harsh. By the middle of 1808, Jefferson and Gallatin were involved in the regulation of the smallest details of American economic life. Indeed, in the words of one of Jefferson’s biographers, the president assumed the role of “commissar of the nation’s economy.” The federal government supervised the coastal trade, lest a ship sailing between two states slip away to Europe or the West Indies. Overland trade with Canada was proscribed. When violations still occurred, Congress gave customs collectors the right to seize a vessel merely on suspicion of wrongdoing. A final desperate act, passed in January 1809, prohibited the loading of any U.S. vessel, regardless of size, without authorization from a customs officer who was supported by the army, navy, and local militia. Jefferson’s eagerness to pursue a reasonable foreign policy blinded him to the fact that he and a Republican Congress would have had to establish a police state to make it work. Northerners hated the embargo. Persons living near Lake Champlain in upper New York State simply ignored the regulations, and they roughed up collectors who interfered with the Canadian trade. The administration was determined to stop the smugglers. In a decision that Hamilton might have applauded, Jefferson dispatched federal troops—led by the conspiratorial General Wilkinson—to overawe the citizens of New York. New Englanders regarded the embargo as lunacy. Merchants of the region were willing to take their chances on the high seas, but for reasons that few people understood, the president insisted that it was better to preserve ships from possible seizure than to make profits. Sailors and artisans were thrown out of work. The popular press maintained a constant howl of protest. One writer observed that embargo in reverse spelled “O grab me!” Not surprisingly, the Federalist Party experienced a brief revival in New England, and a few extremists suggested the possibility of state assemblies nullifying federal law. By 1809, the bankruptcy of Jefferson’s foreign policy was obvious. The embargo never seriously damaged the British economy.

 In fact, British merchants rushed to take over the lucrative markets that the Americans had been forced to abandon. Napoleon liked the embargo, since it seemed to harm Great Britain more than it did France. Faced with growing popular opposition, the Republicans in Congress panicked. One newly elected representative declared that “peaceful coercion” was a “miserable and mischievous failure” and joined his colleagues in repealing the embargo a few days before James Madison’s inauguration. Relations between the United States and the great European powers were much worse in 1809 than they had been in 1805. During his second term, the pressures of office weighed heavily on Jefferson, and after so many years of public service, he welcomed retirement to Monticello.

A
New Administration Goes to War  As president, James Madison suffered from several personal and political handicaps. Although his intellectual abilities were great, he lacked the qualities necessary for effective leadership. In public gatherings, he impressed people as being “exceedingly modest,” and one foreign visitor claimed that the new president “always seems to grant that the one with whom he talks is his superior in mind and training.” Critics argued that Madison’s humility revealed a weak, vacillating character. During the election of 1808, Randolph and the Quids tried unsuccessfully to persuade James Monroe to challenge Madison’s candidacy. Jefferson favored his old friend Madison. In the end, a caucus of Republican congressmen gave the official nod to Madison, the first time in American history that such a congressional group controlled a presidential nomination. The former secretary of state defeated his Federalist rival, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, in the electoral college by a vote of 122 to 47, with New Yorker George Clinton receiving 6 ballots. The margin of victory was substantially lower than Jefferson’s had been in 1804, a warning of political troubles ahead. The Federalists also made impressive gains in the House of Representatives, raising their delegation from 24 to 48.

THE ELECTION OF 1808
Candidate Madison C. Pinckney 
Party
Republican
Federalist


Electoral Vote


 The new president confronted the same foreign policy problems that had occupied his predecessor. Neither Britain nor France showed the slightest interest in respecting American neutral rights. Threats against either nation rang hollow so long as the United States failed to develop its military strength. Out of weakness, therefore, Madison was compelled to put the Non-Intercourse Act into effect. Congress passed this clumsy piece of legislation at the same time as it repealed the embargo (March 1, 1809). The new bill authorized the resumption of trade between the United States and all nations of the world except Britain and France. Either of these countries could restore full commercial relations simply by promising to observe the rights of neutral carriers. The British immediately took advantage of this offer. Their minister to the United States, David M. Erskine, informed Madison that the British government had modified its position on a number

Embarrassments Overseas


Read the Document


James Madison, First
Inaugural Address (1809)




 Milan Decrees. Again, Madison acted impulsively. Without waiting for further information from Paris, he announced that unless Britain repealed the Orders in Council by November, the United States would cut off commercial relations. Only later did the president learn that Napoleon had no intention of living up to his side of the bargain; his agents continued to seize American ships. Madison, who had been humiliated by the Erskine experience, decided to ignore the French provocations, to pretend the emperor was behaving in an honest manner. The British could not explain why the United States tolerated such obvious deception. No one in London would have suspected that the president really had no other options left. Events unrelated to international commerce fueled antiBritish sentiment in the newly conquered parts of the United States. Westerners believed—incorrectly, as it turned out—that British agents operating out of Canada had persuaded Tecumseh’s warriors to resist the spread of American settlement. According to the rumors that ran through the region, the British dreamed of monopolizing the fur trade. In any case, General William Henry Harrison, governor of the Indiana Territory, marched an army to the edge of a large Shawnee village at the mouth of Tippecanoe Creek near the banks of the Wabash River. On the morning of November 7, 1811, the American troops routed the Indians at the battle of Tippecanoe. Harrison immediately became a national hero, and several decades later the American people rewarded “Tippecanoe” by electing him president. This incident forced Tecumseh—a brilliant leader who was trying to restore the confidence and revitalize tribal cultures of the Indians of the Indiana Territory—to seek British military assistance in battling the Americans, something he probably would not have done had Harrison left him alone.

Fumbling Toward Conflict


 James Madison was a plantation owner and statesman from Virginia. A political protégé of Thomas Jefferson, Madison became the fourth president of the United States and is commonly remembered as the “Father of the United States Constitution.”

 of sensitive commercial issues. The president was so encouraged by these talks that he publicly announced that trade with Great Britain could resume in June 1809. Unfortunately, Erskine had not conferred with his superiors on the details of these negotiations. George Canning, the British foreign secretary, rejected the agreement out of hand, and while an embarrassed Madison fumed in Washington, the Royal Navy seized the American ships that had already put to sea. Canning’s apparent betrayal led the artless Madison straight into a French trap. In May 1810, Congress passed Macon’s Bill Number Two, an act sponsored by Nathaniel Macon of North Carolina. In a complete reversal of strategy, this poorly drafted legislation reestablished trade with both England and France. It also contained a curious carrot-and-stick provision. As soon as either of these European states repealed restrictions upon neutral shipping, the U.S. government promised to halt all commerce with the other. Napoleon spotted a rare opportunity. He informed the U.S. minister in Paris that France would no longer enforce the hated Berlin and

 In 1811, the anti-British mood of Congress intensified. A group of militant representatives, some of them elected to Congress for the first time in the election of 1810, announced they would no longer tolerate national humiliation. They called for action, for resistance to Great Britain, for any course that promised to achieve respect for the United States and security for its republican institutions. These aggressive nationalists, many of them elected in the South and West, have sometimes been labeled the War Hawks. The group included Henry Clay, an earthy Kentucky congressman who served as Speaker of the House, and John C. Calhoun, a brilliant South Carolinian. These fiery orators spoke of honor and pride, as if foreign relations were a sort of duel between gentlemen. While the War Hawks were Republicans, they repudiated Jefferson’s policy of peaceful coercion. Madison surrendered to the War Hawks. On June 1, 1812, he sent Congress a declaration of war against Great Britain. The timing of his action was peculiar. Over the preceding months, tensions between the two nations had relaxed. No new attacks had occurred. Indeed, at the very moment Madison called for war, the British government was suspending the Orders in Council, a conciliatory gesture that in all likelihood would have preserved the peace. However inadequately Madison communicated his goals, he did seem to have had a plan. His major aim was to force the British to respect American maritime rights, especially in Caribbean waters. The president’s problem was to figure out how a small, militarily weak nation like the United States could bring effective pressure on Great Britain. Madison’s answer seemed to be Canada.

REPUBLICAN ASCENDANCY: THE JEFFERSONIAN VISION

 This colony supplied Britain’s Caribbean possessions with much needed foodstuffs. The president reasoned, therefore, that by threatening to seize Canada, the Americans might compel the British to make concessions on maritime issues. It was this logic that Secretary of State James Monroe had in mind when he explained in June 1812 that “it might be necessary to invade Canada, not as an object of the war but as a means to bring it to a satisfactory conclusion.”

View the Map


Party
Republican
Republican*
 (antiwar faction)

.
 Châteauguay Oct. 25, 1813

York (Toronto)
 burned Apr. 27, 1813

Michilimackinac
 captured July 17, 1812

Electoral Vote


 MAINE (part of Mass.)

 Crysler's Farm Nov. 11, 1813

Lake Champlain
(Plattsburg)
Sept. 11, 1814
 VT.

MICH. TERR.

 *Clinton was nominated by a convention of antiwar Republicans and endorsed by the Federalists.

Detroit
 surrendered Aug. 16, 1812

ILL. TERR.
Ft. Dearborn 
N.Y.


 k La

 eE

R.I.


 rie

Niagara
R.
 PA.

 Put-in-Bay Sept. 10, 1813

 Tippecanoe IND. Nov. 7, 1811 TERR.

 o Ohi

R.


 VA.

 OHIO

Washington, D.C.
 burned Aug. 24, 1814

 CONN.

N.J.


 Ft. McHenry (Baltimore) Sept. 13–14, 1814 DEL. MD.

KY. N.C.

 sipp i R.

N.H.
 MASS.

Thames River
Oct. 5, 1813


ATLANTIC OCEAN

Mi
 ssis

TENN. S.C.
Horseshoe Bend Mar. 27, 1814 
 GA.

MISS. TERR.
Ft. Mims massacre Aug. 30, 1813 New Orleans Jan. 8, 1815 
SPANISH F

 LA.

Gulf of
Mexico


DA RI LO

 Congressional War Hawks, of course, may have had other goals in mind. Some expansionists were probably more concerned about conquering Canada than they were about the impressment of American seamen. For others, the whole affair may have truly been a matter of national pride. Andrew Jackson wrote, “For what are we going to fight? . . . we are going to fight for the reestablishment of our national character, misunderstood and vilified at home and abroad.” New Englanders in whose commercial interests the war would supposedly be waged ridiculed such chauvinism. The vote in Congress was close, 79 to 49 in the House, 19 to 13 in the Senate. With this doubtful mandate, the country marched to war against the most powerful maritime nation in Europe. Division over the war question was reflected in the election of 1812. A faction of antiwar Republicans nominated De Witt Clinton of New York, who was endorsed by the Federalists. Nevertheless Madison, the Republican, won narrowly, gaining 128 electoral votes to Clinton’s 89.

 ce R

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

THE ELECTION OF 1812
Candidate Madison Clinton 
The War of 1812


 wre n

 CHAPTER 8

St
.L
 a



 American offensives, 1812–1813 American victories British offensives,

The Strange War of 1812


 British victories

 Why is the War of 1812 sometimes thought of as a “second war of independence”? Optimism for the War of 1812 ran high. The War Hawks apparently believed that even though the United States possessed only a small army and navy, it could easily sweep the British out of Canada. Such predictions flew in the face of political and military realities. Not only did the Republicans fail to appreciate how unprepared the country was for war, but they also refused to mobilize needed resources. The House rejected proposals for direct taxes and authorized naval appropriations only with the greatest reluctance. Indeed, even as they planned for battle, the Republican members of Congress were haunted by the consequences of their political and economic convictions. They did not seem to understand that a weak, highly decentralized government—the one that Jeffersonians championed—was incapable of waging an expensive war against the world’s greatest sea power. New Englanders refused to cooperate with the war effort. In July 1812, one clergyman in Massachusetts urged the people of the region to “proclaim an honourable neutrality.” Many persons did just that. New Englanders carried on a lucrative, though illegal,





 200 miles

 British naval blockade Indian battles



 100 200 kilometers

THE WAR OF 1812

 Major battles of the War of 1812 brought few lasting gains to either the British or the Americans.

 commerce with the enemy. When the U.S. Treasury appealed for loans to finance the war, wealthy northern merchants failed to respond. The British government apparently believed the New England states might negotiate a separate peace, and during the first year of war, the Royal Navy did not bother to blockade the major northern ports. American military operations focused initially on the western forts. The results were discouraging. On August 16, 1812, Major General William Hull surrendered an entire army to a smaller British force at Detroit. Michilimackinac was lost. Poorly coordinated marches against the enemy at Niagara and Montreal achieved nothing. These experiences demonstrated that the militia, led by aging officers with little military aptitude, no matter how

The Strange War of 1812


 enthusiastic, was no match for well-trained European veterans. On the sea, the United States did much better. In August, Captain Isaac Hull’s Constitution defeated the HMS Guerrière in a fierce battle, and American privateers destroyed or captured a number of British merchant ships. These successes were somewhat deceptive, however. So long as Napoleon threatened the Continent, Great Britain could spare few warships for service in America. As soon as peace returned to Europe in the spring of 1814, Britain redeployed its fleet and easily blockaded the tiny U.S. Navy. The campaigns of 1813 revealed that conquering Canada would be more difficult than the War Hawks ever imagined. Both sides in this war recognized that whoever controlled the Great Lakes controlled the West. On Lake Erie, the Americans won the race for naval superiority. On September 10, 1813, Oliver Hazard Perry

Listen to the Audio File




 destroyed a British fleet at Put-in-Bay, and in a much quoted letter written immediately after the battle, Perry exclaimed, “We have met the enemy; and they are ours.” On October 5, General Harrison overran an army of British troops and Indian warriors at the battle of Thames River. During this engagement, Tecumseh was killed. On the other fronts, however, the war went badly for the Americans. General Wilkinson suffered an embarrassing defeat near Montreal (battle of Chrysler’s Farm, November 11), and the British navy held its own on Lake Ontario. In 1814, the British took the offensive. Following their victory over Napoleon, British strategists planned to increase pressure on three separate American fronts: the Canadian frontier, Chesapeake coastal settlements, and New Orleans. Sir George Prevost, commander of the British forces in Canada, marched his army south

Star-Spangled Banner


 Baltimore lawyer Francis Scott Key viewed the Battle of Ft. McHenry from the deck of a British ship of war. The British bombarded the fort through the night but in the morning Key was thrilled to see that the American “flag was still there.” The scene inspired Key to pen a song celebrating this important American victory in the War of 1812—a song that has become America’s national anthem. This picture shows that original “Star-Spangled Banner” that flew over Ft. McHenry during the battle.



 CHAPTER 8

REPUBLICAN ASCENDANCY: THE JEFFERSONIAN VISION

 into upper New York State. A hastily assembled American fleet led by Captain Thomas Macdonough turned back a British flotilla off Plattsburgh on Lake Champlain (September 11, 1814). When Prevost learned of this setback, he retreated quickly into Canada. Although the Americans did not realize the full significance of this battle, the triumph accelerated peace negotiations, for after news of Plattsburgh reached London, the British government concluded that major land operations along the Canadian border were futile. Throughout the year, British warships harassed the Chesapeake coast. To their surprise, the British found the region almost totally undefended, and on August 24, 1814, in retaliation for the Americans’ destruction of the capital of Upper Canada (York, Ontario), a small force of British marines burned the American capital, a victory more symbolic than strategic. Encouraged by their easy success and contemptuous of America’s ragtag soldiers, the British launched a full-scale attack on Baltimore (September 13–14). To everyone’s surprise, the fort guarding the harbor held out against a heavy naval bombardment, and the British gave up the operation. The survival of Fort McHenry inspired Francis Scott Key to write “The Star-Spangled Banner.” The Battle of New Orleans should never have occurred. The British landed a large assault force under General Edward Pakenham at precisely the same time as diplomats in Europe were preparing the final drafts of a peace treaty. The combatants, of course, knew nothing of these distant developments, and on January 8, 1815, Pakenham foolishly ordered a frontal attack against General Andrew Jackson’s well-defended positions. In a short time, the entire British force had been destroyed. The Americans suffered only light casualties. The victory not only transformed Jackson into a national folk hero, but it also provided the people of the United States with a much needed source of pride. Even in military terms, the battle was significant, for if the British had managed to occupy New Orleans, they would have been difficult to dislodge regardless of the specific provisions of the peace treaty.

Hartford Convention: The Demise
 of the Federalists In the fall of 1814, a group of leading New England politicians, most of them moderate Federalists, gathered in Hartford to discuss relations between the people of their region and the federal government. The Hartford Convention delegates were angry and hurt by the Madison administration’s seeming insensitivity to the economic interests of the New England states. The embargo had soured New Englanders on Republican foreign policy, but the events of the War of 1812 added insult to injury. When British troops occupied the coastal villages of Maine, then part of Massachusetts, the president did nothing to drive out the enemy. Of course, the self-righteous complaints of convention organizers overlooked New England’s tepid support for the war effort. The men who met at Hartford on December 15 did not advocate secession from the Union. Although people living in other sections of the country cried treason, the convention delegates only recommended changes in the Constitution. They drafted a number of amendments that reflected the New Englanders’ growing frustration. One proposal suggested that congressional representation be calculated on the basis of the number of white males living in a state. New England congressmen were tired of the three-fifths rule

 that gave southern slaveholders a disproportionately large voice in the House. The convention also wanted to limit each president to a single term in office, a reform that New Englanders hoped might end Virginia’s monopoly of the executive mansion. And finally, the delegates insisted that a two-thirds majority was necessary before Congress could declare war, pass commercial regulations, or admit new states to the Union. The moderate Federalists of New England were confident these changes would protect their region from the tyranny of southern Republicans. The convention dispatched its resolutions to Washington, but soon after an official delegation reached the federal capital, the situation became extremely awkward. Everyone was celebrating the victory of New Orleans and the announcement of peace. Republican leaders in Congress accused the hapless New Englanders of disloyalty, and people throughout the country were persuaded that a group of wild secessionists had attempted to destroy the Union. The Hartford Convention accelerated the final demise of the Federalist Party.

Treaty of Ghent Ends the War
 In August 1814, the United States dispatched a distinguished negotiating team to Ghent, a Belgian city where the Americans opened talks with their British counterparts. During the early weeks of discussion, the British made impossible demands. They insisted on territorial concessions from the United States, the right to navigate the Mississippi River, and the creation of a large Indian buffer state in the Northwest Territory. The Americans listened to this presentation, more or less politely, and then rejected the entire package. In turn, they lectured their British counterparts about maritime rights and impressment. Fatigue finally broke the diplomatic deadlock. The British government realized that no amount of military force could significantly alter the outcome of hostilities in the United States. Weary negotiators signed the Treaty of Ghent on Christmas Eve 1814. The document dealt with virtually none of the topics contained in Madison’s original war message. Neither side surrendered territory; Great Britain refused even to discuss the topic of impressment. In fact, after more than two years of hostilities, the adversaries merely agreed to end the fighting, postponing the vexing issues of neutral rights until a later date. The Senate apparently concluded that stalemate was preferable to continued conflict and ratified the treaty 35 to 0. Most Americans—except perhaps the diehard Federalists of New England—viewed the War of 1812 as an important success. Even though the country’s military accomplishments had been unimpressive, the people of the United States had been swept up in a contagion of nationalism. The Hartford debacle served to discredit secessionist fantasies for several decades. Americans had waged a “second war of independence” and in the process transformed the Union into a symbol of national destiny. “The war,” reflected Gallatin, had made Americans “feel and act more as a nation; and I hope that the permanency of the Union is thereby better secured.” That nationalism had flourished in times of war was an irony that Gallatin’s contemporaries did not fully appreciate. After the Treaty of Ghent, however, Americans came gradually to realize they had nothing further to fear from Europe, and in an era of peace, the process of sectional divergence began to quicken, threatening to destroy the republic that Jefferson and Madison had worked so hard to preserve.

Conclusion: Republican Legacy


Read the Document




The Treaty of Ghent (1814)


 The Treaty of Ghent ended the War of 1812, but resolved none of the issues—rival territorial claims, impressments, the trading rights of neutral nations—that had led to the war. Still, it presented Americans with a symbolic victory that drew the nation together in its celebration of this “second war of independence.” In the center of this painting, U.S. Ambassador (and future President) John Q. Adams shakes hands with members of the British treaty delegation.

Conclusion: Republican Legacy
 During the 1820s, it became fashionable to visit retired presidents. These were not, of course, ordinary leaders. Jefferson, Adams, and Madison linked a generation of younger men and women to the heroic moments of the early republic. When they spoke about the Declaration of Independence or the Constitution of the United States, their opinions carried symbolic weight for a burgeoning society anxious about its political future. A remarkable coincidence occurred on July 4, 1826, the fiftieth anniversary of the Declaration of Independence. On that day, Thomas Jefferson died at Monticello. His last words were, “Is it the Fourth?” On the same day, several hundred miles to the north, John Adams also passed his last day on Earth. His mind was on his old friend and sometimes adversary, and during his final moments, Adams found comfort in the assurance that “Thomas Jefferson still survives.” James Madison lived on at his Virginia plantation, the last of the Founders. Throughout a long and productive career, he had

 fought for republican values. He championed a Jeffersonian vision of a prosperous nation in which virtuous, independent citizens pursued their own economic interests. He tolerated no aristocratic pretensions. Leaders of a Jeffersonian persuasion—and during his last years, that probably included John Adams—brought forth a democratic, egalitarian society. Although they sometimes worried that the obsessive grubbing for wealth might destroy public virtue, they were justly proud of the republic they had helped to create. But many visitors who journeyed to Madison’s home at Montpelier before he died in 1836 were worried about another legacy of the founding generation. Why, they asked the aging president, had the early leaders of this nation allowed slavery to endure? How did African Americans fit into the republican scheme? Try as they would, neither Madison nor the politicians who claimed the Jeffersonian mantle could provide satisfactory answers. In an open, egalitarian society, there seemed no place for slaves, and a few months before Madison died, a visitor reported sadly, “With regard to slavery, he owned himself almost to be in despair.”



 CHAPTER 8

CHAPTER REVIEW

Study Resources
 Take the Study Plan for Chapter 8 Republican Ascendancy on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1800
Thomas Jefferson elected president 1801 Adams makes “midnight” appointments of federal judges Judiciary Act is repealed (March) 
 1803 Chief Justice John Marshall rules on Marbury v. Madison (February); sets precedent for judicial review; Louisiana Purchase concluded with France (May)

 1803–1806 Lewis and Clark explore the Northwest 1804 Aaron Burr kills Alexander Hamilton in a duel (July);

 1809 Embargo is repealed; Non-Intercourse Act passed (March) Harrison defeats Indians at Tippecanoe (November)

 1812 Declaration of war against Great Britain (June);

 Jefferson elected to second term Justice Samuel Chase acquitted by Senate (March)

 1807 Burr is tried for conspiracy (August–September);

 Embargo Act passed (December) Slave trade is ended (January); Madison elected president



 Madison elected to second term, defeating De Witt Clinton of New York Perry destroys British fleet at battle of Put-in-Bay (September) Jackson crushes Creek Indians at Horseshoe Bend (March); British marines burn Washington, D.C. (August); Hartford Convention meets to recommend constitutional changes (December); Treaty of Ghent ends War of 1812 (December) Jackson routs British at Battle of New Orleans (January)

CHAPTER REVIEW
Regional Identities in a New Republic How did the Republic’s growth shape the market economy and relations with Native Americans? During Jefferson’s administration, a rapidly growing population flooded into the Ohio and Mississippi valleys. Family farms produced crops for a robust international market. Cities served as centers, not of industry, but of commerce. When Native Americans such as Tecumseh resisted expansion, the United States government and ordinary white settlers pushed them aside. (p. 180) 
Jefferson as President
 How did practical politics challenge Jefferson’s political principles? Jefferson brought to the presidency a commitment to a small, less expensive federal government. In office, however, he discovered that practical politics demanded compromises with Republican principles. He needed a government capable of responding to unexpected challenges and opportunities throughout the world. Although he worried that the Louisiana Purchase (1803) might exceed his authority under the Constitution, Jefferson accepted the French offer and sent Lewis and Clark to explore this vast territory. (p. 183)

 Jefferson’s Critics How did Jeffersonians deal with the difficult problems of party politics and slavery? To end Federalist control of the judiciary, Jefferson denied commissions to judges appointed at the end of the Adams

 administration and attempted to remove others from office. That failed, and the impeachment of Supreme Court Justice Samuel Chase embarrassed the administration. In 1807, after considerable debate and compromise, Jefferson signed into law a bill outlawing the international slave trade. (p. 187)

Embarrassments Overseas
 Why did the United States find it difficult to avoid military conflict during this period? During Jefferson’s second term, Britain and France waged a world war. Both nations tried to manipulate the United States into taking sides. Recognizing that his country possessed only a weak navy and small army, Jefferson supported the Embargo Act (1807), which closed American ports to foreign commerce. This angered New Englanders who regarded open trade as the key to their region’s prosperity. (p. 193)

The Strange War of 1812
 Why is the War of 1812 sometimes thought of as a “second war of independence”? Prior to the war, Britain treated the United States as though it were still a colonial possession and regularly seized sailors on American ships. In 1813, American troops failed to conquer Canada. In 1814, British troops burned Washington, D.C., in retaliation. In 1815, General Andrew Jackson won a stunning victory in the Battle of New Orleans. The resolutions of the Hartford Convention, criticizing the war and the Constitution, proved an embarrassment for the Federalists and accelerated their demise as a political party. (p. 196)

STUDY RESOURCES



KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Louisiana Purchase U.S. acquisition of the Louisiana Territory from France in 1803 for $15 million. The purchase secured American control of the Mississippi River and doubled the size of the nation. p. 185 Lewis and Clark Expedition Overland expedition to the Pacific coast (1804–1906) let by Meriwether Lewis and William Clark. Commissioned by President Thomas Jefferson, it collected scientific data about the country and its resources. p. 186 Marbury v. Madison In this 1803 landmark decision, the Supreme Court first asserted the power of judicial review by declaring an act of Congress unconstitutional. p. 188 Judicial review The authority of the Supreme Court to determine the constitutionality of the statutes. p. 188 
 War of 1812 War between Britain and the United States. U.S. justifications for war included British violations of American maritime rights, impressment of seamen, provocation of the Indians, and defense of national honor. p. 196 Battle of New Orleans Battle that occurred in 1815 at the end of the War of 1812 when U.S. forces defeated a British attempt to seize New Orleans. p. 198 Hartford Convention An assembly of New England Federalists who met in Hartford, Connecticut, in December 1814 to protest President James Madison’s foreign policy in the War of 1812, which had undermined commercial interests in the North. They proposed amending the Constitution to prevent future presidents from declaring war without a two-thirds majority in Congress. p. 198

 Embargo Act In response to a British attack on an American warship off the coast of Virginia, this 1807 law prohibited foreign commerce. p. 194 War Hawks Congressional leaders who, in 1811 and 1812, called for war against Britain. p. 195

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
During a period of international instability and conflict, how was the nation’s economy able to expand so impressively? 
 2. Was Jefferson a weak president, as some Federalists at the time

 3. Was Jefferson justified in his attacks on the federal courts? 4. In what way did the resolves of the Hartford Convention contribute to the demise of the Federalist Party?

 claimed? Provide reasons to support your position.

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 8 on MyHistoryLab Regional Identities in a New Republic

Embarrassments Overseas
Read the Document


Read the Document


Charles William Janson, The
Stranger in America p. 179


Read the Document


Margaret Bayard Smith, Reflections
 upon Meeting Jefferson p. 183

Jefferson as President
◾


View the Closer Look


Map of Louisiana Purchase, 1803


 p. 185

◾


Watch the Video


View the Map


The War of 1812 p. 196


Listen to the Audio File


Star-Spangled Banner p. 197


The Treaty of Ghent (1814) p. 199


◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment


Read the Document


Opinion for the Supreme Court for
Marbury v. Madison p. 188
Complete the Assignment


Barbary Pirates and


American Captives p. 190
Read the Document


Slaves 1807 p. 192


◾


Read the Document


 Jefferson’s Critics

◾


The Strange War of 1812


 Lewis & Clark: What were they trying to

 accomplish? p. 186

◾


James Madison, Inaugural Address


(1809) p. 195


Congress Prohibits Importation of




Nation Building and
Nationalism


Contents and Learning Objectives
EXPANSION AND MIGRATION PG. 203

THE POLITICS OF NATION BUILDING AFTER THE WAR OF 1812 PG. 215

 What key forces drove American expansion westward during this period?

A REVOLUTION IN TRANSPORTATION PG. 210

 What decisions did the federal government face as the country expanded?

 How did transportation networks change and improve after the War of 1812?

FEATURE ESSAY
Confronting a New Environment 
EMERGENCE OF A MARKET ECONOMY PG. 212
How did developments in transportation support the growth of agriculture, banking, and industry? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

