Chapter 19 Toward an Urban Society, 1877–1900


The Overcrowded City
 One day around 1900, Harriet Vittum, a settlement house worker in Chicago, went to the aid of a young Polish girl who lived in a nearby slum. The girl, aged 15, had discovered she was pregnant and had taken poison. An ambulance was on the way, and Vittum, told of the poisoning, rushed over to do what she could. Quickly, she raced up the three flights of stairs to the floor where the girl and her family lived. Pushing open the door, she found the father, several male boarders, and two or three small boys asleep on the kitchen floor. In the next room, the mother was on the floor among several women boarders and one or two small children. Glancing out the window, Vittum saw the wall of another building so close she could reach out and touch it. There was a third room; in it lay the 15-year-old girl, along with two more small children who were asleep. Looking at the scene, Vittum thought about the girl’s life in the crowded tenement. Should she try to save her? Vittum asked herself. Should she even try to bring the girl back “to the misery and hopelessness of the life she was living in that awful place”? The young girl died, and in later years, Vittum often told her story. It was easy to see why. The girl’s life in the slum, the children on the floor, the need to take in

 boarders to make ends meet, the way the mother and father collapsed at the end of a workday that began long before sunup—all reflected the experiences of millions of people living in the nation’s cities. ittum and people like her were attempting to respond to the overwhelming challenges of the nation’s burgeoning cities. People poured into cities in the last part of the nineteenth century, lured by glitter and excitement, by friends and relatives who were already there, and, above all, by the greater opportunities for jobs and higher wages. Between 1860 and 1910, the rural population of the United States almost doubled; the number of people living in cities increased sevenfold. Little of the increase came from natural growth, since urban families had high rates of infant mortality, a declining fertility rate, and a high death rate from injury and disease. Many of the newcomers came from rural America, and many more came from Europe, Latin America, and Asia. In one of the most significant migrations in American history, thousands of African Americans began in the 1880s to move from the rural South to northern cities. By 1900, there were large black communities in New York, Baltimore, Chicago, Washington, D.C., and other cities. Yet to come was the even greater black migration during World War I. Two major forces reshaped American society between 1870 and 1920. One was industrialization; the other was urbanization, the headlong rush of people from their rural roots into the modern urban environment. In these years, cities grew upward and outward,

V


Read the Document


Charles Loring Brace, “The Life of the Street Rats” (1872)


 The kitchen of a tenement apartment was often a multipurpose room. Here the tenement dwellers prepared and ate their meals; the room might also serve as a workroom, and it might be used as sleeping quarters for one or more members of the family. Source: © The Museum of the City of New York, The Byron Collection.

 attracting millions of newcomers and influencing politics, education, entertainment, and family life. By 1920, they had become the center of American economic, social, and cultural life.

The Lure of the City
 Why did cities in the United States grow between 1880 and 1900? Between 1870 and 1900, the city—like the factory—became a symbol of a new America. Drawn from farms, small towns, and foreign lands, newcomers swelled the population of older

 cities and created new ones almost overnight. At the beginning of the Civil War, only one-sixth of the American people lived in cities of eight thousand people or more. By 1900, one-third did; by 1920, one-half. “We live in the age of great cities,” wrote the Reverend Samuel Lane Loomis in 1887. “Each successive year finds a stronger and more irresistible current sweeping in towards the centers of life.” The current brought growth of an explosive sort. Thousands of years of history had produced only a handful of cities with more than a half million in population. In 1900, the United States had six such cities, including three—New York, Chicago, and Philadelphia—with populations greater than one million.



 CHAPTER 19

TOWARD AN URBAN SOCIETY, 1877–1900

 which concealed the steel framework, were no longer load bearing; they were pierced by many windows that let in fresh air and light. Completed in 1885, the Home Insurance Building in Chicago was the country’s first metal-frame structure. To a group of talented Chicago architects, the new trends served as a springboard for innovative forms. The leaders of the movement were John Root and Louis H. Sullivan, both of whom were attracted by the chance to rebuild Chicago after the great fire of 1871. Noting that the fire had fed on fancy exterior ornamentation, Root developed a plain, stripped-down style, bold in mass and form—the keynotes of modern architecture. He had another important insight, too. In an age of business, Root thought, the office tower, more than a church or a government building, symbolized the society, and he designed office buildings that carried out, as he said, “the ideas of modern business life: simplicity, stability, breadth, dignity.” Sullivan had studied at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and in Paris before settling in Chicago. In 1886, at the age of thirty, he began work on the Chicago Auditorium, one of the last great masonry buildings. “Then came the flash of imagination which saw the single thing,” he later said. “The trick was turned; and there swiftly came into being something new under the sun.” Sullivan’s skyscrapers, that “flash of imagination,” changed the urban skyline. In the Wainwright Building in St. Louis (1890), the Schiller Building (1892) and the Carson, Pirie, and Scott department store (1899) in Chicago, and the Prudential Building in Buffalo (1895), Sullivan developed the new forms. Architects must discard The Wainwright Building (1890) in St. Louis Missouri was designed by Chicago architect Louis Sullivan. “books, rules, precedents,” he announced; The 10-story red brick office building was one of the first skyscrapers in the world and had many of the responding to the new, they should design modern design features found in Sullivan's buildings of this period. for a building’s function. “Form follows function,” Sullivan believed, and he passed the idea on to a talented disciple, Frank Lloyd Wright. The modern Skyscrapers and Suburbs city should stretch to the sky. Like so many things in these years, the city was transformed by Electric elevators, first used in 1871, carried passengers upward a revolution in technology. Beginning in the 1880s, the age of in the new skyscrapers. During the same years, streetcars, another steel and glass produced the skyscraper; the streetcar produced innovation, carried the people outward to expanded boundaries the suburbs and new residential patterns. that transformed urban life. On the eve of the change, American cities were a crowded Cities were no longer largely “walking cities,” confined to a jumble of small buildings. Church steeples stood out on the skyline, radius of two or three miles, the distance an individual might walk. clearly visible above the roofs of factories and office buildings. Streetcar systems extended the radius and changed the urban map. Buildings were usually made of masonry, and since the massive Cable lines, electric surface lines, and elevated rapid transit brought walls had to support their own weight, they could be no taller than shoppers and workers into central business districts and sped them a dozen or so stories. Steel frames and girders ended that limitation home again. Offering a modest five-cent fare with a free transfer, and allowed buildings to soar higher and higher. “Curtain walls,” the mass transit systems fostered commuting and widely separated

The Lure of the City


 business and residential districts sprang up. The middle class moved farther and farther out to the leafy greenness of the suburbs. As the middle class moved out of the cities, the immigrants and working class poured in. They took over the older brownstones, row houses, and workers’ cottages, turning them, under the sheer weight of numbers, into the slums of the central city. In the cities of the past, classes and occupations had been thrown together; without streetcars and subways, there was no other choice. The streetcar city, sprawling and specialized, became a more fragmented and stratified society with middle-class residential rings surrounding a business and working-class core.

Tenements and the Problems
 of Overcrowding In the shadow of the skyscrapers, grimy rows of tenements filled the central city. Tenement houses on small city lots crowded people into cramped apartments. In the late 1870s, architect James E. Ware won a competition for tenement design with the “dumbbell tenement.” Rising seven or eight stories in height, the dumbbell tenement packed about thirty four-room apartments on a lot only 25 by 100 feet. Between four and sixteen families lived on a floor; two toilets in the hall of each floor served their needs. Narrowed at the middle, the tenement resembled a giant dumbbell in shape. The indented middle created an air shaft between adjoining buildings that provided a little light and ventilation. In case of fire, it also carried flames from one story to the next, making the buildings notorious firetraps. In 1890, nearly half the dwellings in New York City were tenements. That year, more than 1.4 million people lived on Manhattan Island, one of whose wards had a population density of 334,000 people per square mile. Many people lived in alleys and basements so dark they could not be photographed until flashlight photography was invented in 1887. Exploring the city, William Dean Howells, the prominent author, inhaled “the stenches of the neglected street . . . [and] the yet fouler and dreadfuller poverty smell which breathes from the open doorways.” Howells smelled more than poverty. In the 1870s and 1880s, cities stank. One problem was horse manure, hundreds of tons of it a day in every city. Another was the privy, “a single one of which,” said a leading authority on public health, “may render life in a whole neighborhood almost unendurable in the summer.” Said one New York City resident, “The stench is something terrible.” Another wrote that “the stink is enough to knock you down.” In 1880, the Chicago Times said that a “solid stink” pervaded the city. “No other word expresses it so well as stink. A stench means something finite. Stink reaches the infinite and becomes sublime in the magnitude of odiousness.” In 1892, one neighborhood of Chicago, covering one-third of a square mile, had only three bathtubs. Cities dumped their wastes into the nearest body of water, then drew drinking water from the same site. Many built modern purified waterworks but could not keep pace with spiraling growth. In 1900, fewer than one in ten city dwellers drank filtered water. Factories, the pride of the era, polluted the urban air. At night, Pittsburgh looked and sounded like “Hell with the lid off,” according to contemporary observers. Smoke poured from seventy-three



 glass factories, forty-one iron and steel mills, and twenty-nine oil refineries. The choking air helped prevent lung diseases and malaria—or so the city’s advertising claimed. Crime was another growing problem. The nation’s homicide rate nearly tripled in the 1880s, much of the increase coming in the cities. After remaining constant for many decades, the suicide rate rose steadily between 1870 and 1900, according to a study of Philadelphia. Alcoholism also rose, especially among men, though recent studies have shown that for working-class men, the urban saloon was as much a gathering spot as it was a place to drink. Nonetheless, a 1905 survey of Chicago counted as many saloons as grocery stores, meat markets, and dry goods stores combined.

Strangers in a New Land
 While some of the new city dwellers came from farms and small towns, many more came from abroad. Most came from Europe, where unemployment, food shortages, and increasing threats of war sent millions fleeing across the Atlantic to make a fresh start. Often they knew someone already in the United States, a friend or relative who had written them about prospects for jobs and freer lives in a new land. Italians first came in large numbers to escape an 1887 cholera epidemic in southern Italy; tens of thousands of Jews sought refuge from the anti-Semitic massacres that swept Russia and czarist-ruled Poland after 1880.

View the Closer Look


Group of Emigrants (Women
 and Children) from Eastern Europe on Deck of the S.S. Amsterdam

 Francis Eastman Johnston, the photographer of Group Emigrants (Women and Children) from Eastern Europe on Deck of the S.S. Amsterdam (1899), was one of the earliest female photographers and photojournalists. Her photograph above captures the productive promise of Eastern European immigrants coming to the United States during this era seeking economic opportunity, religious freedom, and an escape from deadly epidemics in Europe.

 Complete the Assignment Ellis Island: Isle of Hope, Isle of Tears on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


Ellis Island
Isle of Hope, Isle of Tears


Watch the Video Ellis Island Immigrants


 From 1892 to 1924, Ellis Island in New York Harbor was America’s largest and most active immigration station, where over 12 million immigrants, mostly from Europe, were processed. The review process included a personal health inspection and proof of minimal funds. In exceptional cases, an immigrant would be sent home if he or she failed the inspection and could not be treated in the hospital for any medical problems.

T


 en years after he left Selo, his small Bulgarian village, for the United States, Michael Gurkin returned to tell of the wonders he had seen, including “buildings that scratched the sky,” rooms in them that moved up and down, buttons that, pushed, lit a house or a street. Stoyan Christowe, thirteen, listened intently, caught up in the “Americamania,” as he called it, that swept through his village. Soon he was on his way to the new



 land, his pockets stuffed with walnuts because he was too young to drink the farewell toast. Unknowingly, he had joined a flood of people who were making their way to the United States. Between 1880 and 1920, a period of just forty years, the remarkable total of 23.5 million immigrants arrived in the country. They came from around the world, though mostly from Europe, driven from their homelands by economic, religious, or other troubles, lured across the ocean by the chance for a

 better life. They entered the country through several ports, but by far the most—about seven out of every ten— landed in the city of New York. Until 1892, they landed at a depot known as Castle Garden, a sprawling building on the tip of Manhattan Island. When it could no longer handle the flow, the entry site was moved to Ellis Island, close to the Statue of Liberty. Contractors erected a wooden structure, which opened in 1892 and burned down five years later. They then put up the current edifice, an imposing red brick building

 with triple-arch entrances and corner steeples. A small city, it had dormitories, a hospital, a post office, and showers that could bathe eight thousand people a day. It opened in 1900. The change to Ellis Island represented more than just a shift in site. Entrance at Castle Garden had been fairly informal, since control over immigration still rested largely in the hands of the states. Officials merely registered newcomers, a process that took about thirty seconds. In 1891, worried about the growing numbers of people who wanted in, Congress acted to bring immigration under federal control. Ellis Island was given tasks Castle Garden had never had, including mandates to keep out people some Americans considered undesirable. It became, one observer said, “the nearest earthly likeness to the Final Day of Judgement, when we have to prove our fitness to enter Heaven.” Many of those who sailed into the harbor, it should be remembered, never passed through the island at all. Arriving in first or second class, they had a fast on-board examination and went ashore, monied enough, it was assumed, not to become wards of the state. But those in third class—”steerage,” as it was known—had a very different experience, and they faced it chock full of fear they would fail some test and be sent back home. The day they docked, in 1910, Christowe and others washed thoroughly, hoping to look clean enough to pass inspection. Crowding the ship’s rails, they gazed in wonder at the statue in the harbor, its arm lifted in the air. It was a saint, some guessed; Christopher Columbus, others said. It was a monument to freedom, Christowe was told, with Emma Lazarus’s inviting poem at its base, “Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free.” Once on the island, those huddled masses were under scrutiny from the moment they landed. Officials watched them climb the stairs, looking for heart problems or lameness. Physicians administered the “sixsecond exam,” checking quickly for disabilities or contagious diseases. If

 anything seemed out of sort, they put a chalk mark on the immigrant’s coat calling for closer examination. The next exam was the most feared: a doctor using a tailor’s buttonhook to pull back eyelids to look for signs of diseases such as trachoma, a highly contagious bacterial eye infection that could lead to blindness. Most immigrants had never heard of trachoma, nor even knew they had the disease, but it alone could strand them in the island’s hospital or put them on a boat back home. No one who went through the exam ever forgot it, as an immigrant poet wrote: A stranger receives us Harshly and asks: “And your health?” He examines us. His look Assesses us like dogs. He studies in depth Eyes and mouth. No doubt That if he’d probed our hearts He would have seen the wound. Immigrants with chalk marks were herded to the left, while most went to the right, filing by a matron who searched the faces of women for evidence of “loose character.” With so many languages among the arrivals, there were few written signs, and officials used metal barricades to guide people along, “like puppets on conveyor belts,” Christowe later recalled. Last there were the inspectors, seated behind desks, asking name, age, occupation, among dozens of other questions. On a busy day, the inspectors had two minutes to decide the fate of a newcomer. Those who “failed” went before a feared Board of Special Inquiry for final decision. For most immigrants the whole process took less than five hours; many others, held for proof of funds or further examination, spent days in the dormitories or hospital. Despite the harsh rumors, no more than 3 percent in a given year were turned away. Still, it was becoming harder to get in. People who feared the effect of immigrants on the nation clamored to keep them out. Some worried about the numbers of people who were arriving, others about disease or “radical” political views. Some did not like the shift in immigration after 1890 from

 largely Protestant northern and western Europe to Catholics, Jews, and others from southern and eastern Europe. Reflecting such concerns, Congress passed laws to keep certain types of people out. In 1875, it prohibited the entrance of criminals and prostitutes. In 1882, it barred convicts and lunatics and excluded laborers from China, the first measure aimed directly at a racial group. In 1885, it banned the entry of laborers under contract, imported by industries to work at low wages; in 1891, polygamists and people with “loathsome” diseases; in 1903, anarchists. In 1917, it passed, over Woodrow Wilson’s veto, a literacy test that required immigrants to read a passage in their native tongue. The great burst of immigration, halted during World War I, ended with the adoption of restrictive legislation in the 1920s. Ellis Island became a detention center for “radicals” and other people awaiting deportation. Once the gateway to the United States, the famous island had become an exit. Ellis Island closed in 1954 and in 1965, recognizing its historic importance, the government made it a national monument. It reopened in 1990 as a museum of American immigration, attracting more than two million tourists a year, many of whom retrace the footsteps of their ancestors who had landed there. Stoyan Christowe’s name is in the records. Starting with a miserable job in a railroad yard in St. Louis, he went to college, served in military intelligence during World War II, wrote several books, and became a member of the Vermont legislature. His experience on Ellis Island blended into the nation’s experience. More than one hundred million Americans—about four in every ten— trace their ancestry to those who found a new home through its gates.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
What arguments did Americans use to justify limiting immigration during this era? 2. How did the experience on arrival in the U.S. of those who traveled in first or second class differ from that of steerage passengers? 


 CHAPTER 19

TOWARD AN URBAN SOCIETY, 1877–1900

 foreign-born parentage, two-thirds of Boston’s, and one-half of Philadelphia’s. New York City, where most immigrants arrived and many stayed, had more Italians than lived in Naples, IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES, 1870–1900 more Germans than lived in Hamburg, and twice as many Irish as lived in Dublin. Four Immigrants Northern and Western Europe out of five New York City residents in 1890 (thousands) Southern and Eastern Europe were of foreign birth or foreign parentage. Asia, Africa, and America Beginning in the 1880s, the sources of immigration shifted dramatically away from northern and western Europe, the chief source of immigration for more than two centu400 ries. More and more immigrants came from southern and eastern Europe: Italy, Greece, Austria-Hungary, Poland, and Russia. Between 1880 and 1910, approximately 8.4 million people came from these lands. The new immigrants tended to be Catholics or Jews rather than Protestants. Like their predeces100 sors, most were unskilled rather than skilled, and they often spoke “strange” languages. Most were poor and uneducated; sticking together in close-knit communities, they clung to their Year of arrival native customs, languages, and religions. More than any previous group, the soNote: For purposes of classification, “Northern and Western Europe” includes Great Britain, Ireland, called new immigrants troubled the mainScandinavia, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, Switzerland, France, and Germany. “Southern and stream society. Could they be assimilated? Did Eastern Europe” includes Poland, Austria-Hungary, Russia and the Baltic States, Romania, Bulgaria, they share “American” values? Such questions European Turkey, Italy, Spain, Portugal, and Greece. “Asia, Africa, and America” includes Asian Turkey, China, Japan, India, Canada, the Caribbean, Latin America, and all of Africa. preoccupied such groups as the American Protective Association, a midwestern antiSource: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970, Bicentennial Edition, Washington, DC, 1975. Catholic organization that expanded in the 1890s and worked to limit or end immigration. All told, the immigration figures were staggering. Between 1877 Sneering epithets became part of the national vocabulary: “wop” and and 1890, more than 6.3 million people entered the United States. In “dago” for Italians; “bohunk” for Bohemians, Hungarians, and other one year alone, 1882, almost 789,000 people came. By 1890, about Slavs; “greaseball” for Greeks; and “kike” for Jews. “You don’t call . . . 15 percent of the population, nine million people, were foreign born. an Italian a white man?” a congressman asked a railroad construcMost newcomers were job seekers. Nearly two-thirds were tion boss in 1890. “No, sir,” the boss replied. “An Italian is a Dago.” males, and the majority were between the ages of fifteen and forty. Anti-Catholicism and anti-Semitism flared up again, as they Most were unskilled laborers. Most settled on the eastern seaboard. had in the 1850s. The Immigration Restriction League, founded in In 1901, the Industrial Relocation Office was established to relieve 1894, demanded a literacy test for immigrants from southern and overcrowding in the eastern cities; opening Galveston, Texas, as eastern Europe. Congress passed such a law in 1896, but President a port of entry, it attracted many Russian Jews to Texas and the Cleveland vetoed it. Southwest. But most immigrants preferred the shorter, more familiar journey to New York. Entering through Ellis Island in New York Immigrants and the City harbor, as four in every ten immigrants did, most tended to crowd into northern and eastern cities, settling in areas where others of Industrial capitalism—the world of factories and foremen and their nationality or religion lived. (See the Feature Essay, “Ellis grimy machines—tested the immigrants and placed an enormous Island: Isle of Hope, Isle of Tears,” pp. 442–443.) strain on their families. Many immigrants came from peasant sociThey were often dazzled by what they saw. They stared at eties where life proceeded according to outdoor routine and age-old electric lights, indoor plumbing, soda fountains, streetcars, plush tradition. In their new city homes, they found both new freedoms train seats for all classes, ice cream, lemons, and bananas. Relatives and new confinements, a different language, and a novel set of whisked them off to buy new “American” clothes and showed them customs and expectations. Historians have only recently begun to the teeming markets, department stores, and Woolworth’s new fivediscover the remarkable ways in which they learned to adjust. and-ten stores. “It seemed quite advanced compared with our home Like native-born families, most immigrant families were in Khelm,” said a Polish girl. “There was a sense of safety and hope nuclear in structure—they consisted of two parents and their that we had never felt in Poland.” children. Though variations occurred from group to group, men Cities had increasingly large foreign-born populations. In and women occupied roles similar to those in native families: 1900, four-fifths of Chicago’s population was foreign born or of Men were wage earners, women were housekeepers and mothers. View the Map

Immigration, 1880–1920




The Lure of the City


CANADA WASHINGTON

MAINE NORTH DAKOTA

 MONTANA

VT. N.H.

MINN. SOUTH DAKOTA IDAHO

 MASS.

NEW YORK

OREGON WIS.

R.I.


 MICH.

 WYOMING

 PENN.

IOWA NEBRASKA

OHIO ILL.

 NEVADA

W.
 VA.

COLORADO KANSAS

 DEL.

 IND.

 UTAH

 CONN.

N.J.


 VA.

 MD.

KY. MISSOURI

N.C.
 TENN.

CALIFORNIA OKLAHOMA ARIZONA

PACIFIC OCEAN

S.C.


 ARK.

NEW MEXICO

 MISS.

 ALA.

 GEORGIA

AT L A N T I C OCEAN

LA. TEXAS

Percent of Total Population


 FLORIDA 34 or more

 MEXICO

10–34
1–10




 1 or less





 400 miles

Gulf of Mexico


 400 kilometers

 Not reported

FOREIGN-BORN POPULATION, 1890

 Immigrants tended to settle in regions where jobs were relatively plentiful or conditions were similar to those they had left in their homelands. Cities of the Northeast, Midwest, and West offered job opportunities, while land available for cultivation drew immigrant farmers to the plains and prairies of the nation’s midsection.

 Margaret Byington, who studied steelworkers’ homes in Homestead in the early 1900s, learned that the father played a relatively small role in child rearing or managing the family’s finances. “His part of the problem is to earn and hers to spend.” In Chicago, social reformer Jane Addams discovered that immigrant women made it “a standard of domestic virtue that a man must not touch his pay envelope, but bring it home unopened to his wife.” Although patterns varied among ethnic groups, and between economic classes within ethnic groups, immigrants tended to marry within the group more than did the native born. Immigrants also tended to marry at a later age than natives, and they tended to have more children, a fact that worried nativists opposed to immigration. Immigrants shaped the city as much as it shaped them. Most of them tried to retain their traditional culture for themselves and their children while at the same time adapting to life in their new country. To do this, they spoke their native language, practiced their religious faith, read their own newspapers, and established special parochial or other schools. They observed traditional holidays and formed a myriad of social organizations to maintain ties among members of the group. Immigrant associations—there were many of them in every city—offered fellowship in a strange land. They helped newcomers find jobs and homes; they provided important services such as

 unemployment insurance and health insurance. In a Massachusetts textile town, the Irish Benevolent Society said, “We visit our sick, and bury our dead.” Some groups were no larger than a neighborhood; others spread nationwide. In 1914, the Deutsch-Amerikanischer Nationalbund, the largest of the associations, had more than two million members in dozens of cities and towns. Many women belonged to and participated in the work of the immigrant associations; in addition, there were groups exclusively for women, such as the Polish Women’s Alliance, the Jednota Ceskyck Dam (Society of Czech Women), and the National Council of Jewish Women. The Polish National Alliance (PNA), a typical immigrant association, was founded in 1880. Like other organizations, it helped new immigrants on their arrival, offered insurance plans, established libraries and museums, sponsored youth programs, fielded baseball teams, and organized trips back to Poland. Each year, the PNA published a sought-after calendar filled with Polish holidays, information, and proverbs. Extolling Poles’ contributions to their new country, it erected monuments to distinguished Americans of Polish descent. Every major city had dozens of foreign language newspapers, with circulations large and small. The first newspaper published in the Lithuanian language appeared in the United States, not in Lithuania. Eagerly read, the papers not only carried news of events



 CHAPTER 19

TOWARD AN URBAN SOCIETY, 1877–1900

 in the homeland but also reported on local ethnic leaders, told readers how to vote and become citizens, and gave practical tips on adjusting to life in the United States. The Swedes, Poles, Czechs, and Germans established ethnic theaters that performed national plays and music. The most famous of these, the Yiddish (Jewish) Theater, started in the 1880s in New York City and lasted more than fifty years. The church and the school were the most important institutions in every immigrant community. Eastern European Jews established synagogues and religious schools wherever they settled; they taught the Hebrew language and raised their children in a heritage they did not want to leave behind. Among such groups as the Irish and the Poles, the Roman Catholic church provided spiritual and educational guidance. In the parish schools, Polish priests and nuns taught Polish American children about Polish as well as American culture in the Polish language. Church, school, and fraternal societies shaped the way in which immigrants adjusted to life in America. By preserving language, religion, and heritage, they also shaped the country itself.

Watch the Video


Democracy and Corruption: The Rise of Political Machines


The House That
Tweed Built
 Closely connected with explosive urban growth was the emergence of the powerful city political machine. This political cartoon skewers the success of political bosses, such as the depicted Boss (William) Tweed As cities grew, lines of responsibility of New York, to manipulate the political process and use patronage to enrich themselves and retain political in city governments became hope- power in various cities during this period. lessly confused, increasing the opportunity for corruption and greed. Burgeoning populations required William M. Tweed, head of the famed Tweed Ring in New streets, buildings, and public services; immigrants needed even York, provided the model for them all. Nearly six feet tall, weighmore services. In this situation, political party machines played an ing almost three hundred pounds, Tweed rose through the ranks important role. of Tammany Hall. He served in turn as city alderman, member The machines traded services for votes. Loosely knit, they of Congress, and New York State assemblyman. A man of culture were headed by a strong, influential leader—the “boss”—who tied and warmth, he moved easily between the rough back alleys of together a network of ward and precinct captains, each of whom New York and the parlors and clubs of the city’s elite. Behind the looked after his local constituents. In New York, “Honest” John scenes, he headed a ring that plundered New York for tens of milKelly, Richard Croker, and Charles F. Murphy led Tammany Hall, lions of dollars. the famous Democratic party organization that dominated city The New York County Courthouse—“the house that Tweed politics from the 1850s to the 1930s. Other bosses included “Hinky built”—was his masterpiece. Nestled in City Hall Park in downDink” Kenna and “Bathhouse John” Coughlin in Chicago, James town Manhattan, the three-story structure was designed to McManes in Philadelphia, and Christopher A. Buckley—the notocost $250,000, but the bills ran a bit higher. Andrew Garvey, the rious “Blind Boss,” who used an exceptional memory for voices to “prince of plasterers,” charged $500,000 for plasterwork, and make up for failing eyesight—in San Francisco. then $1 million to repair the same work. His total bill came to

Social and Cultural Change, 1877–1900


 $2,870,464.06. (The New York Times suggested that the six cents be donated to charity.) In the end, the building cost more than $13 million—and in 1872, when Tweed fell, it was still not finished. The role of the political bosses can be overemphasized. Power structures in the turn-of-the-century city were complex, involving a host of people and institutions. Banks, real estate investors, insurance companies, architects, and engineers, among others, played roles in governing the city. Viewed in retrospect, many city governments were remarkably successful. With populations that in some cases doubled every decade, city governments provided water and sewer lines, built parks and playgrounds, and paved streets. When it was over, Boston had the world’s largest public library and New York City had the Brooklyn Bridge and Central Park, two of the finest achievements in city planning and architecture of any era. By the 1890s, New York also had 660 miles of water lines, 464 miles of sewers, and 1,800 miles of paved streets, far more than comparable cities in Europe. Bosses, moreover, differed from city to city. Buckley stayed in power in San Francisco by keeping city tax rates low. “Honest” John Kelly earned his nickname serving as a watchdog over the New York City treasury. Tweed was one of the early backers of the Brooklyn Bridge. Some bosses were plainly corrupt; others believed in honest graft, a term Tammany’s George Washington Plunkitt coined to describe “legitimate” profits made from advance knowledge of city projects. Why did voters keep the bosses in power? The answers are complex, but two reasons were skillful political organization and the fact that immigrants and others made up the bosses’ constituency. Most immigrants had little experience with democratic government and proved easy prey for well-oiled machines. For the most part, however, the bosses stayed in power because they paid attention to the needs of the least privileged city voters. They offered valued services in an era when neither government nor business lent a hand. If an immigrant, tired and bewildered after the long crossing, came looking for a job, bosses like Tweed, Plunkitt, or Buckley found him one in city offices or local businesses. If a family’s breadwinner died or was injured, the bosses donated food and clothing and saw to it that the family made it through the crisis. If the winter was particularly cold, they provided free coal to heat tenement apartments. They ran picnics for slum children on hot summer days and contributed to hospitals, orphanages, and dozens of worthy neighborhood causes. Most bosses became wealthy; they were not Robin Hoods who took from the rich to give to the poor. They took for themselves as well. Reformers occasionally ousted them. Tweed fell from power in 1872, “Blind Boss” Buckley in 1891, Croker in 1894. But the reformers rarely stayed in power long. Drawn mainly from the middle and upper classes, they had little understanding of the needs of the poor. Before long, they returned to private concerns, and the bosses, who had known that they would all along, cheerily took power again. “What tells in holdin’ your grip on your district,” the engaging Plunkitt once said, “is to go right down among the poor families and help them in the different ways they need help. . . . It’s philanthropy, but it’s politics, too—mighty good politics . . . . The poor are the most grateful people in the world.”



Social and Cultural Change,
1877–1900
 How did the growth of American cities affect social, cultural, and political life? The rise of cities and industry between 1877 and the 1890s affected all aspects of American life. Mores changed; family ties loosened. Factories turned out consumer goods, and the newly invented cash register rang up record sales. Public and private educational systems burgeoned, illiteracy declined, life expectancy increased. While many people worked harder and harder just to survive, others found they had a greater amount of leisure time. The roles of women and children changed in a number of ways, and the family took on functions it had not had before. Thanks to advancing technology, news flashed quickly across the oceans, and for the first time in history, people read of the day’s events in distant lands when they opened their daily newspapers. “We are in a period,” President Rutherford B. Hayes said in 1878, “when old questions are settled, and the new ones are not yet brought forward.” Old questions—questions of racial, social and economic justice, and of federal-state relations—were not settled, but people wanted new directions. Political issues lost the sharp focus of the Civil War and Reconstruction. For men and women of middle age in 1877, the issues of the Union and slavery had been the overriding public concerns throughout their adult lives. Now, with the end of Reconstruction, it seemed time for new concerns. In 1877, the country had 47 million people. In 1900, it had nearly 76 million. Nine-tenths of the population was white; just under one-tenth was black. There were 66,000 American Indians, 108,000 Chinese, and 148 Japanese. The bulk of the white population,

URBAN AND RURAL POPULATION, 1870–1900 (IN MILLIONS)
Millions 
Urban




Rural












Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial
Times to 1970, Bicentennial Edition, Washington, DC, 1975.




 CHAPTER 19

TOWARD AN URBAN SOCIETY, 1877–1900

 most of whom were Protestant, came from the so-called AngloSaxon countries of northern Europe. WASPs—white Anglo-Saxon Protestants—were the dominant members of American society. Though the rush to the cities was about to begin, most people of 1877 still lived on farms or in small towns. Their lives revolved around the farm, the church, and the general store. In 1880, nearly 75 percent of the population lived in communities of fewer than 2,500 people. In 1900, in the midst of city growth, 60 percent still did. The average family in 1880 had three children, dramatically fewer than at the beginning of the century, and life expectancy was about 43 years. By 1900, it had risen to 47 years, a result of improved health care. For blacks and other minorities, who often lived in unsanitary rural areas, life expectancy was substantially lower: 33 years. Meals tended to be heavy, and so did people. Even breakfast had several courses and could include steak, eggs, fish, potatoes, toast, and coffee. Food prices were low. Families ate fresh homegrown produce in the summer and “put up” their fruits and vegetables for the long winters. Toward the end of the century, eating habits changed. New packaged breakfast cereals became popular; fresh fruit and vegetables came in on fast trains from Florida and California, and commercially canned food became safer and cheaper. The newfangled icebox, cooled by blocks of ice, kept food fresher and added new treats such as ice cream. Medical science was in the midst of a major revolution. Louis Pasteur’s recent discovery that germs cause infection and disease created the new science of microbiology and led the way to the development of vaccines and other preventive measures. But tuberculosis, typhoid, diphtheria, and pneumonia—all now curable— were still the leading causes of death. Infant mortality declined between 1877 and 1900, but the decline was gradual; a great drop did not come until after 1920. There were few hospitals and no hospital insurance. Most patients stayed at home, although medical practice, especially surgery, expanded rapidly. Once brutal and dangerous, surgery in these years became relatively safe and painless. Anesthetics—ether and chloroform—eliminated pain, and antiseptic practices helped prevent postoperative infections. Antiseptic practices at childbirth also cut down on puerperal fever, an infection that for centuries had killed many women and newborn infants. The new science of psychology began to explore the mind, hitherto uncharted. William James, a leading American psychologist and philosopher, laid the foundations of modern behavioral psychology, which emphasized the importance of the environment on human development.

 the bottle; they puffed cigarettes behind the barn. Counterbalancing such youthful exuberance was strong pride in virtue and self-control. “Thank heaven I am absolutely pure,” Theodore Roosevelt, the future president, wrote in 1880 after proposing to Alice Lee. “I can tell Alice everything I have ever done.” Gentlemen of the middle class dressed in heavy black suits, derby hats, and white shirts with paper collars. Women wore tight corsets, long dark dresses, and black shoes reaching well above the ankles. As with so many things, styles changed dramatically toward the end of the century, spurred in part by new sporting fads such as golf, tennis, and bicycling, which required looser clothing. By the 1890s, a middle-class woman wore a tailored suit or a dark skirt and a blouse, called a shirtwaist, modeled after men’s shirts. Her skirts still draped about the ankles, but more and more she removed or loosened the corset, the dread device that squeezed skin and internal organs into fashionable 18-inch waistlines. Religious and patriotic values were strong. A center of community life, the church often set the tenor for family and social relationships. In the 1880s, eight out of ten church members were Protestants; most of the rest were Roman Catholics. Evangelists such as Dwight L. Moody (a former Chicago shoe salesman) and Ira B. Sankey (an organist and singer) conducted mass revival meetings across the country. Enormously successful, Moody preached to millions and sparked a spiritual awakening on American college campuses. With slavery abolished, reformers turned their attention to new moral and political issues. One group, known as the Mugwumps, worked to end corruption in politics. Drawn mostly from the educated and upper class, they included Thomas Nast, the famous political cartoonist; George William Curtis, editor of Harper’s Weekly; and E. L. Godkin, editor of the influential Nation. Other zealous reformers campaigned for prohibition of the sale of intoxicating liquors, hoping to end the social evils that stemmed from drunkenness. In 1874, women who advocated total abstinence from alcoholic beverages formed the Women’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU). Their leader, Frances E. Willard, served as president of the group from 1879 until her death in 1898. By then, the WCTU had ten thousand branches and five hundred thousand members. In New York City, Anthony Comstock formed the Society for the Suppression of Vice, which supervised public morality. At his request, Congress passed the Comstock Law (1873) prohibiting the mailing or transporting of “obscene, lewd or lascivious” articles. The law was not successful; within a few years, Comstock reported finding 64,094 “articles for immoral use,” 700 pounds of “lead moulds for making obscene matter,” 202,679 obscene photographs, and 26 “obscene pictures, framed on walls of saloons.”

Manners and Mores
 The code of Victorian morality, its name derived from the British queen who reigned throughout the period, set the tone for the era. The code prescribed strict standards of dress, manners, and sexual behavior. It was both obeyed and disobeyed, and it reflected the tensions of a generation that was undergoing a change in moral standards. In 1877, children were to be seen and not heard. They spoke when spoken to, listened rather than chattered—or at least that was the rule. Older boys and girls were often chaperoned, although they could always find moments alone. They played post office and spin

Leisure and Entertainment
 In the 1870s, people tended to rise early. On getting up, they washed from the pitcher and bowl in the bedroom, first breaking the layer of ice if it was winter. After dressing and eating, they went off to work and school. Without large refrigerators, housewives marketed almost daily. In the evening, families gathered in the “second parlor” or living room, where the children did their lessons, played games, sang around the piano, and listened to that day’s verse from the Bible. Popular games included cards, dominoes, backgammon, chess, and checkers. Many homes had a packet of “author cards” that

Social and Cultural Change, 1877–1900


 required knowledge of books, authors, and noted quotations. The latest fad was the stereopticon or “magic lantern,” which brought three-dimensional life to art, history, and nature. Like author cards and other games, it was instructional as well as entertaining. Sentimental ballads such as “Silver Threads Among the Gold” (1873) remained the most popular musical form, but the insistent syncopated rhythms of ragtime were being heard, reflecting the influence of the new urban culture. By the time the strains of Scott Joplin’s “Maple Leaf Rag” (1899) popularized ragtime, critics complained that “a wave of vulgar, filthy and suggestive music has inundated the land.” Classical music flourished. The New England Conservatory (1867), the Cincinnati College of Music (1878), and the Metropolitan Opera (1883) were new sources of civic pride; New York, Boston, and Chicago launched first-rate symphony orchestras between 1878 and 1891. In the hamlets and small towns of America, traveling circuses were enormously popular. Hamlin Garland, an author who grew up in small Iowa villages, recalled how the circus came “trailing clouds of glorified dust and filling our minds with the color of romance . . . . It brought to our ears the latest band pieces and taught us the popular songs. It furnished us with jokes. It relieved our dullness. It gave us something to talk about.” Larger circuses, run by entrepreneurs such as P. T. Barnum and James A. Bailey, played the cities, but every town attracted its own smaller version. Fairs, horse races, balloon ascensions, bicycle tournaments, and football and baseball contests attracted avid fans. The years between 1870 and 1900 saw the rise of organized spectator sports, a trend reflecting both the rise of the city and the new uses of leisure. Baseball’s first professional team, the Cincinnati Red Stockings, appeared in 1869, and baseball soon became the preeminent national sport. Fans sang songs about it (“Take Me Out to the Ballgame”), wrote poems about it (“Casey at the Bat”), and made up riddles about it (“What has eighteen feet and catches flies?”). Modern rules were adopted. Umpires were designated to call balls and strikes; catchers wore masks and chest protectors and moved closer to the plate instead of staying back to catch the ball on the bounce. Fielders had to catch the ball on the fly rather than on one bounce in their caps. By 1890, professional baseball teams were drawing crowds of sixty thousand daily. In 1901, the American League was organized, and two years later the Boston Red Sox beat the Pittsburgh Pirates in the first modern World Series. In 1869, Princeton and Rutgers played the first intercollegiate football game. Soon, other schools picked up the sport, and by the early 1890s, crowds of fifty thousand or more attended the most popular contests. Basketball, invented in 1891, gained a large following. Boxing, a popular topic of conversation in saloons and schoolyards, was outlawed in most states. For a time, championship prizefights were held in secret, with news of the result spread rapidly by word of mouth. Matches were long and bloody, fought with bare knuckles until the invention in the 1880s of the 5-ounce boxing glove. John L. Sullivan, the “Boston Strong Boy” and the era’s most popular champion, won the heavyweight title in 1889 in a brutal 75-round victory over the stubborn Jake Kilrain. As gas and electric lights brightened the night, and streetcars crisscrossed city streets, leisure habits changed. Delighted with the new technology, people took advantage of an increasing variety of things to do. They stayed home less often. New York City’s first



 electric sign—“Manhattan Beach Swept by Ocean Breezes”— appeared in 1881, and people went out at night filling the streets on their way to the theater, vaudeville shows, and dance halls or just out for an evening stroll.

Changes in Family Life
 Under the impact of industrialization and urbanization, family relationships were changing. On the farm, parents and children worked more or less together, and the family was a producing unit. In factories and offices, family members rarely worked together. In working-class families, mothers, fathers, and children separated at dawn and returned, ready for sleep, at dark. Morris Rosenfeld, a clothing presser lamenting that he was unable to spend more time with his son, wrote a poem titled “My Boy”: I have a little boy at home, A pretty little son; I think sometimes the world is mine In him, my only one. . . . ‘Ere dawn my labor drives me forth; Tis night when I am free; A stranger am I to my child; And stranger my child to me. Working-class families of the late nineteenth century, like the family of the young Polish girl that Harriet Vittum saw, often lived in complex household units—taking in relatives and boarders to pay the rent. As many as one-third of all households contained people who were not members of the immediate family. Although driven apart by the daily routine, family ties among the working class tended to remain strong, cemented by the need to join forces in order to survive in the industrial economy. The middle-class wife and children, however, became increasingly isolated from the world of work. Turning inward, the middle-class family became more self-contained. Older children spent more time in adolescence, and periods of formal schooling were lengthier. Families took in fewer apprentices and boarders. By the end of the century, most middle-class offspring continued to live with their parents into their late teens and their twenties, a larger proportion than today. Fewer middle-class wives participated directly in their husbands’ work. As a result, they and their children occupied what contemporaries called a “separate sphere of domesticity,” set apart from the masculine sphere of income-producing work. The family home became a “walled garden,” a place to retreat from the crass materialism of the outside world. Middle-class fathers began to move their families out of the city to the suburbs, commuting to work on the new streetcars and leaving wives and children at home and school. The middle-class family had once functioned in part to transmit a craft or skill, arrange marriages, and offer care for dependent kin. Now, as these functions declined, the family took on new emotional and ideological responsibilities. In a society that worried about the weakening hold of other institutions, the family became more and more important as a means of social control. It also placed new burdens on wives.



 CHAPTER 19

TOWARD AN URBAN SOCIETY, 1877–1900

 “In the old days,” said a woman in 1907, “a married woman was supposed to be a frump and a bore and a physical wreck. Now you are supposed to keep up intellectually, to look young and well and be fresh and bright and entertaining.” Magazines such as the Ladies’ Home Journal, which started in 1889, glorified motherhood and the home, but its articles and ads featured women as homebound, child-oriented consumers. While society’s leaders spoke fondly of the value of homemaking, the status of housewives declined under the factory system, which emphasized money rewards and devalued household labor. Underlying all these changes was one of the modern world’s most important trends, a major decline in fertility rates that lasted from 1800 to 1939. Though blacks, immigrants, and rural dwellers continued to have more children than white native-born city dwellers, the trend affected all classes and races; among white women, the birthrate fell from seven in 1800 to just over four in 1880 to about three in 1900. People everywhere tended to marry later and have fewer children. Since contraceptive devices were not yet widely used, the decline reflected abstinence and a conscious decision to postpone or limit families. Some women decided to devote greater attention to a smaller number of children, others to pursue their own careers. There was a marked increase in the number of young unmarried women working for wages or attending school, an increase in the number of women delaying marriage or not marrying at all, and a gradual decline in rates of illegitimacy and premarital pregnancy. In large part, the decline in fertility stemmed from people’s responses to the social and economic forces around them, the rise of cities and industry. In a host of individual decisions, they decided to have fewer children, and the result reshaped some of the fundamental attitudes and institutions of American society.

Changing Views: A Growing
 Assertiveness among Women In and out of the family, there was growing recognition of selfsufficient working women, employed in factory, telephone exchange, or business office, who were entering the workforce in increasing numbers. In 1880, 2.6 million women were gainfully employed; in 1890, 4 million. In 1882, the Census Bureau took the first census of working women; most were single and worked out of necessity rather than choice. Many regarded this “new woman” as a corruption of the ideal vision of the American woman, in which man worshiped “a diviner self than his own,” innocent, helpless, and good. Women were to be better than the world around them. They were brought up, said Ida Tarbell, a leading political reformer, “as if wrongdoing were impossible to them.” Views changed, albeit slowly. One important change occurred in the legal codes pertaining to women, particularly in the common law doctrine of femme couverte. Under that doctrine, wives were chattel of their husbands; they could not legally control their own earnings, property, or children unless they had drawn up a specific contract before marriage. By 1890, many states had substantially revised the doctrine to allow wives control of their earnings and inherited property. (See “The Legal Rights of Married Women: Reforming the Law of Coverture,” pp. 286–289.) In cases of divorce, the new laws also recognized women’s rights to custody or joint custody of their children. Although divorce was

 still far from being socially acceptable, divorce rates more than doubled during the last third of the century. By 1905, one in twelve marriages was ending in divorce. In the 1870s and 1880s, a growing number of women were asserting their own humanness. They fought for the vote, lobbied for equal pay, and sought self-fulfillment. The new interest in psychology and medicine strengthened their causes. Charlotte Perkins Gilman, author of Women and Economics (1898), joined other women in questioning the ideal of womanly “innocence,” which, she argued, actually meant ignorance. In medical and popular literature, menstruation, sexual intercourse, and childbirth were becoming viewed as natural functions instead of taboo topics. Edward Bliss Foote’s Plain Home Talk of Love, Marriage, and Parentage, a best-seller that went through many editions between the 1880s and 1900, challenged Victorian notions that sexual intercourse was unhealthy and intended solely to produce children. In Plain Facts for Old and Young (1881), Dr. John H. Kellogg urged parents to recognize the early awakening of sexual feelings in their children. Still, such matters were avoided in many American homes. Rheta Childe Dorr, a journalist, remembered that when a girl reached the age of fourteen, new rules were introduced, “and when you asked for an explanation you met only embarrassed silence.” Women espoused causes with new fervor. Susan B. Anthony, a veteran of many reform campaigns, tried to vote in the 1872 presidential election and was fined $100, which she refused to pay. In 1890, she helped form the National American Woman Suffrage Association to work for the enfranchisement of women. On New York’s Lower East Side, the Ladies Anti–Beef Trust Association, which formed to protest increases in the price of meat, established a boycott of butcher shops. When their demands were ignored, the women invaded the shops, poured kerosene on the meat, and set fire to it. “We don’t riot,” Rebecca Ablowitz told the judge. “But if all we did was to weep at home, nobody would notice it; so we have to do something to help ourselves.”

Educating the Masses
 Continuing a trend that stretched back a hundred years, childhood was becoming an even more distinct time of life. There was still only a vague concept of adolescence—the special nature of the teenage years—but the role of children was changing. Less and less were children perceived as “little adults,” valued for the additional financial gain they might bring into the family. Now children were to grow and learn and be nurtured rather than rushed into adulthood. As a result, schooling became more important, and American children came closer than ever before to universal education. By 1900, thirty-one states and territories (out of fifty-one) had enacted laws making school attendance compulsory, though most required attendance only until the age of fourteen. In 1870, there were only 160 public high schools; in 1900, there were 6,000. In the same years, public school budgets rose from $63 million to $253 million; illiteracy declined from 20 percent to just over 10 percent of the population. Still, even as late as 1900, the average adult had only five years of schooling. Educators saw the school as the primary means to train people for life and work in an industrializing society. Hence

Social and Cultural Change, 1877–1900


 teachers focused on basic skills—reading and mathematics—and on values—obedience and attentiveness to the clock. Most schools had a highly structured curriculum, built around discipline and routine. In 1892, Joseph Rice, a pediatrician, toured twelve hundred classrooms in thirty-six cities. In a typical classroom, he reported, the atmosphere was “damp and chilly,” the teacher strict. “The unkindly spirit of the teacher is strikingly apparent; the pupils being completely subjugated to her will, are silent and motionless.” One teacher asked her pupils, “How can you learn anything with your knees and toes out of order?” Many children dropped out of school early, and not just to earn money. Helen Todd, a factory inspector in Chicago, found a group of young girls working in a hot, stuffy attic. When she asked why they were not in school, Tillie Isakowsky, who was 14, said, “School! School is de fiercest t’ing youse kin come up against. Factories ain’t no cinch, but schools is worst.” A few blocks away, Todd stumbled on a 13-year-old boy hiding in a basement. He cried when she said he would have to go to school, blurting that “they hits ye if yer don’t learn, and they hits ye if ye whisper, and they hits ye if ye have string in yer pocket, and they hits ye if yer seat squeaks, and they hits ye if ye don’t stan’ up in time, and they hits ye if yer late, and they hits ye if ye ferget the page.” Curious, Todd asked 500 children whether they would go to school or work in a factory if their families did not need the money—412 preferred the factory. School began early; boys attended all day, but girls often stayed home after lunch, since it was thought they needed less in the way of learning. On the teacher’s command, students stood and recited from Webster’s Spellers and McGuffey’s Eclectic Readers, the period’s most popular textbooks. The work of William Holmes McGuffey, a professor of languages at Miami University in Ohio, McGuffey’s Eclectic Readers had been in use since 1836; 100 million copies were sold in the last half of the nineteenth century. Nearly every child read them; they taught not only reading but also ethics, values, and religion. In the Readers, boys grew up to be heroes, girls to be mothers, and hard work always meant success: Shall birds, and bees, and ants, be wise, While I my moments waste? O let me with the morning rise, And to my duty haste. The South lagged far behind in education. The average family size there was about twice as large as in the North, and a greater proportion of the population lived in isolated rural areas. State and local authorities mandated fewer weeks in the average school year, and many southern states refused to adopt compulsory education laws. Even more important was the effect of southern Jim Crow laws, passed in the 1890s and after to keep African Americans from voting, serving on juries, and participating in other aspects of southern life. Southerners used these laws to maintain separate school systems to segregate the races. Supported by the U.S. Supreme Court decision of 1896 in Plessy v. Ferguson (see Plessy v. Ferguson: “The Shaping of Jim Crow,” pp. 460–463), segregated schooling added a devastating financial burden to education in the South. North Carolina and Alabama mandated segregated schools in 1876, South Carolina and Louisiana in 1877, Mississippi in 1878, and Virginia in 1882. A series of Supreme Court decisions in the 1880s and 1890s upheld the concept of segregation. In the



 Civil Rights Cases (1883), the Court ruled that the Fourteenth Amendment barred state governments from discriminating on account of race but did not prevent private individuals or organizations from doing so. Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) established the doctrine of “separate but equal” and upheld a Louisiana law requiring different railroad cars for whites and blacks. The Court applied the doctrine directly to schools in Cumming v. County Board of Education (1899), which approved the creation of separate schools for whites, even if there were no comparable schools for blacks. Southern school laws often implied that the schools would be “separate but equal,” and they were often separate but rarely equal. Black schools were usually dilapidated, and black teachers were paid considerably less than white teachers. In 1890, only 35 percent of black children attended school in the South; 55 percent of white children did. That year nearly two-thirds of the country’s black population was illiterate. Educational techniques changed after the 1870s. Educators paid more attention to early elementary education, a trend that placed young children in school and helped the growing number of mothers who worked outside the home. The kindergarten movement, started in St. Louis in 1873, spread across the country. In kindergartens, four- to six-year-old children learned by playing, not by keeping their knees and toes in order. For older children, social reformers advocated “practical” courses in manual training and homemaking. “We are impatient with the schools which lay all stress on reading and writing,” Jane Addams said, for “they fail to give the child any clew to the life about him.” For the first time, education became a field of university study. European theorists such as Johann Friedrich Herbart, a German educator, argued that learning occurred best in an atmosphere of freedom and confidence between teachers and pupils. Teacher training became increasingly professional. Only ten normal schools, or teacher training institutions, existed in the United States before the Civil War. By 1900, there were 345, and one in every five elementary teachers had graduated from a professional school.

Higher Education
 Nearly one hundred fifty new colleges and universities opened in the twenty years between 1880 and 1900. The Morrill Land Grant Act of 1862 gave large grants of land to the states for the establishment of colleges to teach “agriculture and the mechanic arts.” The act fostered sixty-nine “land-grant” institutions, including the great state universities of Wisconsin, California, Minnesota, and Illinois. Private philanthropy, born of the large fortunes of the industrial age, also spurred growth in higher education. Leland Stanford gave $24 million to endow Stanford University on his California ranch, and John D. Rockefeller, founder of the Standard Oil Company, gave $34 million to found the University of Chicago. Other industrialists established Cornell (1865), Vanderbilt (1873), and Tulane (1884). As colleges expanded, their function changed and their curriculum broadened. No longer did they exist primarily to train young men for the ministry. They moved away from the classical curriculum of rhetoric, mathematics, Latin, and Greek toward “reality and practicality,” as President David Starr Jordan of Stanford University said. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), founded in 1861, focused on science and engineering.



 CHAPTER 19

TOWARD AN URBAN SOCIETY, 1877–1900

 courses rather than following a rigidly prescribed curriculum. Lectures and discussions replaced rote recitation, and courses in the natural and social sciences, fine arts, and modern languages multiplied. In the 1890s, Eliot’s Harvard moved to the forefront of educational innovation. Women still had to fight for educational opportunities. Some formed study clubs, an important movement that spread rapidly between 1870 and 1900. Groups such as the Decatur (Illinois) Art Class, the Boston History Class, and the Barnesville (Georgia) Shakespeare Club aimed “to enlarge the mental horizon as well as the knowledge of our members.” Club members read Virgil and Chaucer, studied history and architecture, and discussed women’s rights. Clubs sprang up almost everywhere there were women: in Caribou, Maine; Tyler, Texas; and Leadville, Colorado—as well as San Francisco, New York, and Boston. Although they were usually small, study clubs sparked a greater interest in education among women and their daughters and contributed to a rapid rise in the number of women entering college in the early 1900s. Before the Civil War, only three private colleges admitted women to study with men. After the war, educational opportunities increased for women. A number of women’s colleges opened, including Vassar (1865), Wellesley (1875), Smith (1875), Bryn Mawr (1885), Barnard (1889), and Radcliffe (1893). The land-grant colleges of the Midwest, open to women from the outset, spurred a nationwide trend toward coeducation, although some physicians, such as Harvard Medical School’s Dr. Edward H. Clarke in his popular Sex in Education (1873), continued to argue that the strain of learning made women sterile. By 1900, women made up about 40 percent of college students, and four out of five colleges admitted them. Fewer opportunities existed for African Americans and other minorities. Jane Stanford encouraged the Chinese who had worked on her husband’s Central Pacific Railroad to apply to Stanford University, but her policy was unusual. Most colleges did not accept minority students, and only a few applied. W. E. B. Du Bois, the brilThe Morrill Land Grant Act of 1862 gave large grants of land to the states for the establishment of liant African American sociologist and civil rights colleges to teach “agriculture and the mechanic arts.” The act, sponsored by U.S. Representative leader, attended Harvard in the late 1880s but found Justin Smith Morrill of Vermont, facilitated the creation of sixty-nine “land-grant” institutions, the society of Harvard Yard closed against him. including the state universities of Wisconsin, California, Minnesota, Massachusetts, and Illinois. Disdained and disdainful, he “asked no fellowship Influenced by the new German universities, which emphasized of my fellow students.” Chosen as one of the commencement speakspecialized research, Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore opened ers, Du Bois picked as his topic “Jefferson Davis,” treating it, said an the nation’s first separate graduate school in 1876. Under President onlooker, with “an almost contemptuous fairness.” Daniel Coit Gilman, Johns Hopkins stressed the seminar and laboBlack students turned to black colleges such as the Hampton ratory as teaching tools, bringing together student and teacher in Normal and Industrial Institute in Virginia and the Tuskegee close association. Institute in Alabama. These colleges were often supported by whites Charles W. Eliot, who became president of Harvard in 1869 at who favored manual training for blacks. Booker T. Washington, an the age of thirty-five, moved to end, as an admirer said, the “old ex-slave, put into practice his educational ideas at Tuskegee, which fogyism” that marked the institution. Revising the curriculum, opened in 1881. Washington began Tuskegee with limited funds, four Eliot set up the elective system, in which students chose their own run-down buildings, and only thirty students; by 1900, it was a model Read the Document

The Morrill Act (1862)


Social and Cultural Change, 1877–1900


 industrial and agricultural school. Spread over forty-six buildings, it offered instruction in thirty trades to fourteen hundred students. Washington emphasized patience, manual training, and hard work. “The wisest among my race understand,” he said in a widely acclaimed speech at the Atlanta Exposition in 1895, “that the agitation of questions of social equality is the extremest folly.” Blacks should focus on economic gains; they should go to school, learn skills, and work their way up the ladder. “No race,” he said at Atlanta, “can prosper till it learns that there is as much dignity in tilling a field as in writing a poem. It is at the bottom of life we must begin, and not at the top.” Southern whites should help out because they would then have “the most patient, faithful, law-abiding, and unresentful people that the world has seen.” Outlined most forcefully in Washington’s speech in Atlanta, the philosophy became known as the Atlanta Compromise, and many whites and some blacks welcomed it. Acknowledging white domination, it called for slow progress through self-improvement, not through lawsuits or agitation. Rather than fighting for equal rights, blacks should acquire property and show they were worthy of their rights. But Washington did believe in black equality. Often secretive in his methods, he worked behind the scenes to organize black voters and lobby against harmful laws. In his own way, he bespoke a racial pride that contributed to the rise of black nationalism in the twentieth century. Du Bois wanted a more aggressive strategy. Born in Massachusetts in 1868, the son of poor parents, he studied at Fisk University in Tennessee and the University of Berlin before

Listen to the Audio File




 he went to Harvard. Unable to find a teaching job in a white college, he took a low-paying research position at the University of Pennsylvania. He had no office but did not need one. Du Bois used the new discipline of sociology, which emphasized factual observation in the field, to study the condition of blacks. Notebook in hand, he set out to examine crime in Philadelphia’s black seventh ward. He interviewed five thousand people, mapped and classified neighborhoods, and produced The Philadelphia Negro (1898). The first study of the effect of urban life on blacks, it cited a wealth of statistics, all suggesting that crime in the ward stemmed not from inborn degeneracy but from the environment in which blacks lived. Change the environment, and people would change, too; education was a good way to go about it. In The Souls of Black Folk (1903), Du Bois openly attacked Booker T. Washington and the philosophy of the Atlanta Compromise. He urged African Americans to aspire to professional careers, to fight for the restoration of their civil rights, and, wherever possible, to get a college education. Calling for integrated schools with equal opportunity for all, Du Bois urged blacks to educate their “talented tenth,” a highly trained intellectual elite, to lead them. Du Bois was not alone in promoting careers in the professions. Throughout higher education there was increased emphasis on professional training, particularly in medicine, dentistry, and law. Enrollments swelled, even as standards of admission tightened. The number of medical schools in the country rose from 75 in 1870 to 160 in 1900, and the number of medical students—including more and more women—almost tripled. Schools of nursing grew from

Address at the Atlanta Exposition by Booker T. Washington


 Booker T. Washington, who served as the first president of Tuskegee Institute, advocated work efficiency and practical skills as keys to advancement for African Americans. Students like these at Tuskegee studied academic subjects and received training in trades and professions.



 CHAPTER 19

TOWARD AN URBAN SOCIETY, 1877–1900

 only 15 in 1880 to 432 in 1900. Doctors, lawyers, and others became part of a growing middle class that shaped the concerns of the Progressive Era of the early twentieth century. Although less than 5 percent of the college-age population attended college during the 1877–1890 period, the new trends had great impact. A generation of men and women encountered new ideas that changed their views of themselves and society. Courses never before offered, such as Philosophy II at Harvard, “The Ethics of Social Reform,” which students called “drainage, drunkenness, and divorce,” heightened interest in social problems and the need for reform. Some graduating students burned with a desire to cure society’s ills. “My life began . . . at Johns Hopkins University,” Frederic C. Howe, an influential reformer, recalled. “I came alive, I felt a sense of responsibility to the world, I wanted to change things.”

The Spread of Jim Crow
 Why did Jim Crow laws spread across the South after the end of Reconstruction? Though Washington and Du Bois differed widely in their views, both of them fought the growing restrictions on black civil rights known as Jim Crow laws (see Chapter 16). While segregation and disfranchisement began as informal arrangements in the immediate aftermath of the Civil War, they soon culminated in a legal regime of separation and exclusion that took firm hold in the 1890s. Throughout the South, the new measures lent the sanction of law to a racial ostracism that included voting booths, churches, schools, housing, and jobs. Touching virtually all parts of life, they affected public transportation, hospitals, prisons, and asylums— even funeral homes and cemeteries. A number of influences lay behind their rapid growth. By the 1870s, many northerners had lost interest in guarding the rights of blacks. Weariness with Civil War issues played a role in this trend, as did beliefs in Anglo-Saxon superiority and, after the SpanishAmerican War of 1898, the acquisition of colonial subjects—called, revealingly, “the white man’s burden”—in Hawaii, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Philippines. As a result, the North and the federal government did little to stem the tide. Supreme Court decisions between 1878 and 1898 gutted the Reconstruction amendments and the legislation passed to enforce them, leaving blacks virtually defenseless against political and social discrimination. (See Table 19.1.) Most visible in areas like voting, Jim Crow laws soon penetrated nearly every aspect of Southern life. In 1915, a South Carolina code banned textile factories from allowing laborers of different races to work together in the same room or to use the same entrances, exits, toilets, and drinking water. That year, Oklahoma required telephone companies to maintain separate phone booths for whites and blacks. North Carolina and Florida ordered separate textbooks for black and white children. Florida even required that the books be segregated while they were in storage. A New Orleans ordinance placed black and white prostitutes in separate districts of the city. There were Jim Crow Bibles for African American witnesses in Atlanta courts and Jim Crow elevators in Atlanta buildings.

 Perhaps no event better expresses the cruel and barbaric nature of the racism and white supremacy that swept the South after Reconstruction than lynching. Although lynchings were not confined to the South, most occurred there, and African American men were the most frequent victims. Here, two men lean out of a barn window above a black man who is about to be hanged. Others below prepare to set on fire the pile of hay at the victim’s feet. Lynchings were often public events, drawing huge crowds to watch the victim’s agonizing death.

 Jim Crow laws expanded during the 1920s and 1930s. Mississippi segregated white and black patients in hospitals and mandated that nurses could tend only the sick of their own race. City ordinances required Jim Crow taxis in Jacksonville, Florida, in 1929; Birmingham, Alabama, in 1930; and Atlanta, Georgia, in 1940. In 1930, a Birmingham ordinance forbade blacks and whites from playing each other at dominoes or checkers. Lynchings also spread. Between 1889 and 1899, an average of 187 blacks were lynched every year for alleged offenses against white supremacy. Many blacks (and whites) convicted of petty crimes were leased out to private contractors whose brutality rivaled that of the most sadistic slaveholders. The convict-lease system enabled entrepreneurs, such as mine owners and lumber companies, to rent prisoners

The Stirrings of Reform


SUPREME COURT DECISIONS AFFECTING BLACK CIVIL RIGHTS, 1875–1900
Case Hall v. DeCuir (1878) 
 Effects of Court’s Decisions Struck down Louisiana law prohibiting racial discrimination by “common carriers” (railroads, steamboats, buses). Declared the law a “burden” on interstate commerce, over which states had no authority. United States v. Declared federal laws to punish crimes Harris (1882) such as murder and assault unconstitutional. Declared such crimes to be the sole concern of local government. Ignored the frequent racial motivation behind such crimes in the South. Civil Rights Struck down Civil Rights Act of 1875. Cases (1883) Declared that Congress may not legislate on civil rights unless a state passes a discriminatory law. Declared the Fourteenth Amendment silent on racial discrimination by private citizens. Plessy v. Upheld Louisiana statute requiring Ferguson “separate but equal” accommodations on (1896) railroads. Declared that segregation is not necessarily discrimination. Williams v. Upheld state law requiring a literacy test Mississippi to qualify for voting. Refused to find any (1898) implication of racial discrimination in the law, although it permitted illiterate whites to vote if they “understood” the Constitution. Using such laws, southern states rapidly disfranchised blacks.

 from the state and treat them as they saw fit. Unlike slaveowners, they suffered no loss when a forced laborer died from overwork. Racism, of course, was not limited to the South, as race riots in East St. Louis, Illinois, (1917) and Chicago (1919), among other events, attested. In 1903, the New York public school system banned Uncle Tom’s Cabin from its reading lists, saying that Harriet Beecher Stowe’s depiction of antebellum slavery “does not belong to today but to an unhappy period of our country’s history, the memory of which it is not well to revive in our children.” Encountering the racism of the North—far less brutal but racism nonetheless—blacks who had migrated there called it James Crow.

The Stirrings of Reform
 How did life in the growing cities lead to ideas of reform? When Henry George, one of the era’s leading reformers, asked a friend what could be done about the problem of political corruption in American cities, his friend replied, “Nothing! You and I can do nothing at all. . . . We can only wait for evolution. Perhaps in four or five thousand years evolution may have carried men beyond this state of things.”



 This emphasis on the slow pace of change reflected the doctrine of Social Darwinism, based on the writings of English social philosopher Herbert Spencer. In several influential books, Spencer took the evolutionary theories of Charles Darwin and applied Darwinian principles of natural selection to society, combining biology and sociology in a theory of “social selection” that tried to explain human progress. Like animals, society evolved, slowly, by adapting to the environment. The “survival of the fittest”—a term that Spencer, not Darwin, invented—preserved the strong and weeded out the weak. “If they are sufficiently complete to live, they do live, and it is well they should live. If they are not sufficiently complete to live, they die, and it is best they should die.” Social Darwinism had a number of influential followers in the United States, including William Graham Sumner, a professor of political and social science at Yale University. One of the country’s best known academic figures, Sumner was forceful and eloquent. In writings such as What Social Classes Owe to Each Other (1883) and “The Absurd Effort to Make the World Over” (1894), he argued that government action on behalf of the poor or weak interfered with evolution and sapped the species. Reform tampered with the laws of nature. “It is the greatest folly of which a man can be capable to sit down with a slate and pencil to plan out a new social world,” Sumner said. The influence of Social Darwinism on American thinking has been exaggerated, but in the powerful hands of Sumner and others it did influence some journalists, ministers, and policy makers. Between 1877 and the 1890s, however, it came under increasing attack. In fields such as religion, economics, politics, literature, and law, thoughtful people raised questions about established conditions and suggested the need for reform.

Progress and Poverty
 Read and reread, passed from hand to hand, Henry George’s nationwide best-seller Progress and Poverty (1879) led the way to a more critical appraisal of American society in the 1880s and beyond. The book jolted traditional thought. “It was responsible,” one historian has said, “for starting along new lines of thinking an amazing number of the men and women” who became leaders of reform. Born in 1839, the child of a poor Philadelphia family, George had little formal schooling. As a boy he went to sea; he also worked as a prospector, printer, and journalist. Self-educated as an economist, he moved to San Francisco in the late 1850s and began to study “the fierce struggle of our civilized life.” Disturbed by the depression of the 1870s and labor upheavals such as the great railroad strikes of 1877, George saw modern society—rich, complex, with material goods hitherto unknown—as sadly flawed. “The present century,” he wrote, “has been marked by a prodigious increase in wealth-producing power. . . . It was natural to expect, and it was expected, that . . . real poverty [would become] a thing of the past.” Instead, he argued, it becomes no easier for the masses of our people to make a living. On the contrary, it is becoming harder. The wealthy class is becoming more wealthy; but the poorer class is becoming more dependent. The gulf between the employed and the employer is growing wider; social contrasts are becoming sharper; as liveried carriages appear, so do barefooted children.



 CHAPTER 19

TOWARD AN URBAN SOCIETY, 1877–1900

Read the Document


 Edward Bellamy, from Looking Backward

 solution, simplistic and unappealing, had much less impact than his analysis of the problem itself. He raised questions a generation of readers set out to answer.

New Currents in Social
Thought
 George’s emphasis on deprivation in the environment excited a young country lawyer in Ashtabula, Ohio—Clarence Darrow. Unlike the Social Darwinists, Darrow was sure that criminals were made and not born. They grew out of “the unjust condition of human life.” In the mid-1880s, he left for Chicago and a forty-year career working to convince people that poverty lay at the root of crime. “There is no such thing as crime as the word is generally understood,” he told a group of startled prisoners in the Cook County jail. “If every man, woman and child in the world had a chance to make a decent, fair, honest living there would be no jails and no lawyers and no courts.” As Darrow rejected the implications of social Darwinism, in similar fashion Richard T. Ely and a group of young economists poked holes in traditional economic thought. Fresh from graduate study in Germany, Ely in 1884 attacked classical economics for its dogmatism, simple faith in laissez-faire, and reliance on self-interest as a guide for human conduct. The “younger” economics, he said, must no longer be “a tool in the hands of the greedy and the avaricious for keeping down and oppressing the laboring classes. It does not acknowledge laissez-faire as an excuse for doing nothing while people starve.” Accepting a post at Johns Hopkins University, Ely assigned graduate students to study labor conditions in Baltimore and other cities; one of them, John R. Commons, went on to publish a massive four-volume study, History of Labour in the United States. In 1885, Ely led a small band of rebels in founding the American Economic Association, which linked economics to social problems and urged government intervention in economic affairs. Social critic Thorstein Veblen saw economic Edward Bellamy was the author in 1887 of Looking Backward, 2000–1887. The book laws as a mask for human greed. In The Theory envisioned a nation cured of its social problems through the creation of a socialist utopia of the Leisure Class (1899), Veblen analyzed the including the elimination of private competition and government ownership of industry. “predatory wealth” and “conspicuous consumption” of the business class. George proposed a simple solution. Land, he thought, formed Edward Bellamy dreamed of a cooperative society in which the basis of wealth, and a few people could grow wealthy just poverty, greed, and crime no longer existed. A lawyer from western because the price of their land rose. Since the rise in price did not Massachusetts, Bellamy published Looking Backward, 2000–1887, in result from any effort on their part, it represented an “unearned 1887 and became a national reform figure virtually overnight. The increment,” which, George argued, should be taxed for the good novel’s protagonist, Julian West, falls asleep in 1887 and awakes in the of society. A “single tax” on the increment, replacing all other year 2000. Wide-eyed, he finds himself in a socialist utopia: The govtaxes, would help equalize wealth and raise revenue to aid the poor. ernment owns the means of production, and citizens share the mate“Single-tax” clubs sprang up around the country, but George’s rial rewards. Cooperation, rather than competition, is the watchword.

The Stirrings of Reform


 The world of Looking Backward had limits; it was regimented, paternalistic, and filled with the gadgets and material concerns of Bellamy’s own day. But it had a dramatic effect on many readers. The book sold at the rate of ten thousand copies a week, and its followers formed Nationalist Clubs to work for its objectives. By 1890, there were such clubs in twenty-seven states, all calling for the nationalization of public utilities and a wider distribution of wealth. Walter Rauschenbusch, a young Baptist minister, read widely from the writings of Bellamy and George, along with the works of other social reformers. When he took his first church post in Hell’s Kitchen, a blighted area of New York City, he soon discovered the weight of the slum environment. “One could hear,” he said, “human virtue cracking and crushing all around.” In the 1890s, Rauschenbusch became a professor at the Rochester Theological Seminary, and he began to expound on the responsibility of organized religion to advance social justice. Some Protestant sects emphasized individual salvation and a better life in the next world, not in this one. Poverty was evidence of sinfulness; the poor had only themselves to blame. “God has intended the great to be great and the little to be little,” said Henry Ward Beecher, the country’s best known pastor. Wealth and destitution, suburbs and slums—all formed part of God’s plan. Challenging those traditional doctrines, a number of churches in the 1880s began establishing missions in the city slums. William Dwight Porter Bliss, an Episcopal clergyman, founded the Church of the Carpenter in a working-class district of Boston. Lewis M. Pease worked in the grim Five Points area of New York; Alexander Irvine, a Jewish missionary, lived in a flophouse in the Bowery. Irvine walked his skid row neighborhood every afternoon to lend a hand to those in need. Living among the poor and homeless, the urban missionaries grew impatient with religious doctrines that endorsed the status quo. Many of the new trends were reflected in an emerging religious philosophy known as the Social Gospel. As the name suggests, the Social Gospel focused on society as well as individuals, on improving living conditions as well as saving souls. Sermons in Social Gospel churches called on church members to fulfill their social obligations, and adults met before and after the regular service to discuss social and economic problems. Children were excused from sermons, organized into age groups, and encouraged to make the church a center for social as well as religious activity. Soon churches included dining halls, gymnasiums, and even theaters. The most active Social Gospel leader was Washington Gladden, a Congregational minister and prolific writer. Linking Christianity to the social and economic environment, Gladden spent a lifetime working for “social salvation.” He saw Christianity as a fellowship of love and the church as a social agency. In Applied Christianity (1886) and other writings, he denounced competition, urged an “industrial partnership” between employers and employees, and called for efforts to help the poor.

The Settlement Houses
 A growing number of social reformers living in the urban slums shared Gladden’s concern. Like Tweed and Plunkitt, they appreciated the dependency of the poor; unlike them, they wanted to eradicate the conditions that underlay it. To do so, they formed



 settlement houses in the slums and went to live in them to

 experience the problems they were trying to solve. Youthful, idealistic, and mostly middle class, these social workers took as their model Toynbee Hall, founded in 1884 in the slums of East London to provide community services. Stanton Coit, a moody and poetic graduate of Amherst College, was the first American to borrow the settlement house idea; in 1886, he opened the Neighborhood Guild on the Lower East Side of New York. The idea spread swiftly. By 1900, there were more than a hundred settlements in the country; five years later, there were more than two hundred, and by 1910, more than four hundred. The settlements included Jane Addams’s famous Hull House in Chicago (1889), Robert A. Woods’s South End House in Boston (1892), and Lillian Wald’s Henry Street Settlement in New York (1893). The reformers wanted to bridge the socioeconomic gap between rich and poor and to bring education, culture, and hope to the slums. They sought to create in the heart of the city the values and sense of community of small-town America. Of settlement workers, Wald said in The House on Henry Street (1915), “We were to live in a neighborhood . . . identify ourselves with it socially, and, in brief, contribute to it our citizenship.” Many of the settlement workers were women, some of them college graduates, who found that society had little use for their talents and energy. Jane Addams, a graduate of Rockford College in Illinois, opened Hull House on South Halsted Street in the heart of the Chicago slums. Twenty-nine years old, endowed with a forceful and winning personality, she intended “to share the lives of the poor” and humanize the industrial city. “American ideals,” she said, “crumbled under the overpowering poverty of the overcrowded city.” Occupying an old, rundown house, Hull House focused on education, offering classes in elementary English and Shakespeare, lectures on ethics and the history of art, and courses in cooking, sewing, and manual skills. A pragmatist, Addams believed in investigating a problem and then doing something to solve it. Noting the lack of medical care in the area, she established an infant welfare clinic and free medical dispensary. Because the tenements lacked bathtubs, she installed showers in the basement of the house and built a bathhouse for the neighbors. Because there was no local library, she opened a reading room. Gradually, Hull House expanded to occupy a dozen buildings sprawling over more than a city block. Like settlement workers in other cities, Addams and her colleagues studied the immigrants in nearby tenements. Laboriously, they identified the background of every family in a one-thirdsquare-mile area around Hull House. Finding people of eighteen different nationalities, they taught them American history and the English language, yet Addams also encouraged them—through folk festivals and art—to preserve their own heritage. In Boston, Robert Woods of South End House focused on the problem of school dropouts. He offered manual training, formed clubs to get young people off the streets, and established a cheap restaurant where the hungry could eat. Lillian Wald, the daughter of a middle-class family and herself a graduate nurse, concentrated on providing health care for the poor. In 1898, the first Catholic-run settlement house opened in New York, and in 1900, Bronson House opened in Los Angeles to work in the Mexican American community. Florence Kelley, an energetic graduate of Cornell University, taught night school one winter in Chicago. Watching children



 CHAPTER 19

TOWARD AN URBAN SOCIETY, 1877–1900

Read the Document


 Jane Addams, from Twenty Years at Hull House (1910)

 Jane Addams founded Chicago’s Hull House in 1889. The settlement house provided recreational and day-care facilities; offered extension classes in academic, vocational, and artistic subjects; and, above all, sought to bring hope to poverty-stricken slum dwellers.

 break under the burden of poverty, she devoted her life to the problem of child labor. Convinced of the need for political activism, she worked with Addams and others to push through the Illinois Factory Act of 1893, which mandated an eight-hour day for women in factories and for children under the age of fourteen. The settlement house movement had its limits. Hull House, one of the best, attracted two thousand visitors a week, still just a fraction of the seventy thousand people who lived within six blocks. Immigrants sometimes resented the middle-class “strangers” who told them how to live. Dressed always in a brown suit and dark stockings, Harriet Vittum, the head resident of Chicago’s Northwestern University Settlement (who told the story of the suicide victim at the beginning of this chapter), was known in the neighborhood as “the police lady in brown.” She once stopped a dance because it was too wild, and then watched in disgust as the boys responded by “making vulgar sounds with their lips.” Though her attempts to help were sincere, in private Vittum called the people she was

 trying to help “ignorant foreigners, who live in an atmosphere of low morals . . . surrounded by anarchy and crime.” Although Addams tried to offer a few programs for blacks, most white reformers did not, and after 1900, a number of black reformers opened their own settlements. Like the whites, they offered employment information, medical care, and recreational facilities, along with concerts, lectures, and other educational events. White and black, the settlement workers made important contributions to urban life.

Crisis in Social Welfare
 The depression of 1893 jarred the young settlement workers, many of whom had just begun their work. Addams and the Hull House workers helped form the Chicago Bureau of Charities to coordinate emergency relief. Kelley, recently appointed the chief factory inspector of Illinois, worked even harder to end child labor, and in

Conclusion: The Pluralistic Society


 1899, she moved to New York City to head the National Consumers League, which marshaled the buying power of women to encourage employers to provide better working conditions. In cities and towns across the country, traditional methods of helping the needy foundered in the crisis. Churches, charity organization societies, and community chests did what they could, but their resources were limited, and they functioned on traditional lines. Many of them still tried to change rather than aid individual families, and people were often reluctant to call on them for help. Gradually, a new class of professional social workers arose to fill the need. Unlike the church and charity volunteers, these social workers wanted not only to feed the poor but to study their condition and alleviate it. Revealingly, they called themselves “case workers” and daily collected data on the income, housing, jobs, health, and habits of the poor. Prowling tenement districts, they gathered information about the number of rooms, number of occupants, ventilation, and sanitation of the buildings, putting together a fund of useful data. Studies of the poor popped up everywhere. Walter Wyckoff, a graduate of Princeton University, embarked in 1891 on what he called “an experiment in reality.” For eighteen months, he worked as an unskilled laborer in jobs from Connecticut to California. “I am vastly ignorant of the labor problems and am trying to learn by experience,” he said as he set out. After working as a ditchdigger, farmhand, and logger, Wyckoff summarized his findings in The Workers (1897), a book immediately hailed as a major contribution to sociology. So many others followed Wyckoff ’s example that sometimes it seemed the observers outnumbered those being observed. W. E. B. Du Bois did his pioneering study of urban blacks; Lillian Pettengill took a job as a domestic servant to see “the ups and downs of this particular dog-life from the dog’s end of the chain.” Others became street beggars, miners, lumberjacks, and factory laborers. Bessie and Marie Van Vorst’s The Woman Who Toils: Being the Experiences of Two Gentlewomen as Factory Girls (1903) studied female workers, as did Helen Campbell’s Women Wage-Earners: Their Past, Their Present and Their Future (1893), which suggested that the conditions of factory employment prepared women mainly “for the hospital, the workhouse, and the prison.” William T. Stead, a prominent British editor, visited the Chicago World’s Fair in 1893 and stayed to examine the city. He roamed the flophouses and tenements and dropped in at Hull House to drink hot chocolate and talk over conditions with Jane Addams. Later he wrote an influential book, If Christ Came to Chicago (1894), and in a series of mass meetings during 1893, he called for a civic revival. In response, Chicagoans formed the Civic Federation, a group of forty leaders who aimed to make Chicago “the best governed, the healthiest city in this country.” Setting up task forces for philanthropy, moral improvement,



 and legislation, the new group helped spawn the National Civic Federation (1900), a nationwide organization devoted to the reform of urban life.

Conclusion: The Pluralistic Society
 “The United States was born in the country and moved to the city,” historian Richard Hofstadter said. Much of that movement occurred during the nineteenth century when the United States was the most rapidly urbanizing nation in the Western world. American cities bustled with energy; they absorbed millions of migrants who came from Europe and other distant and not-so-distant parts of the world. That migration, and the urban growth that accompanied it, reshaped American politics and culture. By 1920, the census showed that, for the first time, most Americans lived in cities. By then, too, almost half the population was descended from people who had arrived after the American Revolution. As European, African, and Asian cultures met in the American city, a culturally pluralistic society emerged. Dozens of nationalities produced a culture whose members considered themselves Polish Americans, African Americans, and Irish Americans. The melting pot sometimes softened distinctions between the various groups, but it only partially blended them into a unified society. “Ah, Vera,” said a character in Israel Zangwill’s popular play The Melting Pot (1908), “what is the glory of Rome and Jerusalem where all nations and races come to worship and look back, compared with the glory of America, where all races and nations come to labour and look forward!” Critics scorned the play as “romantic claptrap,” and indeed it was. But the metaphor of the melting pot clearly depicted a new national image. In the decades after the 1870s a jumble of ethnic and racial groups struggled for a place in society. That society, it is clear, experienced a crisis between 1870 and 1900. Together, the growth of cities and the rise of industrial capitalism brought jarring change: the exploitation of labor, ethnic and racial tensions, poverty—and, for a few, wealth beyond the imagination. At Homestead, Pullman, and a host of other places, there was open warfare between capital and labor. As reformers struggled to mediate the situation, they turned more and more to state and federal government to look after human welfare, a tendency the Supreme Court stoutly resisted. In the midst of the crisis, the depression of the 1890s struck, adding to the turmoil and straining American institutions. Tracing the changes wrought by waves of urbanization and industrialization, Henry George described the country as “the House of Have and the House of Want,” almost in paraphrase of Lincoln’s earlier metaphor of the “house divided.” The question was, could this house, unlike that one, stand?

 Complete the Assignment Plessy v. Ferguson: The Shaping of Jim Crow on myhistorylab

Law and
Society


I


 n a nation of laws, the interpretation of law can profoundly change people’s lives. Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), one of the most important cases ever to reach the Supreme Court, changed the lives of millions of black and white Americans. Interpreting law in a way that lasted for more than a half century, it permitted the segregation of blacks in public facilities throughout the land. Given the significance of the case, we know surprisingly little about Homer A. Plessy, the man who figured in it. He was young—we know that—and apparently worked as a carpenter in Louisiana. According to the court records, he was “seveneighths Caucasian,” which perhaps was a reason he was chosen to test the constitutionality of a Louisiana law requiring railroad companies to segregate whites and blacks on trains in the state. It seemed a good law to test. Louisiana’s own constitution forbade such discrimination; so did the federal Civil Rights Act of 1875, which guaranteed blacks “full and equal enjoyment” of public conveyances. Whatever the details of his life, Plessy lived in a post–Reconstruction South in which racism was widespread but segregation was not. Where segregation did exist, it usually was not enacted into law. During the 1870s and 1880s, blacks and whites often ate together, rode together, and worked together. “I can ride in first-class cars on the railroads and in the streets,” a delighted black visitor wrote home from South Carolina in 1885. “I can stop in and drink a glass of soda and be more



Plessy v. Ferguson
The Shaping of Jim Crow
 politely waited upon than in some parts of New England.” That situation changed near the end of the century. The courts often reflect trends in the society, and whites in both North and South in the 1890s had little enthusiasm for civil rights or racial equality. In addition, economic depression heightened racial tensions, and the spread of colonial imperialism in Africa and Asia led to talk about “inferior” people, both at home and abroad. Beginning in the 1870s, the Supreme Court handed down a series of decisions that overturned much Reconstruction legislation, limited federal protection for blacks, and encouraged racial segregation. In the Slaughterhouse Cases of 1873, the Supreme Court narrowed the scope of the Fourteenth Amendment protecting blacks; a decade later, in the Civil Rights Cases (1883), it said that Congress could not punish private individuals for acts of racial discrimination. Emboldened by such decisions, southern states passed many segregation laws, including laws requiring railroad companies to separate white and black riders. In the summer of 1890, Louisiana passed “An Act to promote the comfort of passengers” that made railroads in the state provide “equal but separate” cars “for the white and colored races.” Segregationists were delighted. “The Southern whites,” a New Orleans newspaper said, had passed the law “in no spirit of hostility to the negroes,” but to make sure that “the two races shall live separate and distinct from each other in all things, with separate schools, separate hotels, and separate cars.”

 New Orleans, more than most southern cities, had a group of talented African American leaders, educated, aggressive, and experienced in politics and the judicial system. Outraged by the new law, they thought first of boycotting the railroads that obeyed it but then decided to contest it in the courts. Led by Louis A. Martinet, a well-known lawyer and physician, and Rodolphe L. Desdunes, an important Reconstruction Republican, they formed the Citizens’ Committee to Test the Constitutionality of the Separate Car Law, raised money for the cause, and enlisted the aid of Albion W. Tourgée of New York, a prominent white lawyer, novelist, and longtime crusader for African American rights. Tourgée did not hesitate to join in the fight, for which he charged no fee. “Submission to such outrages,” he angrily wrote his New Orleans friends, tends “only to their multiplication and exaggeration. It is by constant resistance to oppression that the race must ultimately win equality of right.” As a first step, Citizens’ Committee members went to various railroad officials to ask for aid in establishing a case that could test the law. Disliking the cost of the extra cars the law forced them to buy, the officials were sympathetic but reluctant. One railroad already refused to enforce the law; officials on two other railroads said it was “a bad and mean one; they would like to get rid of it,” but were afraid of public opinion. At last, the East Louisiana Railway agreed to help. And so on June 7, 1892, to test the law, Homer A. Plessy boarded

 an East Louisiana Railway train in New Orleans for the 30-mile trip to Covington. He took a seat in the car reserved for whites, refused to move when a conductor asked him to, and was arrested by a detective who was standing by for the occasion. John H. Ferguson, a local judge, ruled against Plessy’s argument that the law violated his rights, and Plessy appealed to the State Supreme Court, arguing that the law violated the “equal protection” clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution. That Court, too, promptly ruled against him. Delighted, Louisiana segregationists hoped, as one of their newspapers said, that the two decisions would knock some sense into “the silly negroes who are trying to fight this law. The sooner they drop their socalled ‘crusade’ against the ‘Jim Crow Car,’ and stop wasting their money in combating so well-established a

 principle—the right to separate the races in cars and elsewhere—the better for them.” It took three more years before the United States Supreme Court heard the case. Tourgée himself was pleased with the delay, hoping that time might improve racial feelings in the country and bring popular support to his cause. Those hopes did not bear out, nor did his arguments before the Court. In an unusual approach, Tourgée began by arguing that Homer A. Plessy, who was light-skinned in color, had been deprived of property without due process of law, contrary to the Fourteenth Amendment. Able to pass for white, he had been identified by the railroad conductor as black. He had been robbed, therefore, of his “property,” Tourgée said, the sense of being white, and thus barred from association with white people, who in the United States controlled the avenues to advancement.

 “Probably most white persons if given a choice,” Tourgée argued, “would prefer death to life in the United States as colored persons. Under these conditions, is it possible to conclude that the reputation of being white is not property? Indeed, is it not the most valuable sort of property, being the master-key that unlocks the golden door of opportunity?” The remainder of Tourgée’s brief was straightforward, emphasizing the incompatibility of the separate car law with the intent of the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments, the inequities it fostered, and its basis in claims of white superiority. Unless the Court stopped it now, enforced segregation would soon spread everywhere through life. “Why may [a law] not require all red-headed people to ride in a separate car? Why not require all colored people to walk on one side of the street and the whites on the other?” Why not houses of



 different color, or clothes, or carriages? Laws might make blacks and whites (or Protestants and Catholics, natives and foreign-born, or anyone else, for that matter) sit on opposite sides of a courtroom or use different playgrounds. Deciding the case was simple, Tourgée concluded: “Suppose you, the members of the Court, were suddenly ordered into a Jim Crow car of your own. What humiliation, once owned slaves. But accepting what rage would then fill the judicial mind!” Finally, on May 18, 1896, the Court handed down its decision in Plessy v. Ferguson. By a vote of 7 to 1, it decided against Plessy. Upholding the doctrine of “separate but equal,” it held that the Louisiana law did not violate Plessy’s rights. It did not violate them, the Court said, because the law was “reasonable”; it had been passed “with reference to the established usages, customs, and traditions of the people.” It was precisely those usages and customs—race prejudice, in short— that Tourgée had argued against. They were contrary to the Reconstruction amendments to the Constitution, he had argued, but the majority of the Court would have none of it. The authors of those amendments, they said, could not have meant to do away with racial distinctions or institute social equality; that simply could not be done. Laws did not create race prejudice, and they could not change it. Enforced segregation did not label anyone as inferior. “We consider,” the Court said, “the underlying fallacy of the plaintiff’s argument to consist in the assumption that the enforced separation of the two races stamps the colored race with a badge of inferiority. If this be so, it is not by reason of anything found in the act, but solely because the colored race chooses to put that construction upon it.” There was irony in the Court’s vote. Justice Henry Billings Brown, a son of Massachusetts and Michigan, wrote the opinion for the majority, a measure



 of changing opinion in the North. The single dissenter in the case, Justice John Marshall Harlan of Kentucky, on the other hand, was not only from the South, he had once owned slaves. But accepting the changed requirements of the Reconstruction amendments, he became the “Great Dissenter” in a Court—and a country—fast fleeing its important responsibilities. Dissenting in Plessy, he scoffed at the majority’s reasoning. The Louisiana law, he said, was clearly prejudicial, designed to keep blacks from railroad cars occupied by whites, and as such was in clear conflict with both the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments. It was “a badge of servitude,” inconsistent with “the equality before the law established by the Constitution. It cannot be justified upon any legal grounds.” “Our Constitution is color-blind, and neither knows nor tolerates classes among citizens. In respect of civil rights, all citizens are equal before the law. The humblest is the peer of the most powerful. The law regards man as man, and takes no account of his surroundings or of his color when his civil rights as guaranteed by the supreme law of the land are involved.” “In my opinion,” Harlan concluded, “the judgment this day rendered will, in time, prove to be quite as pernicious as the decision made by this tribunal in the Dred Scott case.” It was. After Plessy, Jim Crow laws spread swiftly through the South. More and more public conveyances, schools, and restaurants were segregated. Signs saying “Whites only” or “Colored” appeared on entrances and exits, restrooms and water fountains, waiting rooms, and even elevators. In 1905, Georgia passed the first law requiring separate public parks. In 1909, Mobile, Alabama, enacted a curfew requiring blacks to be off the streets by 10 P.M. In 1915, South Carolina forbade blacks and whites to work in the same rooms in textile factories. The Oklahoma legislature required separate telephone booths; New Orleans segregated white

 and black prostitutes. Atlanta had separate Bibles for black witnesses in the city courts. Harlan had, in general terms, predicted it all, in words still worth reading today: “The destinies of the two races, in this country, are indissolubly linked together, and the interests of both require that the common government of all shall not permit the seeds of race hate to be planted under the sanction of law. What can more certainly arouse race hate, what more certainly create and perpetuate a feeling of distrust between these races, than state enactments, which, in fact, proceed on the ground that colored citizens are so inferior and degraded that they cannot be allowed to sit in public coaches occupied by white citizens? That, as all will admit, is the real meaning of such legislation as was enacted in Louisiana.” Plessy v. Ferguson set a pattern of court-supported segregation that lasted sixty years. Generations of blacks and whites, children and adults alike, were deeply affected—sometimes traumatized—by it. The practice became a major focus of grievance in the growing movement for civil rights during the 1930s and 1940s. “Justice,” Tourgée had written in his original brief, “is pictured blind and her daughter, the Law, ought at least to be color-blind.” Harlan had used the same word, “color-blind,” a welcome concept to those fighting for civil rights in the 1890s. But history takes interesting and different turns, as does the law, and the word would come up again decades later, in arguments against affirmative action programs that helped African Americans get into colleges and professional schools. (See discussion of Bakke v. Regents of the University of California, p. 792.) Plessy, by then, was no more. At last, exactly fifty-eight years after the decision had been announced, on May 17, 1954, in the case of Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (see Chapter 29), the Supreme Court

 reversed itself and overturned Plessy. Ruling that segregated schools are inherently unequal, the Court’s stand toppled segregation of many kinds and changed lives once again.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
What did the majority of the Supreme Court give as its reasons in deciding Plessy v. Ferguson? What 
 do you think of these reasons? How do you think the majority reflected the climate of their times? What changes in public opinion have occurred since?

 3. What are some of the factors that contributed to increased segregation in the South and North, after 1890?

 2. Do you think Tourgée established an effective defense in arguing that the light-skinned Plessy had been deprived of his valuable property, “the reputation of being white”? Why or why not?





 CHAPTER 19

CHAPTER REVIEW

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 19 Toward an Urban Society, 1877–1900 on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1862
Morrill Land Grant gives land to states for 
 establishment of colleges Rutgers and Princeton play in nation’s first intercollegiate football game; Cincinnati Red Stockings, baseball’s first professional team, organized Comstock Law bans obscene articles from U.S. mail; Nation’s first kindergarten opens in St. Louis, Missouri Women’s Christian Temperance Union formed to crusade against evils of liquor Johns Hopkins University opens first separate graduate school Henry George analyzes problems of urbanizing America in Progress and Poverty; Salvation Army arrives in United States Polish National Alliance formed to help Polish immigrants adjust to life in America Booker T. Washington opens Tuskegee Institute in Alabama; Dr. John H. Kellogg advises parents to teach their children about sex in Plain Facts for Old and Young

 1883 Metropolitan Opera opens in New York 1885 Home Insurance Building, country’s first metal-frame





 structure, erected in Chicago; American Economic Association formed to advocate government intervention in economic affairs Edward Bellamy promotes idea of socialist utopia in Looking Backward, 2000–1887 Jane Addams opens Hull House in Chicago National Woman Suffrage Association and the American Woman Suffrage Association, both formed in 1869, merge to consolidate the woman suffrage movement Immigration Restriction League formed to limit immigration from southern and eastern Europe Supreme Court decision in Plessy v. Ferguson establishes constitutionality of “separate but equal” facilities; John Dewey’s Laboratory School for testing and practice of new educational theory opens at University of Chicago

CHAPTER REVIEW
The Lure of the City 
The Spread of Jim Crow


 Why did cities expand in the United States between 1880 and 1900?

 Why did Jim Crow laws spread across the South after end of the Reconstruction?

 American cities grew by leaps and bounds between 1880 and 1900. Among the reasons for the growth were the needs of an industrializing society; technological change in the form of electricity, elevators, steel beams, and other advances; and the arrival of millions of immigrants. Politically, city bosses retained power by responding to the needs of immigrants and other urban voters. (p. 439)

 After Reconstruction ended in 1877, northern weariness with Civil War issues, a series of Supreme Court decisions, and growing racism led the federal government to stop trying to uphold civil rights legislation in the South. This enabled Southern states and cities to pass and enforce Jim Crow laws that mandated rigid separation between blacks and whites. (p. 454)

The Stirrings of Reform
Social and Cultural Change, 1877–1900


Rural


 How did the growth of American cities affect social, cultural, and political life?



 The rapid growth of cities changed how Americans thought and acted. Cities opened up new areas of entertainment, employment, and behavior. They reshaped the family, brought more women into the workforce, and emphasized education. (p. 447)

 How did life in the growing cities lead to ideas of reform? Urban life, which forced many people close together, made social problems unprecedentedly visible. The city could not hide the contrasts between rich and poor, the dirtiness and dangers of factory life, and the woeful lot of millions of immigrants. Reformers argued for change. Some of them, like Jane Addams, opened urban settlement houses where they lived among the poor. (p. 455)

STUDY RESOURCES



KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
New immigrants Starting in the 1880s, immigration into the United States began to shift from northern and western Europe to southern and eastern Europe. These new immigrants were mostly poor, non-Protestant, and unskilled; they tended to stay in close-knit communities and retain their language, customs, and religions. Between 1880 and 1910, approximately 8.4 million of these so-called new immigrants came to the United States. p. 444 Mugwumps Educated and upper-class reformers who crusaded for lower tariffs, limited federal government, and civil service reform. They were best known for helping elect Grover Cleveland president in 1884. p. 448 Women’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) This organization campaigned to end drunkenness and the social ills that accompanied it. By 1898, it had 10,000 branches and 500,000 members. The WCTU illustrated the role women played in politics and reform long before they won the right to vote. p. 448 National American Woman Suffrage Association Founded by Susan B. Anthony in 1890, this organization worked to secure women the right to vote. It stressed careful organization and peaceful lobbying. p. 450 Plessy v. Ferguson A Supreme Court case in 1896 that established the doctrine of “separate but equal.” The Court applied it to schools in Cumming v. County Board of Education (1899). The doctrine was finally overturned in 1954, in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka. p. 451 
 Civil Rights Cases A group of cases in 1883 in which the Supreme Court ruled that the Fourteenth Amendment barred state governments from discriminating on the basis of race but did not prevent private individuals or organizations from doing so. The ruling dealt a major blow to efforts to protect African Americans. p. 451 Social Darwinism Adapted by English social philosopher Herbert Spencer from Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution, this theory held that the “laws” of evolution applied to human life, that change or reform therefore took centuries, and that the “fittest” would succeed in business and social relationships. It promoted competition and individualism, saw government intervention into human affair as futile, and was used by the economic and social elite to oppose reform. p. 455 Social Gospel Preached by urban Protestant ministers, the Social Gospel focused as much on improving the conditions of life on earth as on saving souls for the hereafter. Its adherents worked for child-labor laws and measures to alleviate poverty. p. 457 Settlement houses Located in poor districts, these community centers tried to soften the impact of urban life for immigrant and other families. Often run by young, educated women, they provided social services and a political voice for their neighborhoods. Chicago’s Hull House, founded by Jane Addams in 1889, was the most famous of them. p. 457

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
What were the main economic, social, and political characteristics of 
 3. How did reform-minded critics try to meet the challenges of

 the new urban society?

 urban growth?

 2. In what ways did the social and cultural changes of urban society affect fundamental outlooks on the family, the role of women, and education, and lead to demands for reform?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 19 on MyHistoryLab The Lure of the City

Social and Cultural Change, 1877–1900
Read the Document


Read the Document


Charles Loring Brace, “The Life of
 the Street Rats” (1872) p. 439

◾


◾


View the Closer Look


Group of Emigrants (Women
 and Children) from Eastern Europe on Deck of the S.S. Amsterdam p. 441

Watch the Video
View the Map


◾


Complete the Assignment
Isle of Tears p. 442


◾


Watch the Video


Ellis Island: Isle of Hope,


Democracy and Corruption: The Rise
 of Political Machines p. 446

Listen to the Audio File


Address at the Atlanta
Exposition by Booker T. Washington p. 453


The Stirrings of Reform
Read the Document


Ellis Island Immigrants (1903) p. 442


Immigration, 1880–1920 p. 444


The Morrill Act (1862) p. 452


 Edward Bellamy, from Looking

Backward p. 456


◾


Read the Document


 Jane Addams, from Twenty Years at Hull House (1910) p. 458

Complete the Assignment
Shaping of Jim Crow p. 460


Plessy v. Ferguson: The


◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




Political Realignments
 in the 1890s

Contents and Learning Objectives
POLITICS OF STALEMATE PG. 468

CHANGING ATTITUDES PG. 479

 Why was there a stalemate between Republicans and Democrats until the mid-1890s?

 What changes in outlook did the panic and depression of the 1890s bring about?

REPUBLICANS IN POWER: THE BILLIONDOLLAR CONGRESS PG. 470

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION OF 1896 PG. 481

 How did the Republican party’s vision shape the “BillionDollar Congress”?

 Why was the presidential election of 1896 so important?

THE RISE OF THE POPULIST MOVEMENT PG. 472

 What did McKinley accomplish that placed the results of the 1896 election on a solid basis?

 What factors led to the formation and growth of the Farmers’ Alliance and People’s party?

THE MCKINLEY ADMINISTRATION PG. 485

FEATURE ESSAY
The Wonderful Wizard of Oz 
THE CRISIS OF THE DEPRESSION PG. 476
What were the main political and labor effects of the panic and depression of the 1890s? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

