Chapter 21 Toward Empire


Roosevelt and the Rough Riders
 Many Americans regretted the start of the war with Spain that began in April 1898, but many others welcomed it. Many highly respected people believed that nations must fight every now and then to prove their power and test the national spirit. Theodore Roosevelt, 39 years old in 1898, was one of them. Nations needed to fight in order to survive, he thought. For months, Roosevelt argued strenuously for war with Spain for three reasons: first, on grounds of freeing Cuba and expelling Spain from the hemisphere; second, because of “the benefit done to our people by giving them something to think of which isn’t material gain”; and third, because the army and navy needed the practice. In April 1898, Roosevelt was serving in the important post of assistant secretary of the navy. When war broke out, he quickly resigned to join the army, rejecting the advice of the secretary of the navy, who warned he would only “ride a horse and brush mosquitoes from his neck in the Florida sands.” The secretary was wrong—dead wrong—and later had the grace to admit it. “Roosevelt was right,” he said. “His going into the Army led straight to the Presidency.” In 1898, officers supplied their own uniforms, and Roosevelt, the son of well-to-do parents, wanted his to be stylish. He wired Brooks Brothers, the expensive New York clothier, for a “regular Lieutenant-Colonel’s uniform without yellow on the collar and with leggings,” to be ready in a week. Joining a friend, he chose to enlist his own regiment, and after a few telephone calls

 to friends, and telegrams to the governors of Arizona, New Mexico, and Oklahoma asking for “good shots and good riders,” he had more than enough men. The First United States Volunteer Cavalry, an intriguing mixture of Ivy League athletes and western frontiersmen, was born. Known as the Rough Riders, it included men from the Harvard, Yale, and Princeton clubs of New York City, the Somerset Club of Boston, and New York’s exclusive Knickerbocker Club. Former college athletes—football players, tennis players, and track stars—enlisted. Woodbury Kane, a wealthy yachtsman, signed up and promptly volunteered for kitchen duty. Other volunteers came from the West—natural soldiers, Roosevelt called them, “tall and sinewy, with resolute, weather-beaten faces, and eyes that looked a man straight in the face without flinching.” Among the cowboys, hunters, and prospectors, there were Bucky O’Neill, a legendary Arizona sheriff and Indian fighter; a half dozen other sheriffs and Texas Rangers; a large number of Indians; a famous broncobuster; and an ex-marshal of Dodge City, Kansas. Eager for war, the men trained hard, played harder, and rarely passed up a chance for an intellectual discussion—if Roosevelt’s memoir of the war is to be believed. Once, he overheard Bucky O’Neill and a Princeton graduate “discussing Aryan word-roots together, and then sliding off into a review of the novels of Balzac, and a discussion as to how far Balzac could be said to be the founder of the modern realistic school of

Watch the Video


 Roosevelt’s Rough Riders

 This lithograph depicts Lieutenant Colonel Teddy Roosevelt and his Rough Rider regiment charging up San Juan Hill on July 1, 1898. The Battle of San Juan Hill was considered the bloodiest of the war and the greatest victory by the Rough Riders.

 fiction.” Roosevelt himself spent his spare time reading Superiorité des Anglo-Saxons, a French work that strove to prove the superiority of English-speaking peoples. In such a camp, discipline was lax, and enlisted men got on easily with the officers. The troops howled with joy when orders came to join the invasion army for Cuba. They won their first victories in Florida, fighting off other regiments to capture a train to take them to the wharf and then seizing the only available troopship to Cuba. The

 Rough Riders set sail on June 14, 1898, and Lieutenant Colonel Roosevelt, who had performed a war dance for the troops the night before, caught their mood: “We knew not whither we were bound, nor what we were to do; but we believed that the nearing future held for us many chances of death and hardship, of honor and renown. If we failed, we would share the fate of all who fail; but we were sure that we would win, that we should score the first great triumph in a mighty world-movement.”



 CHAPTER 21

TOWARD EMPIRE

 hat “world-movement,” Roosevelt was sure, would establish the United States as a world power, whose commerce and influence would extend around the globe, particularly in Latin America and Asia. As he hoped, the nation in the 1890s underwent dramatic expansion, building on the foreign policy approaches of administrations from Lincoln to William McKinley. Policy makers fostered business interests abroad, strengthened the navy, and extended American influence into Latin America and the Pacific. Differences over Cuba resulted in a war with Spain that brought new colonies and colonial subjects, establishing for the first time an American overseas empire.

T


America Looks Outward
 Why did Americans look outward in the last half of the nineteenth century? The overseas expansion of the 1890s differed in several important respects from earlier expansionist moves of the United States. From its beginning, the American republic had been expanding. After the first landings in Jamestown and Plymouth, settlers pushed westward into the trans-Appalachian region, the Louisiana Territory, Florida, Texas, California, Arizona, and New Mexico. Most of these lands were contiguous with existing territories of the United States, and most were intended for settlement, usually agricultural. The expansion of the 1890s was different. It sought to gain island possessions, the bulk of them already thickly populated. The new territories were intended less for settlement than for use as naval bases, trading outposts, or commercial centers on major trade routes. More often than not, they were viewed as colonies, not as states in the making. Historian Samuel F. Bemis described the overseas expansion of the 1890s as “the great aberration,” a time when the country adopted expansionist policies that did not fit with prior experience. Other historians, pointing to expansionist tendencies in thought and foreign policy that surfaced during the last half of the nineteenth century, have found a developing pattern that led naturally to the overseas adventures of the 1890s. In the view of Walter LaFeber, “The United States did not set out on an expansionist path in the late 1890s in a sudden, spur-of-the-moment fashion. The overseas empire that Americans controlled in 1900 was not a break in their history, but a natural culmination.”

Catching the Spirit of Empire
 Most people in most times in history tend to look at domestic concerns, and Americans in the years following the Civil War were no exception. Among other things, they focused on Reconstruction, the movement westward, and simply making a living. They took seriously the well-remembered advice of George Washington’s farewell address to “steer clear” of foreign entanglements. Throughout the nineteenth century, Americans enjoyed “free security” without fully appreciating it. Sheltered by two oceans and the British navy, they could enunciate bold policies such as the Monroe Doctrine,

 which instructed European nations to stay out of the affairs of the Western Hemisphere, while remaining virtually impregnable to foreign attack. In those circumstances a sense of isolationism spread, fostering a desire to stay out of foreign entanglements. Some people even urged abolition of the foreign service, considering it an unnecessary expenditure, a dangerous profession that might lead to involvement in the struggles of the world’s great powers. In the 1870s and after, however, Americans began to take an increasing interest in events abroad. There was a growing sense of internationalism, which stemmed in part from the telegraphs, telephones, and undersea cables that kept people better informed about political and economic developments in distant lands. Many Americans continued to be interested in expansion of the country’s borders; relatively few were interested in imperialism. Expansion meant the kind of growth that had brought California and Oregon into the American system. Imperialism meant the imposition of control over other peoples through annexation, military conquest, or economic domination.

Reasons for Expansion
 Several developments in these years combined to shift attention outward across the seas. The end of the frontier, announced officially in the census report of 1890, sparked fears about diminishing opportunities at home. Further growth, it seemed to some, must take place abroad, as John A. Kasson, an able and experienced diplomat, said in the North American Review: “We are rapidly utilizing the whole of our continental territory. We must turn our eyes abroad, or they will soon look inward upon discontent.” Factories and farms multiplied, producing more goods than the domestic market could consume. Both farmers and industrialists looked for new overseas markets, and the growing volume of exports—including more and more manufactured goods— changed the nature of American trade relations with the world. American exports of merchandise amounted to $393 million in 1870, $858 million in 1890, and $1.4 billion in 1900. In 1898, the United States exported more than it imported, beginning a trend that lasted through the 1960s. Political leaders such as James G. Blaine began to argue for the vital importance of foreign markets to continued economic growth. Blaine, secretary of state under Garfield and again under Harrison, aggressively sought wider markets in Latin America, Asia, and Africa, using tariff reciprocity agreements and other measures. To some extent, he and others were also caught up in a worldwide scramble for empire. In the last third of the century, Great Britain, France, and Germany divided up Africa and looked covetously at Asia. The idea of imperialistic expansion was in the air, and the great powers measured their greatness by the colonies they acquired. Inevitably, some Americans—certain business interests and foreign policy strategists, for example—caught the spirit and wanted to enter the international hunt for territory. Intellectual currents that supported expansion drew on Charles Darwin’s theories of evolution. Adherents pointed, for example, to The Origin of Species, which mentioned in its subtitle The Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life.

America Looks Outward


Read the Document


 Josiah Strong, from Our

Country (1885)


 Josiah Strong (1847–1916) was a Protestant minister who advocated in his works and speeches the responsibility of the Anglo-Saxons to civilize and Christianize “inferior” races around the world. Strong’s opinions influenced support among American Protestants, by the 1890s, for the development of an expansionist and imperialist foreign policy.

 Applied to human and social development, biological concepts seemed to call for the triumph of the fit and the elimination of the unfit. “In this world,” said Theodore Roosevelt, who thought of himself as one of the fit, “the nation that has trained itself to a career of unwarlike and isolated ease is bound, in the end, to go down before other nations which have not lost the manly and adventurous qualities.” The “biogenetic law” formulated by German biologist Ernst Haeckel suggested that the development of the race paralleled the development of the individual. Primitive peoples thus were in the arrested stages of childhood or adolescence; they needed supervision and protection. In a similar vein, John Fiske, a popular writer and lecturer, argued for Anglo-Saxon racial superiority,



 a result of the process of natural selection. The English and Americans, Fiske said, would occupy every land on the globe that was not already “civilized,” bringing the advances of commerce and democratic institutions. Such views were widespread among the lettered and unlettered alike. In Cuba, one of the Rough Riders ushered a visiting Russian prince around the trenches, informing him with ill-considered enthusiasm: “You see, Prince, the great result of this war is that it has united the two branches of Anglo-Saxon people; and now that they are together they can whip the world, Prince! They can whip the world!” Eminent scholars such as John W. Burgess, a professor of political science at Columbia University, argued in similar though more dignified fashion that people of English origin were destined to impose their political institutions on the world. The career of Josiah Strong, a Congregational minister and fervent expansionist, suggested the strength of the developing ideas. A champion of overseas missionary work, Strong traveled extensively through the West for the Home Missionary Society, and in 1885, drawing on his experiences, he published a book titled Our Country: Its Possible Future and Its Present Crisis. An immediate best seller, the book called on foreign missions to civilize the world under the Anglo-Saxon races. Strong became a national celebrity. Our Country argued for expanding American trade and dominion. Trade was important, it said, because the desire for material things was one of the hallmarks of civilized people. So was the Christian religion, and by exporting both trade and religion, Americans could civilize and Christianize “inferior” races around the world. As Anglo-Saxons, they were members of a God-favored race destined to lead the world. Anglo-Saxons already owned one-third of the Earth, Strong said, and in a famous passage he concluded that they would take more. In “the final competition of races,” they would win and “move down upon Mexico, down upon Central and South America, out upon the islands of the sea, over upon Africa and beyond.” Taken together, these developments in social, political, and economic thought prepared Americans for a larger role in the world. The change was gradual, and there was never a day when people awoke with a sudden realization of their interests overseas. But change there was, and by the 1890s, Americans were ready to reach out into the world in a more determined and deliberate fashion than ever before. For almost the first time, they felt the need for a foreign “policy.”

Foreign Policy Approaches, 1867–1900
 Rarely consistent, American foreign policy in the last half of the nineteenth century took different approaches to different areas of the world. In relation to Europe, seat of the dominant world powers, policy makers promoted trade and tried to avoid diplomatic entanglements. In North and South America, they based policy on the Monroe Doctrine, a recurrent dream of annexing Canada or Mexico, a hope for extensive trade, and Pan-American unity against the nations of the Old World. In the Pacific, they coveted Hawaii and other outposts on the sea-lanes to China. Secretary of State William Henry Seward, who served from 1861 to 1869, aggressively pushed an expansive foreign policy.



 CHAPTER 21

TOWARD EMPIRE

 “Give me . . . ; fifty, forty, thirty more years of life,” he told a Boston audience in 1867, “and I will give you possession of the American continent and control of the world.” Seward, it turned out, had only five more years of life, but he developed a vision of an American empire stretching south into Latin America and west to the shores of Asia. His vision included Canada and Mexico; islands in the Caribbean as strategic bases to protect a canal across the isthmus; and Hawaii and other islands as stepping-stones to Asia, which Seward and many others considered a virtually bottomless outlet for farm and manufactured goods. Seward tried unsuccessfully to negotiate a commercial treaty with Hawaii in 1867, and the same year he annexed the Midway Islands, a small atoll group twelve hundred miles northwest of Hawaii. In 1867, he concluded a treaty with Russia for the purchase of Alaska (which was promptly labeled “Seward’s Folly”) partly to sandwich western Canada between American territory and lead to its annexation. As the American empire spread, Seward thought, Mexico City would become its capital. Secretary of State Hamilton Fish, an urbane New Yorker, followed Seward in 1869, serving under President Ulysses S. Grant. An avid expansionist, Grant wanted to extend American influence in the Caribbean and Pacific, though the more conservative Fish often restrained him. They moved first to repair relations with Great Britain. The first business was settlement of the Alabama claims— demands that Britain pay the United States for damages to Union ships caused by Confederate vessels which, like the Alabama, had been built and outfitted in British shipyards. Negotiating patiently, Fish signed the Treaty of Washington in 1871, providing for arbitration of the Alabama issue and other nettlesome controversies. The treaty, one of the landmarks in the peaceful settlement of international disputes, marked a significant step in cementing AngloAmerican relations. Grant and Fish looked most eagerly to Latin America. In 1870, Grant became the first president to proclaim the nontransfer principle—“hereafter no territory on this continent shall be regarded as subject to transfer to a European power.” Fish also promoted the independence of Cuba, restive under Spanish rule, while holding off the annexation desired by the more eager Grant. Influenced by speculators, Grant tried to annex Santo Domingo in 1869 but was thwarted by powerful Republicans in the Senate who disliked foreign involvement and feared a subsequent attempt to annex Haiti. James G. Blaine served briefly as secretary of state under President James Garfield and laid extensive plans to establish closer commercial relations with Latin America. Blaine’s successor, Frederick T. Frelinghuysen, changed Blaine’s approach but not his strategy. Like Blaine, Frelinghuysen wanted to find Caribbean markets for American goods; he negotiated separate reciprocity treaties with Mexico, Cuba and Puerto Rico, the British West Indies, Santo Domingo, and Colombia. Using these treaties, Frelinghuysen hoped not only to obtain markets for American goods but to bind these countries to American interests. When Blaine returned to the State Department in 1889 under President Benjamin Harrison, he moved again to expand markets in Latin America. Drawing on earlier ideas, he envisaged a hemispheric system of peaceful intercourse, arbitration of disputes, and expanded trade. He also wanted to annex Hawaii. “I think there are

 only three places that are of value and not already taken, that are not continental,” he wrote in a letter to President Harrison in 1891. “One is Hawaii and the others are Cuba and Puerto Rico.” The last two might take a generation to acquire, but “Hawaii may come up for decision at any unexpected hour and I hope we shall be prepared to decide it in the affirmative.” Harrison and Blaine toyed with naval acquisitions in the Caribbean and elsewhere, but in general they focused on Pan-Americanism and tariff reciprocity. Blaine presided over the first Inter-American Conference in Washington on October 2, 1889, where delegates from nineteen American nations negotiated several agreements to promote trade and created the International Bureau of the American Republics, later renamed the Pan-American Union, for the exchange of general information, including political, scientific, and cultural knowledge. The conference, a major step in hemispheric relations, led to later meetings promoting trade and other agreements. Reciprocity, Harrison and Blaine hoped, would divert Latin American trade from Europe to the United States. Working hard to sell the idea in Congress, Blaine lobbied for a reciprocity provision in the McKinley Tariff Act of 1890, and once that was enacted, he negotiated reciprocity treaties with most Latin American nations. The treaties failed to foster the hoped-for trade because of the depression of the 1890s; nevertheless, they resulted in greater American exports of flour, grain, meat, iron, and machinery. Exports to Cuba jumped by one-third between 1891 and 1893, then dropped precipitously when the 1894 Wilson-Gorman Tariff Act ended reciprocity. Grover Cleveland, Harrison’s successor, also pursued an aggressive policy toward Latin America. In 1895, he brought the United States precariously close to war with Great Britain over a boundary dispute between Venezuela and British Guiana. Cleveland sympathized with Venezuela, and he and Secretary of State Richard Olney urged Britain to arbitrate the dispute. When Britain failed to act, Olney drafted a stiff diplomatic note affirming the Monroe Doctrine and denying European nations the right to meddle in Western Hemisphere affairs. Four months passed before Lord Salisbury, the British foreign secretary, replied. Rejecting Olney’s arguments, he sent two letters, the first bluntly repudiating the Monroe Doctrine as international law. The second letter, carefully reasoned and sometimes sarcastic, rejected Olney’s arguments for the Venezuelan boundary. Enraged, Cleveland defended the Monroe Doctrine, and he asked Congress for authority to appoint a commission to decide the boundary and enforce its decision. “I am fully alive to the responsibility incurred and keenly realize all the consequences that may follow,” he told Congress, plainly implying war. Preoccupied with larger diplomatic problems in Africa and Europe, Britain changed its position. In November 1896, the two countries signed a treaty of arbitration, under which Great Britain and Venezuela divided the disputed territory. Though Cleveland’s approach was clumsy—throughout the crisis, for example, he rarely consulted Venezuela—the Venezuelan incident demonstrated a growing determination to exert American power in the Western Hemisphere. Cleveland and Olney had persuaded Great Britain to recognize the dominance of the United States, and they had increased American influence in Latin America.

America Looks Outward


 The Monroe Doctrine assumed new importance. In averting war, an era of AngloAmerican friendship was begun.

Read the Document




 Liliuokalani, Hawaii’s Story

The Lure of Hawaii and
Samoa
 The islands of Hawaii offered a tempting way station to Asian markets. In the early 1800s, they were already called the “Crossroads of the Pacific,” and trading ships of many nations stopped there. In 1820, the first American missionaries arrived to convert the islanders to Christianity. Like missionaries elsewhere, they advertised Hawaii’s economic and other benefits and attracted new settlers. Their children later came to dominate Hawaiian political and economic life and played an important role in annexation. After the Civil War, the United States tightened its connections with the islands. The reciprocity treaty of 1875 allowed Hawaiian sugar to enter the United States free of duty and bound the Hawaiian monarchy to make no territorial or economic concessions to other powers. The treaty increased Hawaiian economic dependence on the United States; its political clauses effectively made Hawaii an American protectorate. In 1887, a new treaty reaffirmed these arrangements and granted the United States exclusive use of Pearl Harbor, a magnificent harbor that had early caught the eye of naval strategists. Following the 1875 treaty, white Hawaiians became more and more influential in the islands’ political life. The McKinley Tariff Act of 1890 ended the special status given Hawaiian sugar and at the same time awarded American producers a bounty of two cents a pound. Hawaiian sugar production dropped dramatically, unemployment rose, and property values fell. The following year, the weak King Kalakaua died, bringing to power a strongThe first step toward American annexation of Hawaii came in 1893 when Queen Liliuokalani was willed nationalist, Queen Liliuokalani. removed from the throne. Hawaii was annexed to the United States as a possession in 1898 and Resentful of white minority rule, she became a U.S. territory in 1900. decreed a new constitution that gave greater power to native Hawaiians. Unhappy, the American residents revolted in early 1893 and States to pluck it.” On February 14, 1893, Harrison’s secretary of called on the United States for help. John L. Stevens, the American state, John W. Foster, and delegates of the new government signed minister in Honolulu, sent 150 marines ashore from the cruiser a treaty annexing Hawaii to the United States. Boston, and within three days, the bloodless revolution was over. But only two weeks remained in Harrison’s term, and the Queen Liliuokalani surrendered “to the superior force of the United Senate refused to ratify the agreement. Five days after taking office, States,” and the victorious rebels set up a provisional government. Cleveland withdrew the treaty; he then sent a representative to Stevens urged annexation, telling Washington that the “Hawaiian investigate the cause of the rebellion. The investigation revealed pear is now fully ripe, and this is the golden hour for the United that the Americans’ role in it had been improper, and Cleveland



 CHAPTER 21

TOWARD EMPIRE

Alaska


 RUSSIA

 CANADA

 CHINA

UNITED STATES JAPAN
Hawaiian Islands 
 PACIFIC

 OCEAN

Equator


 AUSTRALIA

Samoan
Islands


 Major shipping routes

HAWAIIAN ISLANDS
The Hawaiian Islands provided the United States with both a convenient stopping point on the way to Asian markets and a strategic naval station in the Pacific. decided to restore the queen to her throne. He made the demand, but the provisional government in Hawaii politely refused and instead established the Republic of Hawaii, which the embarrassed Cleveland, unable to do otherwise, recognized. The debate over Hawaiian annexation, continuing through the 1890s, foreshadowed the later debate over the treaty to end the Spanish-American War. People in favor of annexation pointed to Hawaii’s strategic location, argued that Japan or other powers might seize the islands if the United States did not, and suggested that Americans had a responsibility to civilize and Christianize the native Hawaiians. Opponents warned that annexation might lead to a colonial army and colonial problems, the inclusion of a “mongrel” population in the United States, and rule over an area not destined for statehood. Annexation came swiftly in July 1898 in the midst of excitement over victories in the Spanish-American War. The year before, President William McKinley had sent a treaty of annexation to the Senate, but opposition quickly arose, and the treaty stalled. Japan protested against it, pointing out that Japanese made up a quarter of the Hawaiian population. Japan dispatched a cruiser to Honolulu; the Navy Department sent the battleship Oregon and ordered naval forces to take Hawaii if the Japanese made threatening moves. In 1898, annexationists redoubled arguments about Hawaii’s commercial and military importance. McKinley and congressional leaders switched strategies to seek a joint resolution, rather than a treaty, for annexation. A joint resolution required only a majority of both houses, while a treaty needed a two-thirds vote in the Senate. Bolstered by the new strategy, the annexation measure moved quickly through Congress, and McKinley signed it on July 7, 1898. His signature, giving the United States a naval and commercial base in the mid-Pacific, realized a goal held by policy makers since the 1860s. 
 While annexation of Hawaii represented a step toward China, the Samoan Islands, three thousand miles to the south, offered a strategic location astride the sea-lanes of the South Pacific. Americans showed early interest in Samoa, and in 1872, a naval officer negotiated a treaty granting the United States the use of Pago Pago, a splendid harbor on one of its islands. The Senate rejected the treaty but six years later approved a similar agreement providing for a naval station there. The agreement bound the United States to use its good offices to adjust any disputes between the Samoan chiefs and foreign governments. Great Britain and Germany also secured treaty rights in Samoa, and thereafter the three nations jockeyed for position. The situation grew tense in 1889, when warships from all three countries gathered in a Samoan harbor. But a sudden typhoon damaged the fleets, and tensions eased. A month later, delegates from Britain, Germany, and the United States met in Berlin to negotiate the problem. Britain and Germany wanted to divide up the islands; Secretary of State Blaine held out for some degree of authority by the indigenous population, with American control over Pago Pago. The agreement, an uneasy one, ended in 1899 when the United States and Germany divided Samoa and compensated Britain with lands elsewhere in the Pacific. Germany claimed the two larger islands in the chain; the United States kept the harbor at Pago Pago.

The New Navy
 Large navies were vital in the scramble for colonies, and in the 1870s the United States had almost no naval power. One of the most powerful fleets in the world during the Civil War, the American navy had fallen into rapid decline. By 1880, there were fewer than two thousand vessels, only forty-eight of which could fire a gun. Ships rotted, and many officers left the service. Conditions changed during the 1880s. A group of rising young officers, steeped in a new naval philosophy, argued for an expanded navy equipped with fast, aggressive fleets capable of fighting battles across the seas. This group had its greatest influence in a special Naval Advisory Board, formed by the secretary of the navy in 1881. Big-navy proponents pointed to the growing fleets of Great Britain, France, and Germany, arguing that the United States needed greater fleet strength to protect its economic and other interests in the Caribbean and Pacific. In 1883, Congress authorized construction of four steel ships, marking the beginning of the new navy. Experts also worked to improve naval management and the quality of fleet personnel, and between 1885 and 1889, Congress budgeted funds for thirty additional ships. The initial building program focused on lightly armored fast cruisers for raiding enemy merchant ships and protecting American shores, but after 1890, the program shifted to the construction of a seagoing offensive battleship navy capable of challenging the strongest fleets of Europe. Alfred Thayer Mahan and Benjamin F. Tracy were two of the main forces behind the new navy. Austere and scholarly, Mahan was the era’s most influential naval strategist. After graduating from

 War with Spain

 the Naval Academy in 1859, he devoted a lifetime to studying the influence of sea power in history; for more than two decades, he headed the Newport Naval War College, where officers imbibed the latest in strategic thinking. A clear, logical writer, Mahan summarized his beliefs in several major books, including The Influence of Sea Power upon History, 1660–1783 (1890), and The Interest of America in Sea Power (1897). Mahan’s reasoning was simple and, to that generation, persuasive. Industrialism, he argued, produced vast surpluses of agricultural and manufactured goods, for which markets must be found. Markets involved distant ports; reaching them required a large merchant marine and a powerful navy to protect it. Navies, in turn, needed coaling stations and repair yards. Coaling stations meant colonies, and colonies became strategic

Read the Document


Alfred Thayer Mahan,
The Interest of America in Sea Power




 bases, the foundation of a nation’s wealth and power. The bases might serve as markets themselves, but they were more important as stepping-stones to other objectives, such as the markets of Latin America and Asia. Mahan called attention to the worldwide race for power, a race, he warned, the United States could not afford to lose. “All around us now is strife; ‘the struggle of life,’ ‘the race of life’ are phrases so familiar that we do not feel their significance till we stop to think about them. Everywhere nation is arrayed against nation; our own no less than others.” To compete in the struggle, Mahan argued, the United States must expand. It needed strategic bases, a powerful oceangoing navy, a canal across the isthmus to link the East Coast with the Pacific, and Hawaii as a way station on the route to Asia. Mahan influenced a generation of policy makers in the United States and Europe; one of them, Benjamin F. Tracy, became Harrison’s secretary of the navy in 1889. Tracy organized the Bureau of Construction and Repair to design and build new ships, established the naval reserve in 1891, and ordered construction of the first American submarine in 1893. He also adopted the first heavy rapid-fire guns, smokeless powder, torpedoes, and heavy armor. Above all, Tracy joined with big-navy advocates in Congress to push for a far-ranging battleship fleet capable of attacking distant enemies. He wanted two fleets of battle ships, eight ships in the Pacific and twelve in the Atlantic. He got four first-class battleships. In 1889, when Tracy entered office, the United States ranked twelfth among world navies; in 1893, when he left, it ranked seventh and was climbing rapidly. “The sea,” he predicted in 1891, “will be the future seat of empires. And we shall rule it as certainly as the sun doth rise.” By the end of the decade, the navy had seventeen steel battleships, six armored cruisers, and many smaller craft. It ranked third in the world.

 War with Spain What were the causes and results of the war with Spain?

 This 1881 cartoon depicted “our top heavy navy,” a decrepit vessel sinking with idle officers.

 The war with Spain in 1898 built a mood of national confidence; altered older, more insular patterns of thought; and reshaped the way Americans saw themselves and the world. Its outcome pleased some people but troubled others who raised questions about war itself, colonies, and subject peoples. The war left a lingering strain of isolationism and antiwar feeling that affected later policy. It also left an American empire, small by European standards, but quite new to the American experience by virtue of its overseas location. When the war ended, American possessions stretched into the Caribbean and deep into the Pacific. American influence went further still, and the United States was recognized as a “world power.” The Spanish-American War established the United States as a dominant force for the twentieth century. It brought America colonies and millions of colonial subjects; it brought the responsibilities of governing an empire and protecting it. For better



 CHAPTER 21

TOWARD EMPIRE

 or worse, it involved the country in other nations’ arguments and affairs. The war strengthened the office of the presidency, swept the nation together in a tide of emotion, and confirmed the longstanding belief in the superiority of the New World over the Old. When it was over, Americans looked outward as never before, touched, they were sure, with a special destiny.

A
War for Principle  By the 1890s, Cuba and the nearby island of Puerto Rico comprised nearly all that remained of Spain’s once vast empire in the New World. Several times, Cuban insurgents had rebelled against Spanish rule, including a decade-long rebellion from 1868 to 1878 (the Ten Years’ War) that failed to settle the conflict. The depression of 1893 damaged the Cuban economy, and the Wilson-Gorman Tariff of 1894 prostrated it. Duties on sugar, Cuba’s lifeblood, were raised 40 percent. With the island’s sugar market in ruins, discontent with Spanish rule heightened, and in late February 1895, revolt again broke out. Recognizing the importance of the nearby United States, Cuban insurgents established a junta in New York City to raise money, buy weapons, and wage a propaganda war to sway American public opinion. Conditions in Cuba were grim. The insurgents pursued a hit-and-run scorched-earth policy to force the Spanish to leave. Spain committed more than two hundred thousand soldiers; the Spanish commander, who had won with similar tactics in 1878, tried to pin the insurgents in the eastern part of the island where they could be cornered and destroyed. When this strategy failed, Spain, in January 1896, sent a new commander, General Valeriano Weyler y Nicolau. Relentless and brutal, Weyler gave the rebels ten days to lay down their arms. He then put into effect a “reconcentration” policy designed to move the native population into camps and destroy the rebellion’s popular base. Herded into fortified areas, Cubans died by the thousands, victims of unsanitary conditions, overcrowding, and disease. Stories in American newspapers spurred a wave of sympathy for the insurgents. Two brash newspaper publishers in New York City, William Randolph Hearst of the New York Journal, and Joseph Pulitzer of the New York World, hoped to use the situation in Cuba to increase sales of their newspapers. To do so they published accounts of lurid Spanish atrocities, rebel victories, and of innocent Cuban women harassed by Spanish troops. Because of the yellow color of the comic strips in both papers, the tactic became known as yellow journalism, and some blamed it for causing the war. In actual fact, it did not. The conflict stemmed from larger disputes in policies and perceptions between Spain and the United States. Grover Cleveland, under whose administration the rebellion began, preferred Spanish rule to the kind of turmoil that might invite foreign intervention. Opposed to the annexation of Cuba, he issued a proclamation of neutrality and tried to restrain public opinion. In 1896, Congress passed a resolution favoring recognition of Cuban belligerence, but Cleveland ignored it. Instead, he offered to mediate the struggle, an offer Spain declined. Taking office in March 1897, President McKinley also urged neutrality but leaned slightly toward the insurgents. He immediately

 sent a trusted aide on a fact-finding mission to Cuba; the aide reported in mid-1897 that Weyler’s policy had wrapped Cuba “in the stillness of death and the silence of desolation.” The report in hand, McKinley offered to mediate the struggle, but, concerned over the suffering, he protested against Spain’s “uncivilized and inhuman” conduct. The United States, he made clear, did not contest Spain’s right to fight the rebellion but insisted it be done within humane limits. Late in 1897, a change in government in Madrid brought a temporary lull in the crisis. The new government recalled Weyler and agreed to offer the Cubans some form of autonomy. It also declared an amnesty for political prisoners and released Americans from Cuban jails. The new initiatives pleased McKinley, though he again warned Spain that it must find a humane end to the rebellion. Then, in January 1898, Spanish army officers led riots in Havana against the new autonomy policy, shaking the president’s confidence in Madrid’s control over conditions in Cuba. McKinley ordered the battleship Maine to Havana to demonstrate strength and protect American citizens if necessary. On February 9, 1898, the New York Journal , a leader of the yellow press, published a letter stolen from Enrique Dupuy de Lôme, the Spanish ambassador in Washington. In the letter, which was private correspondence to a friend, de Lôme called McKinley “weak,” “a would-be politician,” and “a bidder for the admiration of the crowd.” Many Americans were angered by the insult; McKinley himself was more worried about other sections of the letter that revealed Spanish insincerity in the negotiations. De Lôme immediately resigned and went home, but the damage was done. A few days later, at 9:40 in the evening of February 15, an explosion tore through the hull of the Maine, riding at anchor in Havana harbor. The ship, a trim symbol of the new steel navy, sank quickly; 266 lives were lost. McKinley cautioned patience and promised an immediate investigation. Crowds gathered quietly on Capitol Hill and outside the White House, mourning the lost men. Soon there was a new slogan: “Remember the Maine and to Hell with Spain!” The most recent study of the Maine incident blames the sinking on an accidental internal explosion, caused perhaps by spontaneous combustion in poorly ventilated coal bunkers. In 1898, Americans blamed it on Spain. Spaniards were hanged in effigy in many communities. Roosevelt, William Jennings Bryan, and others urged war, but McKinley delayed, hopeful that Spain might yet agree to an armistice and perhaps Cuban independence. In early March 1898, wanting to be ready for war if it came, McKinley asked Congress for $50 million in emergency defense appropriations, a request Congress promptly approved. The unanimous vote stunned Spain; allowing the president a latitude that was highly unusual for the era, it appropriated the money “for the National defense and for each and every purpose connected therewith to be expended at the discretion of the President.” In late March, the report of the investigating board blamed the sinking of the Maine on an external (and thus presumably Spanish) explosion. Pressures for war increased. On March 27, McKinley cabled Spain his final terms. He asked Spain to declare an armistice, end the reconcentration

 War with Spain

Watch the Video




Burial of the Maine Victims


 This photo of the burial procession of victims of the Maine was taken at Key West, FL, on March 27, 1898. Two hundred sixty-six sailors and marines were killed in the explosion in Havana harbor.

 policy, and—implicitly—move toward Cuban independence. When the Spanish answer came, it conceded some things, but not, in McKinley’s judgment, the important ones. Spain offered a suspension of hostilities (but not an armistice) and left the Spanish commander in Cuba to set the length and terms of the suspension. It also revoked the reconcentration policy. But the Spanish response made no mention of a true armistice, McKinley’s offer to mediate, or Cuba’s independence. Reluctantly McKinley prepared his war message. Congress heard it on April 11, 1898. On April 19, Congress passed a joint resolution declaring Cuba independent and authorizing the president to use the army and navy to expel the Spanish from it. The Teller Amendment, offered by Colorado senator Henry M. Teller, pledged that the United States had no intention of annexing the island.

 On April 21, Spain severed diplomatic relations. The following day, McKinley proclaimed a blockade of Cuba and called for 125,000 volunteers. On Monday, April 25, Congress passed a declaration of war. Late that afternoon, McKinley signed it. Some historians have suggested that in leading the country toward war, McKinley was weak and indecisive, a victim of war hysteria in the Congress and the country; others have called him a wily manipulator for war and imperial gains. In truth, he was neither. Throughout the Spanish crisis, McKinley pursued a moderate middle course that sought to end the suffering in Cuba, promote Cuba’s independence, and allow Spain time to adjust to the loss of the remnant of empire. He also wanted peace, as did Spain, but in the end, the conflicting national interests of the two countries brought them to war.



 CHAPTER 21

TOWARD EMPIRE

“A Splendid Little War”
 Ten weeks after the declaration of war, the fighting was over. For Americans, they were ten glorious, dizzying weeks, with victories to fill every headline and slogans to suit every taste. No war can be a happy occasion for those who fight it, but the SpanishAmerican War came closer than most. Declared in April, it ended in August. Relatively few Americans died, and the quick victory seemed to verify burgeoning American power, though Sherwood Anderson, the author, suggested that fighting a weakened Spain was “like robbing an old gypsy woman in a vacant lot at night after a fair.” John Hay, soon to be McKinley’s secretary of state, called it “a splendid little war.” At the outset, the United States was militarily unprepared. Unlike the navy, the army had not been rebuilt or modernized, and it had shrunk drastically since the day thirty-three years before when Grant’s great Civil War army marched sixty abreast, two hundred thousand strong, down Washington’s Pennsylvania Avenue. In 1898, the regular army consisted of only twenty-eight thousand officers and men, most of them more experienced in quelling Indian uprisings than fighting large-scale battles. When McKinley called for 125,000 volunteers, as many as one million young Americans responded. Ohio alone had 100,000 volunteers. Keeping the regular army units intact, War Department officials enlisted the volunteers in National Guard units that were then integrated into the national army. Men clamored to join. The secretary of war feared “there is going to be more

 trouble to satisfy those who are not going than to find those who are willing to go.” In an army inundated with men, problems of equipment and supply quickly appeared. The regulars had the new .30-caliber Krag-Jorgensen rifles, but National Guard units carried Civil War Springfield rifles that used old black-powder cartridges. The cartridges gave off a puff of smoke when fired, neatly marking the troops’ position. Spanish troops were better equipped; they had modern Mausers with smokeless powder, which they used to devastating effect. Food was also a problem, as was sickness. The War Department fell behind in supplies and received many complaints about the canned beef it offered the men. Tropical disease felled many soldiers. Scores took ill after landing in Cuba and the Philippines, and it was not uncommon for half a regiment to be unable to answer the bugle call. Americans then believed that “a foreign war should be fought by the hometown military unit acting as an extension of their community.” Soldiers identified with their hometowns, dressed in the local fashion, and thought of themselves as members of a town unit in a national army. The poet Carl Sandburg, twenty years old in 1898, rushed to join the army and called his unit a “living part” of his hometown of Galesburg, Illinois. And the citizens of Galesburg, for their part, took a special interest in Sandburg’s unit, in a fashion repeated in countless towns across the country. Not surprisingly, then, National Guard units mirrored the social patterns of their communities. Since everyone knew each other, there was an easygoing familiarity, tempered by the deference

 Charge of the 24th and 25th Colored Infantry and Rescue of the Rough Riders at San Juan Hill, July 2, 1898, colored lithograph by Kurz and Allison, 1899 (above). The Twenty-fourth and Twenty-fifth Colored Infantry regiments served with exceptional gallantry in the Spanish-American War. Charles Young (right), an 1889 graduate of West Point, was the only African American officer in the army during the Spanish-American War except for a few chaplains.

 War with Spain

View the Map


The Spanish-American War


UNITED STATES

Tampa


CHINA ATLANTIC OCEAN

FLORIDA
Miami Nassau 
China
C
Chi
 na S Sea

Key West
 US

Havana
Sinking of the Maine
(Feb. 15, 1898)


 nav a

 l blo

 cka d

 BAHAMAS e

El Caney and
San Juan/Kettle Hill
Santiago
(July 1, 1898)
 de Cuba



 ey Manila

500 Miles


 PHILIPPINES

0 500 KM


 Guantánamo Bay US na Santiago

 JAMAICA 400 Miles

400 KM


(Br.)


PA PACIFIC P ACIFIC A C OCEAN OC C AN CE N

 CUBA

 US e naval blockad CAYMAN IS. (Br.)

 FORMOSA

Hong Kong


De w


Gulf
 of Mexico





(Br.)
Kingston


Santiago de Cuba
(July 1-2, 1898)


 HAITI

 val b

 loc ka

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

 Port-au-Prince HISPANIOLA

Santo
Domingo


 U.S. forces

 de

 Spanish forces San Juan

Puerto Rico


 U.S. victories

Caribbean Sea
 U.S. naval blockade

 Disputes regarding Cuba and the sinking of the battleship U.S.S. Maine prompted the United States to declare war on Spain in 1898. The two nations dueled over another Spanish possession, the Philippines. The Treaty Of Paris of 1898 that ended the war granted Cuba its independence (although it remained an American protectorate until 1934) and established U.S. control over Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines.

 that went with hometown wealth, occupation, education, and length of residence. Enlisted men resented officers who grabbed too much authority, and they expected officers and men to call each other by their first names. Sandburg knew most of the privates in his unit, had worked for his corporal, and had gone to school with the first lieutenant. “Officers and men of the Guard mingle on a plane of beautiful equality,” said a visitor to one volunteer camp. “Privates invade the tents of their officers at will, and yell at them half the length of the street.” Each community thought of the hometown unit as its own unit, an extension of itself. In later wars, the government censored news and dominated press relations; there was little censorship in the war with Spain, and the freshest news arrived in the latest letter home. Small-town newspapers printed news of the men, and townswomen knit special red or white bellybands of stitched flannel, thought to ward off tropical fevers. Towns sent food, clothing, and occasionally even local doctors to the front. At the close of the war, the Clyde (Ohio) Ladies Society collected funds to provide each member of the town’s company a medal struck on behalf of the town.

“Smoked Yankees”
 When the invasion force sailed for Cuba, nearly one-fourth of it was African American. In 1898, the regular army included four regiments of African American soldiers, the Twenty-fourth and

 Twenty-fifth Infantry and the Ninth and Tenth Cavalry. Black regiments had served with distinction in campaigns against the Indians in the West. Most African American troops in fact were posted in the West; no eastern community would accept them. A troop of the Ninth Cavalry was stationed in Virginia in 1891, but whites protested and the troop was ordered back to the West. When the war broke out, the War Department called for five black volunteer regiments. The army needed men, and military authorities were sure that black men had a natural immunity to the climate and diseases of the tropics. But most state governors refused to accept black volunteers. Only Alabama, Ohio, and Massachusetts mustered in black units in response to McKinley’s first call for volunteers. Company L of the Sixth Massachusetts Regiment took part in the invasion of Puerto Rico in July 1898, the only one of the black volunteer units to see action in the Caribbean. African American leaders, among them P. B. S. Pinchback, former acting governor of Louisiana, and George White of North Carolina, the lone African American member of Congress, protested the discrimination. The McKinley administration intervened, and in the end, the volunteer army included more than ten thousand black troops. Orders quickly went out to the four black regular army regiments in the West to move to camps in the South to prepare for the invasion of Cuba. Crowds and cheers followed the troop trains across the plains, but as they crossed into Kentucky and Tennessee, the cheering stopped. Welcoming crowds were kept away from the trains, and the troops were hustled onward. Station restaurants



 CHAPTER 21

TOWARD EMPIRE

 refused to serve them; all waiting rooms were segregated. “It mattered not if we were soldiers of the United States, and going to fight for the honor of our country,” Sergeant Frank W. Pullen of the Twenty-fourth Infantry wrote; “we were ‘niggers’ as they called us and treated us with contempt.” Many soldiers were not prepared to put up with the treatment. Those stationed near Chickamauga Park, Tennessee, shot “at some whites who insulted them” and forcibly desegregated the railroad cars on the line into Chattanooga. Troops training near Macon, Georgia, refused to ride in the segregated “trailers” attached to the trolleys, and fights broke out. Discovering a Macon park with a sign saying “Dogs and niggers not allowed,” they invaded it and removed the sign. They also chopped down a tree in the park that had been used for lynchings. More than four thousand black troops training near Tampa and Lakeland, Florida, found segregated saloons, cafes, and drugstores. “Here the Negro is not allowed to purchase over the same counter in some stores as the white man purchases over,” Chaplain George W. Prioleau charged. “Why sir, the Negro of this country is a freeman and yet a slave. Talk about fighting and freeing poor Cuba and of Spain’s brutality; of Cuba’s murdered thousands, and starving reconcentradoes. Is America any better than Spain?” When the invasion force sailed a few days later, segregation continued on some of the troopships. Blacks were assigned to the lowest decks, or whites and blacks were placed on different sides of the ship. But the confusion of war often ended the problem, if only temporarily. Blacks took command as white officers died, and Spanish troops soon came to fear the “smoked Yankees,” as they called them. Black soldiers played a major role in the Cuban campaign and probably staved off defeat for the Rough Riders at San Juan Hill. In Cuba, they won twenty-six Certificates of Merit and five Congressional Medals of Honor.

The Course of the War
 Mahan’s Naval War College had begun studying strategy for a war with Spain in 1895. By 1898, it had a detailed plan for operations in the Caribbean and Pacific. Naval strategy was simple: Destroy the Spanish fleet, damage Spain’s merchant marine, and harry the colonies or the coast of Spain. Planners were excited; two steam-powered armored fleets had yet to meet in battle anywhere in the world. The army’s task was more difficult. It had to defend the United States, invade Cuba and probably Puerto Rico, and undertake possible action in far-flung places such as the Philippines or Spain. Even before war was declared, the secretary of war arranged joint planning between the army and navy. Military intelligence was plentiful, and planners knew the numbers and locations of the Spanish troops. Earlier they had rejected a proposal to send an officer in disguise to map Cuban harbors; such things, they said, were simply not done in peacetime. Still, the War Department’s new Military Information Division, a sign of the increasing professionalization of the army, had detailed diagrams of Spanish fortifications in Havana and other points. On the afternoon of April 20, 1898, McKinley summoned the strategists to the White House; to the dismay of those who wanted a

 more aggressive policy, they decided on the limited strategy of blockading Cuba, sending arms to the insurgents, and annoying the Spanish with small thrusts by the army. Victories soon changed the strategy. In case of war, longstanding naval plans had called for a holding action against the Spanish base in the Philippines. On May 1, 1898, with the war barely a week old, Commodore George Dewey, commander of the Asiatic Squadron located at Hong Kong, crushed the Spanish fleet in Manila Bay. Suddenly, Manila and the Philippines lay within American grasp. At home, Dewey portraits, songs, and poems blossomed everywhere, and his calm order to the flagship’s captain—“You may fire when ready, Gridley”—hung on every tongue. Dewey had two modern cruisers, a gunboat, and a Civil War paddle steamer. He sank eight Spanish warships. Dewey had no troops to attack the Spanish army in Manila, but the War Department, stunned by the speed and size of the victory, quickly raised an expeditionary force. On August 13, 1898, the troops accepted the surrender of Manila, and with it, the Philippines. McKinley and his aides were worried about Admiral Pascual Cervera’s main Spanish fleet, thought to be headed across the Atlantic for an attack on Florida. On May 13, the navy found Cervera’s ships near Martinique in the Caribbean but then lost them again. A few days later, Cervera slipped secretly into the harbor of Santiago de Cuba, a city on the island’s southern coast. But a spy in the Havana telegraph office alerted the Americans, and on May 28, a superior American force under Admiral William T. Sampson bottled Cervera up. In early June, a small force of Marines seized Guantánamo Bay, the great harbor on the south of the island. They established depots for the navy to refuel and pinned down Spanish troops in the area. On June 14, an invasion force of about seventeen thousand men set sail from Tampa. Seven days later, they landed at Daiquiri on Cuba’s southeastern coast. All was confusion, but the Spanish offered no resistance. Helped by Cuban insurgents, the Americans immediately pushed west toward Santiago, which they hoped to surround and capture. At first, the advance through the lush tropical countryside was peaceful. The first battle broke out at Las Guasimas, a crossroads on the Santiago road. After a sharp fight, the Spanish fell back. On July 1, the Rough Riders, troops from the four black regiments, and the other regulars reached the strong fortifications at El Caney and San Juan Hill. Black soldiers of the Twenty-fifth Infantry charged the El Caney blockhouses, surprising the Spanish defenders with Comanche yells. For the better part of a day, the defenders fought stubbornly and held back the army’s elite corps. In the confusion of battle, Roosevelt rallied an assortment of infantry and cavalry to take Kettle Hill, adjacent to San Juan Hill. They charged directly into the Spanish guns, Roosevelt at their head, mounted on a horse, a blue polka-dot handkerchief floating from the brim of his sombrero. “I waved my hat and we went up the hill with a rush,” he recalled in his autobiography. Actually, it was not quite so easy. Losses were heavy; eighty-nine Rough Riders were killed or wounded in the attack. Dense foliage concealed the enemy and smokeless powder gave no clue to their position. At nightfall, the surviving Spanish defenders withdrew, and the Americans prepared for the counterattack.

Acquisition of Empire


 American troops now occupied the ridges overlooking Santiago. They were weakened by sickness, a fact unknown to the Spanish, who decided the city was lost. The Spanish command in Havana ordered Cervera to run for the open sea, although he knew the attempt to escape was hopeless. On the morning of July 3, Cervera’s squadron steamed down the bay and out through the harbor’s narrow channel, but the waiting American fleet closed in, and in a few hours every Spanish vessel was destroyed. Two weeks later, Santiago surrendered. Soon thereafter, army troops, meeting little resistance, occupied Puerto Rico. Cervera had commanded Spain’s only battle fleet, and when it sank, Spain was helpless against attacks on the colonies or even its own shores. The war was over. Lasting 113 days, it took relatively few lives, most of them the result of accident, yellow fever, malaria, and typhoid in Cuba. Of the 5,500 Americans who died in

View the Closer Look


 the war, only 379 were killed in battle. The navy lost one man in the battle at Santiago Bay, and only one to heatstroke in the stunning victory in Manila Bay.

Acquisition of Empire
 What were the various viewpoints about the acquisition of empire after the war with Spain? Late in the afternoon of August 12, 1898, representatives of Spain and the United States met in McKinley’s White House office to sign the preliminary instrument of peace. Secretary of State William R. Day beckoned a presidential aide over to a large globe, remarking, “Let’s see what we get by this.”

American Empire


Alaska


ASIA NORTH

Aleutian Is.


 AMERICA

UNITED STATES

CEA EA AN PACIFIC OCEAN

Wake Is.
Guam


ATLANTIC OCEAN
Cuba (U.S. acquires exclusive rights to lease naval bases) 
Midway Is.


Philippine Is.


Hawaiian
 an Is Is. Puerto Rico

Johnston
 ohn Is. 1858 Kingman Reef 1858 Palmyra Is. 1898

Howland Is.
Baker Is.




Equator
Jarvis Is.


American Samoa


 AUSTRALIA

AMERICAN EMPIRE, 1900
With the Treaty of Paris, the United States gained an expanded colonial empire stretching from the Caribbean to the far Pacific. It embraced Puerto Rico, Alaska, Hawaii, part of Samoa, Guam, the Philippines, and a chain of Pacific islands. The dates on the map refer to the date of U.S. acquisition. 
SOUTH AMERICA



 CHAPTER 21

TOWARD EMPIRE

 What the United States got was an expansion of its territory and an even larger expansion of its responsibilities. According to the preliminary agreement, Spain granted independence to Cuba, ceded Puerto Rico and the Pacific island of Guam to the United States, and allowed Americans to occupy Manila until the two countries reached final agreement on the Philippines. To McKinley, the Philippines were the problem. Puerto Rico was close to the mainland, and it appealed even to many of the opponents of expansion. Guam was small and unknown; it escaped attention. The Philippines, on the other hand, were huge, sprawling, and thousands of miles from America. McKinley weighed a number of alternatives for the Philippines, but he liked none of them. He believed he could not give the islands back to Spain; public opinion would not allow it. He might turn them over to another nation, but then they would fall, as he later said, “a golden apple of discord, among the rival powers.” Germany, Japan, Great Britain, and Russia had all expressed interest in acquiring them. Germany even sent a large fleet to Manila and laid plans to take the Philippines if the United States let them go. Rejecting those alternatives, McKinley considered independence for the islands but was soon talked out of it. People who had been there, reflecting the era’s racism, told him the Filipinos were not ready for independence. He thought of establishing an American protectorate but discarded the idea, convinced it would bring American responsibilities without full American control. Sifting the alternatives, McKinley decided there was only one practical policy: Annex the Philippines, with an eye to future independence after a period of tutelage. At first hesitant, American opinion was swinging to the same conclusion. Religious and missionary organizations appealed to McKinley to hold on to the Philippines in order to “Christianize” them. Some merchants and industrialists saw them as the key to the China market and the wealth of Asia. Many Americans simply regarded them as the legitimate fruits of war. In October 1898, representatives of the United States and Spain met in Paris to discuss a peace treaty. Spain agreed to recognize Cuba’s independence, assume the Cuban debt, and cede Puerto Rico and Guam to the United States. Acting on instructions from McKinley, the American representatives demanded the cession of the Philippines. “Grave as are the responsibilities and unforeseen as are the difficulties which are before us, the President can see but one plain path of duty— the acceptance of the archipelago,” the instructions said. In return, the United States offered a payment of $20 million. Spain resisted but had little choice, and on December 10, 1898, the American and Spanish representatives signed the Treaty of Paris.

The Treaty of Paris Debate
 Submitted to the Senate for ratification, the treaty set off a storm of debate throughout the country. Industrialist Andrew Carnegie, reformer Jane Addams, labor leader Samuel Gompers, prominent Republicans such as Thomas B. Reed and John Sherman, Mark Twain, William Dean Howells, and a host of others argued forcefully against annexing the Philippines. Annexation of the Philippines, the anti-imperialists protested over and over again,

 violated the very principles of independence and self-determination on which the United States was founded. Some labor leaders feared the importation of cheap labor from new Pacific colonies. Gompers warned about the “halfbreeds and semi-barbaric people” who might undercut wages and the union movement. Other anti-imperialists argued against assimilation of different races, “Spanish-Americans,” as one said, “with all the mixture of Indian and negro blood, and Malays and other unspeakable Asiatics, by the tens of millions!” Such racial views were also common among those favoring expansion, and the anti-imperialists usually focused on different arguments. If the United States established a tyranny abroad, they were sure, there would soon be tyranny at home. “This nation,” declared William Jennings Bryan, “cannot endure half republic and half colony— half free and half vassal.” Charles Francis Adams, Jr., warned that the possession of colonies meant big armies, government, and debts (“an income tax looms up in the largest possible proportions,” he said). Bryan scoffed at the argument that colonies were good for trade, pointing out, “It is not necessary to own people to trade with them.” E. L. Godkin, the editor of The Nation; George F. Hoar, a leading Republican senator; and many others thought there was no way to reconcile the country’s republican ideals with the practice of keeping people under heel abroad. As one of them put it, “Dewey took Manila with the loss of one man—and all our institutions.” To Booker T. Washington, the country had more important things to think about at home, including its treatment of Indians and blacks. Carnegie was so upset that he offered to buy Filipino independence with a personal check for $20 million. He was sure that keeping the Philippines would divert attention from industrial development to foreign adventure, would glorify physical force, and would lead to a war against the Filipinos themselves, in which American soldiers who had signed up “to fight the oppressor” would end up “shooting down the oppressed.” In November 1898, opponents of expansion formed the Anti-Imperialist League to fight against the peace treaty. Local leagues sprang up in Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and many other cities; the parent league claimed thirty thousand members and more than half a million “contributors.” Membership centered in New England; the cause was less popular in the West and South. It enlisted more Democrats than Republicans, though never a majority of either. The anti-imperialists were weakened by the fact that they lacked a coherent program. Some favored keeping naval bases in the conquered areas. Some wanted Hawaii and Puerto Rico but not the Philippines. Others wanted nothing at all to do with any colonies. Most simply wished that Dewey had sailed away after beating the Spanish at Manila Bay. The treaty debate in the Senate lasted a month. Pressing hard for ratification, McKinley earlier toured the South to rally support and consulted closely with senators. Though opposed to taking the Philippines, Bryan supported ratification in order to end the war; his support influenced some Democratic votes. Still, on the final weekend before the vote, the treaty was two votes short. That Saturday night, news reached Washington that fighting had broken out between American troops and Filipino insurgents who demanded immediate independence. The news

Acquisition of Empire


Read the Document


Carl Schurz, Platform of
 the American Anti-Imperialist League

 Carl Schurz and other anti-imperialists of the American Anti-Imperialists League lobbied President McKinley not to annex the Philippines after the Spanish American War in 1898. These anti-imperialists argued that annexation of the Philippines would violate republican principles.

 increased pressure to ratify the treaty, which the Senate did on February 6, 1899, with two votes to spare. An amendment promising independence as soon as the Filipinos established a stable government lost by one vote. The United States had a colonial empire.

Guerrilla Warfare in the Philippines
 Historians rarely write of the Philippine-American War, but it was an important event in American history. The war with Spain was over a few months after it began, but war with the Filipinos lasted more than three years. Four times as many American soldiers fought in the Philippines as in Cuba. For the first time, Americans fought men of a different color in an Asian guerrilla war. The Philippine-American War of 1898–1902 took a heavy toll: 4,300 American lives and untold thousands of Filipino lives (estimates range from 50,000 to 200,000). Emilio Aguinaldo, the Filipino leader, was twenty-nine years old in 1898. An early organizer of the anti-Spanish resistance, he



 had gone into exile in Hong Kong; from there he welcomed the outbreak of the Spanish-American War. Certain the United States would grant independence, he worked for an American victory. Filipino insurgents helped guide Dewey into Manila Bay, and Dewey himself sent a ship to Hong Kong to bring back Aguinaldo to lead a native uprising against the Spanish. On June 12, 1898, the insurgents proclaimed their independence. Cooperating with the Americans, they drove the Spanish out of many areas of the islands. In the liberated regions, Aguinaldo established local governments with appointed provincial governors. He waited impatiently for American recognition, but McKinley and others had concluded that the Filipinos were not ready. Soon, warfare broke out between the Filipinos and Americans over the question of Filipino independence. By late 1899, the American army had defeated and dispersed the organized Filipino army, but claims of victory proved premature. Aguinaldo and his advisers shifted to guerrilla tactics, striking suddenly and then melting into the jungle or friendly native villages. In many areas, the Americans ruled the day, the guerrillas the night. There were terrible atrocities on both sides. The Americans found themselves using brutal, Weyler-like tactics. After any attack on an American patrol, the Americans burned all the houses in the nearest district. They tortured people and executed prisoners. They established protected “zones” and herded Filipinos into them. Seizing or destroying all food outside the zones, they starved many guerrillas into submission. Bryan tried to turn the election of 1900 into a debate over imperialism, but the attempt failed. For one thing, he himself refused to give up the silver issue, which cost him some support among anti-imperialists in the Northeast who were for gold. McKinley, moreover, was able to take advantage of the surging economy, and he could defend expansion as an accomplished fact. “It is no longer a question of expansion with us,” he told one audience. “If there is any question at all it is a question of contraction; and who is going to contract?” Riding a wave of patriotism and prosperity, McKinley won the election handily—by an even larger margin than he had in 1896. In 1900, McKinley sent a special Philippine Commission to the islands under William Howard Taft, a prominent Ohio judge. Directed to establish a civil government, the commission organized municipal administrations and, in stages, created a government for the Philippines. In March 1901, five American soldiers tricked their way into Aguinaldo’s camp deep in the mountains and took him prisoner. Back in Manila, he signed a proclamation urging his people to end the fighting. Some guerrillas held out for another year, but to no avail. On July 4, 1901, authority was transferred from the army to Taft, who was named civilian governor of the islands, and his civilian commission. McKinley reaffirmed his purpose to grant the Filipinos self-government as soon as they were deemed ready for it. Given broad powers, the Taft Commission introduced many changes. New schools provided education and vocational training for Filipinos of all social classes. The Americans built roads and bridges, reformed the judiciary, restructured the tax system, and introduced sanitation and vaccination programs. They established local governments built on Filipino traditions and hierarchies.



 CHAPTER 21

TOWARD EMPIRE

GREENLAND (DENMARK)

ICELAND (DENMARK) SWEDEN DENMARK THE NETHERLANDS GREAT GERMAN BRITAIN EMPIRE BELGIUM AUSTRIAFRANCE HUNGARY

ALASKA (U.S.)

 CANADA

ATLANTIC OCEAN

ITALY GREECE

 MOROCCO

EGYPT PUERTO RICO (U.S.)

 CUBA

FRENCH WEST AFRICA

 LIBERIA

BELGIAN CONGO C N E R F ANGOLA

H


 ECUADOR

 BRAZIL

 PERU

BOLIVIA PARAGUAY

GERMAN SOUTHWEST AFRICA

 JAPAN

BURMA SIAM

FRENCH INDOCHINA PHILIPPINE ISLANDS

 ETHIOPIA

PACIFIC ISLANDS (GERMAN, 1899)

BRITISH EAST AFRICA GERMAN EAST AFRICA

 DU

TCH EAST IN DIES

INDIAN OCEAN

 MADAGASCAR

 AUSTRALIA

UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA

URUGUAY CHILE

 KOREA

PACIFIC OCEAN INDIA

ANGLOEGYPTIAN SUDAN

EQ UA TO RIA

 COLOMBIA

CHINA AFGHANISTAN PERSIA

 ARABIA

MO ZA MB IQUE

 MEXICO

 VENEZUELA

Equator


OTTOMAN EMPIRE

 TRIPOLI

L AFRICA

PACIFIC OCEAN

 SPAIN

MA NC HU RI

A


 PORTUGAL

UNITED STATES

RUSSIAN EMPIRE

 ARGENTINA

NEW ZEALAND

WORLD COLONIAL EMPIRES, 1900
Belgium 
German Empire


Italy


Portugal


United States


France


Great Britain


The Netherlands


Spain


 Other independent states

WORLD COLONIAL EMPIRES, 1900
Events of the nineteenth century increased European hegemony over the world. By 1900, most independent African nations had disappeared and the major European nations had divided the continent among themselves. In the East, the European powers and Japan took advantage of China’s internal weakness to gain both trading ports and economic concessions. 
 Taft encouraged Filipino participation in government. During the following decades, other measures broadened Filipino rights. Independence finally came on July 4, 1946, nearly fifty years after Aguinaldo proclaimed it.

Governing the Empire
 Ruling the colonies raised new and perplexing questions. How could—and how should—the distant dependencies be governed? Did their inhabitants have the rights of American citizens? Some people contended that acquisition did not automatically incorporate the new possessions into the United States and endow them with constitutional privileges. Others argued that “the Constitution followed the flag,” meaning that acquisition made the possessions part of the nation and thus entitled them to all constitutional guarantees. A third group suggested that only “fundamental” constitutional guarantees—citizenship, the right to vote, and the right to trial by jury—not “formal” privileges—the right to use American currency, the right to be taxed, and the right to run for the presidency—were applicable to the new empire. In a series of cases between 1901 and 1904 (De Lima v. Bidwell, Dooley v. U.S., and Downes v. Bidwell), the Supreme Court asserted

 the principle that the Constitution did not automatically and immediately apply to the people of an annexed territory and did not confer upon them all the privileges of U.S. citizenship. Instead, Congress could specifically extend such constitutional provisions as it saw fit. “Ye-es,” the secretary of war said of the Court’s ambiguous rulings, “as near as I can make out the Constitution follows the flag—but doesn’t quite catch up with it.” Four dependencies—Hawaii, Alaska, Guam, and Puerto Rico—were organized quickly. In 1900, Congress granted territorial status to Hawaii, gave American citizenship to all citizens of the Hawaiian republic, authorized an elective legislature, and provided for a governor appointed from Washington. A similar measure made Alaska a territory in 1912. Guam and American Samoa were simply placed under the control of naval officers. Unlike the Filipinos, Puerto Ricans readily accepted the war’s outcome, and McKinley early withdrew troops from the island. The Foraker Act of 1900 established civil government in Puerto Rico. It organized the island as a territory, made its residents citizens of Puerto Rico (U.S. citizenship was extended to them in 1917), and empowered the president to appoint a governor general and a council to serve as the upper house of the legislature. A lower house of delegates was to be elected.

Acquisition of Empire


View the Image


Emilio Aguinaldo




 Cubans themselves. It repaired the damage of the civil war, built roads and schools, and established order in rural areas. A public health campaign headed by Dr. Walter Reed, an army surgeon, wiped out yellow fever. Most troops withdrew at the end of 1899, but a small American occupation force remained until May 1902. When it sailed for home, the Cubans at last had a form of independence, but they were still under the clear domination of their neighbor to the north.

The Open Door


 Emilio Aguinaldo in the Philippines, 1896. Aguinaldo’s forces helped the Americans drive Spain out of the Philippines, expecting that the United States would recognize Filipino independence. When the United States failed to do so, Aguinaldo led his forces in warfare against the Americans.

 Cuba proved a trickier matter. McKinley asserted the authority of the United States over conquered territory and promised to govern the island until the Cubans had established a firm and stable government of their own. “I want you to go down there to get the people ready for a republican form of government,” he instructed General Leonard Wood, commander of the army in Cuba until 1902. “I leave the details of procedure to you. Give them a good school system, try to straighten out their ports, and put them on their feet as best you can. We want to do all we can for them and to get out of the island as soon as we safely can.” Wood moved quickly to implement the instructions. Early in 1900, he completed a census of the Cuban population, conducted municipal elections, and arranged the election of delegates to a constitutional convention. The convention adopted a constitution modeled on the U.S. Constitution and, at Wood’s prodding, included provisions for future relations with the United States. Known as the Platt Amendment to the new Cuban Constitution, the provisions stipulated that Cuba should make no treaties with other powers that might impair its independence, acquire no debts it could not pay, and lease naval bases such as Guantánamo Bay to the United States. Most important, the amendment empowered the United States to intervene in Cuba to maintain orderly government. Between 1898 and 1902, the American military government worked hard for the economic and political revival of the island, though it often demonstrated a paternalistic attitude toward the

 Poised in the Philippines, the United States had become an Asian power on the doorstep of China. Weakened by years of warfare, China in 1898 and 1899 was unable to resist foreign influence. Japan, England, France, Germany, and Russia eyed it covetously, dividing parts of the country into “spheres of influence.” They forced China to grant “concessions” that allowed them exclusive rights to develop particular areas and threatened American hopes for extensive trade with the country. McKinley first outlined a new China policy in September 1898 when he said that Americans sought more trade, “but we seek no advantages in the Orient which are not common to all. Asking only the open door for ourselves, we are ready to accord the open door to others.” In September 1899, Secretary of State John Hay addressed identical diplomatic notes to England, Germany, and Russia, and later to France, Japan, and Italy, asking them to join the United States in establishing the Open Door policy. This policy urged three agreements: Nations possessing a sphere of influence would respect the rights and privileges of other nations in that sphere; the Chinese government would continue to collect tariff duties in all spheres; and nations would not discriminate against other nations in levying port dues and railroad rates within their respective spheres of influence. Under the Open Door policy, the United States would retain many commercial advantages it might lose if China was partitioned into spheres of influence. McKinley and Hay also attempted to preserve for the Chinese some semblance of national authority. Great Britain most nearly accepted the principle of the Open Door. Russia declined to approve it, and the other powers, sending evasive replies, stated they would agree only if all the other nations did. Hay turned the situation to American advantage by boldly announcing in March 1900 that all the powers had accepted the Open Door policy. (See the Feature Essay, “The 400 Million Customers of China,” pp. 508–510, for more on U.S. trade in China.) The policy’s first test came just three months later with the outbreak of the Boxer Rebellion in Peking (now Beijing). In June 1900, a secret, intensely nationalistic Chinese society called the Boxers tried to oust all foreigners from their country. Overrunning Peking, they drove foreigners into their legations and penned them up for nearly two months. In the end, the United States joined Britain, Germany, and other powers in sending troops to lift the siege. Fearing that the rebellion gave some nations, especially Germany and Russia, an excuse to expand their spheres of influence, Hay took quick action to emphasize American policy. In July, he sent off another round of Open Door notes affirming

 Complete the Assignment The 400 Million Customers of China on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


The 400 Million Customers
 of China

 Duke’s Cameo Cigarettes card depicting the ruler, flag, and coat of arms of China. The W. Duke & Sons Company merged with other tobacco manufacturers in 1890 to form the American Tobacco Company, which began selling cigarettes in China that same year.

T


 he issue of American trade with China, so much in the news today, has been a concern of the United States for more than two centuries. Many of the things Americans now buy and wear carry the label, “Made in China.” The United States had long hoped that the Chinese would be buying goods “Made in the U.S.A.,” but it has not worked out entirely that way. For a time it seemed it would. When the United States won independence from Great Britain, it opened up markets the British had monopolized, such as China, whose huge population of 400 million people fascinated American business leaders throughout the nineteenth century. “Let me say to the businessmen of America,”



 a member of Congress exclaimed in 1898, “Look to the land of the setting sun, look to the Pacific! There are teeming millions there who will ere long want to be fed and clothed the same as we are.” Step-by-step, Americans in the 1800s moved closer to those teeming millions, by actions including Secretary of State William H. Seward’s 1867 purchase of Alaska and the later decisions to acquire Hawaii and construct a canal across the Isthmus of Panama. President William McKinley offered several reasons for retaining the Philippine Islands after the Spanish-American War, but one of them was their nearness to China. Adding a sense of urgency, business and political leaders during the

 1880s and 1890s became increasingly concerned that the avalanche of goods pouring out of the nation’s farms and factories outpaced the purchasing power of customers at home. Presidents from McKinley to Woodrow Wilson pointed out that businesses must find new markets abroad or face collapse. “[O]ur industries have expanded to such a point,” Wilson argued in 1912, “that they will burst their jackets if they cannot find a free outlet to the markets of the world.” But doing that was not easy in China, whose great distances, different language, and restrictive laws stymied even some of America’s most legendary business leaders. Both J. P. Morgan, the famed financier who bought up railroads everywhere

 and created the gigantic U.S. Steel Company, and E. H. Harriman, a railroad magnate who dreamed of China as part of a transportation system that circled the globe, tried and failed. Others, who took account of Chinese customs and conditions, succeeded. “Bring me the atlas,” James B. Duke, head of the American Tobacco Company, said to an aide soon after he founded the company. Turning the pages, he quickly scanned population figures until he came to one he liked: “Pop.: 430,000,000.” “That,” he said, “is where we are going to sell cigarettes.” And that place, of course, was China. American Tobacco shipped its first cigarettes to China in 1890 and watched sales rise dramatically, from 1.25 billion cigarettes in 1902 to 9.75 billion in 1912 and 12 billion in 1916. It built large plants in two Chinese cities, established key distribution centers, and advertised widely. The company employed some native Chinese to market its cigarettes but also hired teams of Westerners, usually bachelors under the age of 25 who could accept the risks of living and working in China. Urging them to learn colloquial Chinese, the company held language exams every six months and awarded a $500 bonus to anyone who passed. Before long, American Tobacco produced nearly two-thirds of the cigarettes consumed in China. Other businesses adopted similar strategies, among them John D. Rockefeller’s Standard Oil Company, which by 1910 marketed more than half the kerosene sold in China. Standard’s famous red kerosene tin, flattened to make roofs and walls of houses around the world, became a symbol of America’s economic reach. Significantly, Americans in the Progressive period exported not only oil and tobacco but also major social reforms, reflecting a certainty, so common in our history, that the Chinese could not do it for themselves. “The pigtails, the old pinched shoes, the parasols and banners,” a leading reform

 magazine said in 1915, “must give way to parks, and sewers, and filtered water, and war on rats and mosquitoes.” American agencies and universities eagerly took up “the Far Eastern question,” as Lillian Wald, a prominent female reformer, put it. The Rockefeller Foundation worked to encourage cultivation of arable land; the Suffragist magazine campaigned to give Chinese women the vote; Americans in China tried to improve the postal service and introduce the wireless radio; the American Red Cross employed engineers to eliminate floods on Chinese rivers and open up new farmland. Before long, the Young Men’s Christian Association extended its mission to China, aiming to improve schools, form settlement houses in major cities, and reform the sanitation of China’s prisons, parks, and businesses. Drawing on its staff of young, dedicated college graduates, it held literacy campaigns, worked for better public health, paid for social surveys, and tried to provide recreation and residences for some of China’s poor. Students from Princeton University established a settlement house soon known as Princeton-in-Peking. In 1906, Yale University students founded the Yale-in-China Medical College at Changsha, to function, as one of the founders said, as a center for the “uplifting of leading Chinese young men toward civilization.” Heady ideas, they were typical of the United States in the Progressive period, a conviction that changing the environment would change people, a desire to expand business growth and progressive reform, and export both to other countries. Business leaders, eager to acquire more and more of the vast China market, were among those who urged the McKinley administration to establish the famed Open Door. The Great Depression and World War II diverted American attention from the China market, but once the war ended, business leaders again flocked there, only to find that the victory in 1949 of Mao Tse-tung and his Communist People’s Liberation

 Army had closed the door to trade. China emptied of Americans. The last American diplomats left in the spring of 1950, followed soon after by business figures and missionaries. It took two decades to begin a thaw, even longer to begin the serious business of trading once again. President Richard M. Nixon visited China in 1972 in a historic trip that signaled a new direction in relations between the two countries. Six years later, President Jimmy Carter restored diplomatic relations. Sounding very much like his nineteenth-century predecessors, President Bill Clinton noted in 2000 that “China, with more than a billion people, is home to the largest potential market in the world.” Backed by the United States, China entered the World Trade Organization in 2001, with much of American business, still hopeful of capturing the China trade, in favor. And the Chinese did buy American goods as those businesses hoped, $35 billion worth in the year 2000, making China America’s fifth largest market in the world. American tobacco companies continue to sell millions of cigarettes in China; companies dealing in aircraft engines, power plant equipment, soybeans, cotton, and fruit also do well. But the old dream proves elusive still. Americans buy from China far more than the Chinese buy from the United States, about six times more, in fact. By the end of 2005, the U.S. deficit with China reached $202 billion, “the largest trade deficit in the history of the world,” the U.S. trade representative said in a recent speech in Beijing. That deficit continues to grow. With many American name brands now made in China, the Chinese have begun to wonder what a “Made in the U.S.A.” label really means.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
Why did American business in the late nineteenth century want to tap the China market? 2. What social reforms did Americans in the Progressive Era want to export to China? 


 CHAPTER 21

TOWARD EMPIRE

 An American cartoon of 1900 showing Uncle Sam opening China to free trade with the key of American diplomacy while economic competitors England and Russia look on.

 U.S. commitment to equal commercial opportunity and respect for China’s independence. While the first Open Door notes had implied recognition of China’s continued independence, the second notes explicitly stated the need to preserve it. Together, the two notes composed the Open Door policy, which became a central element in American policy in the Far East. To some degree, the policy tried to help China, but it also led to further American meddling in the affairs of another country. Moreover, by committing itself to a policy that Americans were not prepared to defend militarily, the McKinley administration left the opportunity for later controversy with Japan and other expansion-minded powers in the Pacific.

Conclusion: Outcome of the War
 with Spain The war with Spain over, Roosevelt and the Rough Riders sailed for home in mid-August 1898. They sauntered through the streets of New York, the heroes of the city. A few weeks later, Roosevelt bade them farewell. They presented him with a reproduction of Frederick Remington’s famed bronze The Bronco-Buster, and, close to tears, he told them, “I am proud of this regiment beyond measure.” Roosevelt later wrote an account of the war in which he played so central a role that Mr. Dooley suggested, “If I was him, I’d call th’ book ‘Alone in

 Conclusion: Outcome of the War with Spain

 Cubia.”’ By then, Roosevelt was already governor of New York and on his way to the White House. Other soldiers were also glad to be home, although they were sometimes resentful of the reception they found. “The war is over now,” said Winslow Hobson, a black trooper from the Ninth Ohio, “and Roosevelt . . . ; and others (white of course) have all there is to be gotten out of it.” Bravery in Cuba and the Philippines won some recognition for black soldiers, but the war itself set back the cause of civil rights. It spurred talk about “inferior” races, at home and abroad, and united whites in the North and South. “The Negro might as well know it now as later,” a black editor said, “the closer the North and South get together by this war, the harder he will have to fight to maintain a footing.”



 A fresh outburst of segregation and lynching occurred during the decade after the war. McKinley and the Republican party soared to new heights of popularity. Firmly established, the Republican majority dominated politics until 1932. Scandals arose about the canned beef and the conduct of the War Department, but there was none of the sharp sense of deception and betrayal that was to mark the years after World War I. In a little more than a century, the United States had grown from thirteen states stretched along a thin Atlantic coastline into a world power that reached from the Caribbean to the Pacific. As Seward and others had hoped, the nation now dominated its own hemisphere, dealt with European powers on more equal terms, and was a major power in Asia.



 CHAPTER 21

CHAPTER REVIEW

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 21 Toward Empire on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1867
United States purchases Alaska from Russia; 
 1895 Cuban insurgents rebel against Spanish rule 1898 Battleship Maine explodes in Havana harbor

 Midway Islands are annexed Treaty of Washington between United States and Great Britain sets precedent for peaceful settlement of international disputes Reciprocity treaty with Hawaii binds Hawaii economically and politically to United States United States acquires naval base in Samoa Congress approves funds for construction of first modern steel ships; beginning of modern navy New treaty with Hawaii gives United States exclusive use of Pearl Harbor First Inter-American Conference meets in Washington, D.C. American settlers in Hawaii overthrow Queen Liliuokalani; provisional government established





 (February); Congress declares war against Spain (April); Commodore Dewey defeats Spanish fleet at Manila Bay (May); United States annexes Hawaii (July); Americans defeat Spanish at El Caney, San Juan Hill (actually Kettle Hill), and Santiago (July); Spain sues for peace (August); Treaty of Paris ends Spanish-American War (December) Congress ratifies Treaty of Paris; United States sends Open Door notes to Britain, Germany, Russia, France, Japan, and Italy; Philippine-American War erupts Foraker Act establishes civil government in Puerto Rico Platt Amendment authorizes American intervention in Cuba Philippine-American War ends with American victory

CHAPTER REVIEW
America Looks Outward Alaska 
 RUSSIA

 CANAD

 HINA

 Why did Americans look outward in the last half of the nineteenth century?

Acquisition of Empire
Alaska


A
 NORTH

Aleutian Is.


 AMERIC

UN ST PACIFIC OCEAN

 JAPAN

 In the late nineteenth century, Americans increasingly looked overseas, influenced by the example of other nations and confidence in what their country could offer other peoples, including Christianity, commerce, and American values. Policy makers were sure that the nation needed a navy, colonial outposts, foreign markets, and a new foreign policy. (p. 492) Hawaiian Islands

 PACIFIC

 OCEAN

Equator


 AUSTRALIA

 What were the various viewpoints about the acquisition of empire after the war with Spain?

UNITED S

Samoan
Islands


 War with Spain What were the causes and results of the war with Spain? In 1898, the United States fought a war with Spain, which resulted in a quick victory and enormous changes for American society, including a larger military, an increased role for the federal government in American life, the acquisition of colonies, and increased power for the presidency. (p. 497)

 In the peace treaty ending the war with Spain, the United States acquired a new empire, including Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines. For the first time, the United States owned territories overseas, to which it did not intend to grant statehood. That, together with historical, racial, and other arguments, caused an angry debate between those in favor and those opposing the new colonies. Adding to the furor was the outbreak of warfare between American troops and Filipino insurgents in the Philippines. (p. 503) Midway Is.

Philippine Is.


Wake Is.


Guam


Hawaiian Is.


Johnston Is. 1858


Kingman Reef 1858
Palmyra Is. 1898


Howland Is.


Baker Is.


Equato


Jarvis Is.


American Samoa


 AUSTRALIA

STUDY RESOURCES



KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Isolationism A belief that the United States should avoid entanglements with other nations. p. 492 Imperialism The policy of extending a nation’s power over other areas through military conquest, economic domination, or annexation. p. 492 Yellow journalism To sell newspapers before and during the SpanishAmerican War, publishers William Randolph Hearst and Joseph Pulitzer engaged in blatant sensationalization of the news, which became known as “yellow journalism.” Although it did not cause the war, it helped turn U.S. public opinion against Spain. p. 498 Teller Amendment In this amendment to the declaration of war on Spain in 1898, the United States pledged that it did not intend to annex Cuba and that it would recognize Cuban independence after the SpanishAmerican War. p. 499 
 Anti-Imperialist League An organization formed in 1898 to fight the Treaty of Paris ending the Spanish-American War. Members opposed acquiring overseas colonies, believing it would subvert American ideals and institutions. Membership centered in New England; the cause was less popular in the South and West. p. 504 Philippine-American War A war fought from 1899 to 1903 to quell Filipino resistance to U.S. control of the Philippine Islands. p. 505 Open Door policy This policy established free trade between the United States and China in 1900 and attempted to induce European nations and Japan to recognize the territorial integrity of China. It marked a departure from the American tradition of isolationism and signaled the country’s growing involvement in the world. p. 507

 Treaty of Paris Treaty in December 1898 ending the Spanish-American War. Under its terms, Spain recognized Cuba’s independence, assumed the Cuban debt, and ceded Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines to the United States. p. 504

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
What were the key developments in leading the United States to look abroad between the 1870s and the 1890s, and how did these developments ultimately lead to the war with Spain in 1898? 
 3. What were the most important effects of the end of the war and the acquisition of empire?

 2. Why did the important causes and events of the Spanish-American War lead to the crucial decision to acquire and overseas empire?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 21 on MyHistoryLab Acquisition of Empire

America Looks Outward
◾


Watch the Video


◾


Read the Document


 Roosevelt’s Rough Riders p. 491

◾


 Josiah Strong, from Our Country

◾


American Empire p. 503


Read the Document


Carl Schurz, Platform of the
American Anti-Imperialist League p. 505


(1885) p. 493
Read the Document


View the Closer Look


 Liliuokalani, Hawaii’s Story p. 495

View the Image


Emilio Aguinaldo p. 507


Read the Document


Alfred Thayer Mahan, The
Interest of America in Sea Power p. 497


 War with Spain Watch the Video

◾


Complete the Assignment


 of China p. 508 Burial of the Maine Victims p. 499

View the Map The Spanish-American War p. 501


◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment


The 400 Million Customers




The Progressive Era


Contents and Learning Objectives
THE CHANGING FACE OF INDUSTRIALISM PG. 515

A NEW URBAN CULTURE PG. 530
What happened to art and culture in these years so filled with change? 
 How did industrialism change after 1900?

FEATURE ESSAY
The Triangle Fire 
SOCIETY’S MASSES PG. 519
How did mass production affect women, children, immigrants, and African Americans? 
CONFLICT IN THE WORKPLACE PG. 524
Why were there so many strikes in this period? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

