 Chapter 32 Into the Twenty-first Century, 1989–2012

“This Will Not Stand”: Foreign
Policy in the Post–Cold War Era
 On the evening of August 1, 1990, George H. W. Bush sat in a T-shirt in the medical office in the basement of the White House. Bush was an avid golfer, but his duties as president kept him from playing as much as he would have liked, and when he did find time to squeeze in a round or some practice, he tended to overdo things. This summer day he had strained a shoulder muscle hitting practice balls, and now he rested on the exam table while a therapist applied deep heat. He planned a quiet evening and hoped the soreness would be gone by morning. Two unexpected visitors altered his plans. Brent Scowcroft, Bush’s national security adviser, and Richard Haass, the Middle East expert of the National Security Council, appeared at the door of the exam room. Bush had known Scowcroft for years, and the look on his face told him something was seriously amiss. Scowcroft’s words confirmed the impression. “Mr. President, it looks very bad,” Scowcroft said. “Iraq may be about to invade Kuwait.” For months, the Bush administration had been monitoring a territorial and financial dispute between Iraq and Kuwait. Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein was rattling the saber against the much smaller Kuwait, but Saddam had rattled sabers before without actually using them. The previous week, Saddam had spoken with the

 American ambassador in Iraq, April Glaspie, who came away from the meeting with the belief that his bellicose talk was chiefly for political effect. The United States had indicated its displeasure with Saddam’s threats, and Glaspie judged that he had gotten the message. “He does not want to further antagonize us,” she wrote to Washington. For this reason, Saddam’s decision to invade Kuwait at the beginning of August caught the Bush administration by surprise. American intelligence agencies detected Iraq’s mobilization; this was what brought Scowcroft and Haass to the White House on the evening of August 1. Haass suggested that the president call Saddam and warn him not to go through with the attack. But even as Bush considered this suggestion, Scowcroft received a message from the State Department that the American embassy in Kuwait had reported shooting in downtown Kuwait City. “So much for calling Saddam,” Bush said. Within hours the Iraqi forces crushed all resistance in Kuwait. Bush, Scowcroft, and other American officials recognized that the Iraqi takeover of Kuwait constituted the first crisis of the post–Cold War era. As Lawrence Eagleburger, the deputy secretary of state, asserted in

 President George Bush confers with National Security Council adviser Brent Scowcroft (left), White House Chief of Staff John Sununu (center), and Vice President Dan Quayle (right) at the Oval Office on August 1, 1990, following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. Source: Getty Images/Time Life Pictures.

 an emergency meeting of the National Security Council, “This is the first test of the postwar system. As the bipolar world is relaxed, it permits this, giving people more flexibility because they are not worried about the involvement of the superpowers.” During the Cold War, a de facto division of labor had developed, with the United States and the Soviet Union each generally keeping its clients and allies in line, typically by threatening to withhold weapons or other assistance. Had the Soviet Union still been a superpower, Saddam, a longtime recipient of Soviet aid, likely would have heeded Moscow’s warnings to settle his dispute with Kuwait peacefully. But in 1990 the Soviet system was disintegrating, and the Kremlin’s clients were on their own. “Saddam Hussein now has greater flexibility because the Soviets are tangled up in domestic issues,” Eagleburger explained. The world was watching. “If he succeeds, others may try the same thing.”

 It was this belief that shaped the Bush administration’s response to the crisis. The president and his advisers understood that they were entering uncharted territory after the Cold War. As the sole remaining superpower, the United States had the opportunity to employ its military and economic resources more freely than at any time in history. But with that freedom came unprecedented responsibility. During the Cold War, the United States could cite the threat of Soviet retaliation as reason to avoid intervening in the affairs of other countries; with that threat gone, American leaders would have to weigh each prospective intervention on its own merits. If one country attacked another, should the United States defend the victim? If the government of a country oppressed its own people, should the United States move to stop the oppression? These questions—and the answers American presidents gave to them—would define American foreign policy in the era after the Cold War.



 CHAPTER 32

INTO THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, 1989–2012

 ush sensed the importance of the United States’ responses, and he responded accordingly. He convened his principal deputies for a series of White House meetings. The particular stakes with Iraq and in the surrounding Persian Gulf were discussed at length. “The rest of the world badly needs oil,” Defense Secretary Dick Cheney observed, restating the obvious. Saddam’s seizure of Kuwait gave him control of a large part of the world’s oil supply, but the real prize was Saudi Arabia. “Saudi Arabia and others will cut and run if we are weak,” Cheney predicted. Bush consulted America’s oldest allies. Britain’s Margaret Thatcher urged the president to oppose Saddam most vigorously. “If Iraq wins, no small state is safe,” the prime minister declared. She offered to help. “We must win this . . . . We cannot give in to dictators.” Bush asked his generals what his military options were. “Iraq is not ten feet tall, but it is formidable,” Norman Schwarzkopf, the U.S. commander for the Middle East, replied. American air power could punish Saddam and perhaps soften him up, but ground forces—in large numbers—would be required to guarantee victory. By August 5, Bush had made up his mind. As he exited the helicopter that brought him back from Camp David to the White House from another high-level meeting, reporters crowded the South Lawn. What was he planning to do? they asked. “I’m not going to discuss what we’re doing in terms of moving forces, anything of that nature,” Bush answered. “But I view it very seriously, not just that but any threat to any other countries.” Bush was no orator, and these remarks were unscripted. But one sentence summarized the policy that soon began to unfold: “This will not stand, this aggression against Kuwait.”

B


The First President Bush
 What were the important issues in George H. W. Bush’s presidency, and how were they handled? Elected on the strength of his association with Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush appeared poised to confirm the ascendancy of the conservative values Reagan forced to the center stage of American life. But events, especially abroad, distracted Bush, whose principal contribution proved to be in the area of foreign affairs. Bush brought the Cold War to a peaceful and triumphant conclusion, and he launched America toward the twenty-first century, an era when the United States faced new opportunities and new challenges.

Republicans at Home
 Democrats approached the 1988 presidential election with high hopes, having regained control of the Senate in 1986 and not having to face the popular Reagan. But Vice President George H. W. Bush proved a stronger candidate than almost anyone had expected, and in a contest that confirmed the Republicans’ hold on the Sunbelt, he defeated Massachusetts governor Michael Dukakis. Many people expected the policies of the Bush administration to reflect the reputation of the new president—bland and cautious, lacking in vision but safely predictable. At home, he lived up (or down) to his reputation, sponsoring few initiatives in education, health care, or environmental protection while continuing

 the Reagan theme of limiting federal interference in the everyday lives of American citizens. He vetoed family leave legislation, declined to endorse meaningful health care reform, and watered down civil rights proposals in Congress. The one exception was the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), passed by Congress in 1991, which prohibited discrimination against the disabled in hiring, transportation, and public accommodations. Beginning in July 1992, ADA called for all public buildings, restaurants, and stores to be made accessible to those with physical handicaps and required that businesses with twenty-five or more workers hire new employees without regard to disability.

THE ELECTION OF 1988
Candidate Bush Dukakis 
Party
Republican
Democratic


Popular
Vote
48,886,097
41,809,074


Electoral
Vote


 Most of Bush’s time on domestic affairs was taken up with two pressing issues: the possible meltdown of the savings and loan industry, and the soaring federal budget deficit. The thrift industry, based on U.S. government-insured deposits, had fallen into deep trouble as a result of lax regulation and unwise, and in some cases fraudulent, loan policies. After record losses of $13.4 billion in 1988, more than 250 savings and loan companies had been forced to close. Bush sought to stanch the bleeding by merging the weakest of the remaining thrifts with the stronger, and by regulating the survivors more carefully. Congress consented, and in August 1989 passed a bill to close or merge more than seven hundred ailing savings and loans and to restructure the federal regulatory system. A new agency, the Resolution Trust Corporation, took over properties on which developers had secured loans many times their actual value, and it gradually sold them off at discount prices. By the time the Resolution Trust Corporation expired in 1992, the cost to the government had passed $150 billion; the eventual bill for the savings and loan cleanup, including interest, was estimated between $500 and $700 billion. The federal budget deficit posed an even greater challenge. The deficits Bush inherited from Reagan topped $150 billion per year, and conventional financial wisdom dictated that something be done to bring them down. In campaigning for president, Bush had promised “no new taxes,” but in the fall of 1990 he broke the pledge. In a package deal negotiated with the leaders of Congress, he agreed to a budget that included new taxes along with substantial spending cuts, especially on the military. The resulting agreement projected a savings of $500 billion over five years, half from reduced spending and half from new revenue generated mainly by increasing the top tax rate from 28 percent to 31 percent and raising the gasoline tax by 5.1 cents a gallon. Unfortunately for the president, the budget deal coincided with the beginning of a slow but painful recession that ended the Republican prosperity of the 1980s. Not only did Bush face recriminations from voters for breaking a campaign pledge not to raise taxes, but the economic decline led to greatly reduced government revenues. As a result, the deficit continued to soar, rising from

The First President Bush


 $150 billion in fiscal year 1989 to just under $300 billion in 1992. Despite the 1990 budget agreement, the national debt increased by more than $1 trillion during Bush’s presidency.

Ending the Cold War
 Bush might have accomplished more in domestic affairs had not the international developments begun during the Reagan years accelerated dramatically. Bush had been in office only months when the communist system of the Cold War began falling apart. In country after country, communism gave way to democracy as the old order collapsed more quickly than anyone had expected. An early attempt at anticommunist liberation proved tragically abortive. In May 1989, students in China began a month-long demonstration for democracy in Beijing’s Tiananmen Square that attracted worldwide attention. Watching American television coverage of Gorbachev’s visit to China in mid-May, Americans were fascinated to see the Chinese students call for democracy with a hunger strike and a handcrafted replica of the Statue of Liberty. But on the evening of June 4, the Chinese leaders sent tanks and troops to Tiananmen Square to crush the student demonstration. By the next day, full-scale repression swept over China; several hundred

View the Closer Look




 protesters were killed, and thousands were injured. Chinese leaders imposed martial law to quell the dissent and shatter American hopes for a democratic China. Bush responded cautiously. He wanted to preserve American influence with the Chinese government. Hence, despite official statements denouncing the crackdown, Bush sent National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft on a secret mission to Beijing to maintain a working relationship with the Chinese leaders. A far more promising trend toward freedom began in Europe in mid-1989. In June, Lech Walesa and his Solidarity movement came to power in free elections in Poland. Soon the winds of change were sweeping over the former Iron Curtain countries. A new regime in Hungary opened its borders to the West in September, allowing thousands of East German tourists in Hungary to flee to freedom. One by one, the repressive governments of East Germany, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, and Romania fell. The most heartening scene of all took place in East Germany in early November when the new communist leaders suddenly announced the opening of the Berlin Wall. Workers quickly demolished a 12-foot-high section of this despised physical symbol of the Cold War, joyously singing a German version of “For He’s a Jolly Good Fellow.”

Opening the Wall, Berlin


 Germans celebrate the destruction and fall of the Berlin Wall on November 9, 1989. The Berlin Wall had been a hated symbol of the Cold War since its construction by the communist East German authorities in August of 1961.



 CHAPTER 32





INTO THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, 1989–2012

 500 miles

 FINLAND

Soviet Union. Dissolved, Dec. 1991;
 Russia and 10 former Soviet republics form Commonwealth of Independent States.

 NORWAY

 500 kilometers

 SWEDEN

 ltic

 DENMARK

 Germany. Berlin Wall breached, Nov. 1989; East and West Germany reunited, Oct. 1990.

 Lithuania declares independence, Mar. 1990.

BELARUS
Poland. Solidarity Party sweeps elections, June 1989. 
POLAND CZE C REP H .

FRANCE AU S T R

 SWITZ.

 MOLDOVA

 ROMANIA

CRO. B.-H.

 ITALY

 AL

.


VK SL

 HUNG.

Corsica
(Fr.)


S PA I N


 Czechoslovakia. Communist leadership ousted, Nov. 1989; country divided into Czech Republic and Slovakia, Jan. 1, 1993.

 IA

 SLO.

 Hungary. Free election sweeps nonCommunists into power, Apr. 1990.

 RUSSIA

 UKRAINE

GERMANY BELG. LUX.

POR TUG

 LITH.

 RUSSIA

 NETH.

ATLANTIC OCEAN

 Latvia and Estonia begin process of separation from Soviet Union, Apr. 1990.

LATVIA
North Sea 
 IRELAND

 ESTONIA

Sea


UNITED KINGDOM
Ba 
Northern
Ireland


 YUGO.

 Yugoslavia. Country disintegrates, 1991–92; civil war begins in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 1992. Sardinia (It.)

 ALB.

 Romania. Communist dictator Ceausescu overthrown and executed, Dec. 1989; Salvation Front led by dissident former Communists wins elections, May 1990.

 BULGARIA

Black Sea


 Bulgaria. Government pledges free elections and new constitution in 1990; free elections sweep non-Communists into power.

MAC. GREECE

 TURKEY

 Albania. Free elections sweep non-Communists into power. Sicily

Medite
 rranean

Crete


Sea


Cyprus


THE END OF THE COLD WAR

 Free elections in Poland in June 1989 triggered the domino effect in the fall of communism in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Changes in policy came quickly, but the restructuring of social and economic institutions continues to take time.

 Most people realized it was Mikhail Gorbachev who was responsible for the liberation of eastern Europe. In late 1988, the Soviet leader signaled the spread of his reforms to the Soviet satellites by announcing that the Brezhnev doctrine, which called for Soviet control of eastern Europe, was now replaced with “the Sinatra doctrine,” which meant that the people of this region could now do things “their way.” It was Gorbachev’s refusal to use armed force to keep repressive regimes in power that permitted the long-delayed liberation of the captive peoples of central and eastern Europe. Yet by the end of 1991, both Gorbachev and the Soviet Union had become victims of the demise of communism. On August 19, 1991, right-wing plotters placed Gorbachev under arrest. Boris Yeltsin, the newly elected president of the Russian Republic, broke up the coup by mounting a tank in Moscow and demanding Gorbachev’s release. The Red Army rallied to Yeltsin’s side. The coup failed and Gorbachev was released, only to resign in December 1991 after the fifteen republics dissolved the Soviet Union. Russia, by far the largest and most powerful of the former Soviet republics, took the lead in joining with ten others to form a loose alignment called the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). Yeltsin then disbanded the Communist party and continued the reforms begun by Gorbachev to establish democracy and a free market system in Russia. The Bush administration, although criticized for its cautious approach, welcomed the demise of communism. Bush facilitated the reunification of Germany and offered economic assistance

 to Russia and the other members of the new CIS. On the critical issue of nuclear weapons, Bush and Gorbachev in 1991 signed START I, agreeing to reduce nuclear warheads to less than ten thousand apiece. In late 1992, Bush and Yeltsin agreed on the terms of START II, which would eliminate land missiles with multiple warheads and reduce the number of nuclear weapons on each side to just over three thousand, a level not seen since the mid-1960s.

The Gulf War
 Amid the disintegration of the Soviet system, Iraq in August 1990 invaded Kuwait. Although Bush quickly concluded that Saddam Hussein’s aggression must be reversed, actually removing Iraq from Kuwait took time and great effort. The president started by persuading Saudi Arabia to accept a huge American troop buildup, dubbed Desert Shield. This American presence would prevent Saddam from advancing beyond Kuwait into Saudi Arabia; it would also allow the United States to launch a ground attack against Iraqi forces if and when the president determined such an attack was necessary. While the American buildup took place, Bush arranged an international coalition to condemn the Iraqi invasion and endorse economic sanctions against Iraq. Not every member of the coalition subscribed to the “new world order” that Bush said the liberation of Kuwait would help establish, but all concurred in the general principle of deterring international aggression. Essential to the success of Bush’s diplomatic offensive was the support of the

The First President Bush


Read the Document




George Bush, Address to the Nation on the Persian Gulf (1991)


 On the evening of January 16,1991, President George H.W. Bush addresses the nation to discuss the launch of Operation Desert Storm.

 Soviet Union, which during the Cold War had regularly blocked American initiatives in the United Nations. Soviet leaders may have been sincere in wishing to see Saddam punished, but they also hoped to receive American aid in restructuring their economy. Congress required somewhat more convincing. Many Democrats supported economic sanctions against Iraq but opposed the use of force. Yet as the troop buildup in the Persian Gulf proceeded—as Operation Desert Shield evolved into what would be called Operation Desert Storm—and as the sanctions failed to dislodge Iraq from Kuwait, some of the skeptics gradually came around. After securing UN support for military action, Bush persuaded Congress (with just five votes to spare in the Senate) to approve the use of force to liberate Kuwait. On January 17, 1991, the president unleashed a devastating aerial assault on Iraq. After knocking out the Iraqi air defense network in a few hours, F-117A stealth fighters and Tomahawk cruise missiles hit key targets in Baghdad. The air attack, virtually unchallenged by the Iraqis, wiped out command and control centers and enabled the bombers of the United States and its coalition partners (chiefly Britain) to demoralize the beleaguered enemy troops.

 After five weeks of this, Bush gave the order for the ground assault. Led by General Schwarzkopf, American and allied armored units swept across the desert in a great flanking operation while a combined force of U.S. marines and Saudi troops drove directly into Kuwait City. In just one hundred hours, the American-led offensive liberated Kuwait and sent Saddam Hussein’s vaunted Republican Guard fleeing back into Iraq. In a controversial decision, President Bush, acting on the advice of General Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs, halted the advance and agreed to an armistice with Iraq. Critics claimed that with just a few more days of fighting, perhaps even just a few more hours, American forces could have encircled the Republican Guard and ended Saddam’s cruel regime. But the president, fearful of disrupting the allied coalition and of having American troops mired down in a guerrilla war, stopped when he had achieved his announced goal of liberating Kuwait. Moreover, he hoped that a chastened Saddam would help balance the threat of Iran in the volatile Persian Gulf region. Desert Storm brought mixed blessings. It was a great personal victory for George Bush, who saw his approval rating climb to



 CHAPTER 32

INTO THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, 1989–2012

 an unprecedented level—nearly 90 percent, higher than for even Eisenhower and Kennedy at the height of the Cold War. American military leaders believed they had finally atoned for Vietnam, a sentiment widely shared by a euphoric public. The United States had deployed more than five hundred thousand troops, as many as were in Vietnam in 1968, and had lost just 146 lives in inflicting a stinging defeat on a dangerous bully. Moreover, the price of oil, which had climbed to nearly $40 a barrel in October, fell back to less than $20, allowing Americans to fill the gas tanks of their cars for just over $1 a gallon. At the same time, however, Saddam Hussein continued to rule in Baghdad, persecuting Kurds in northern Iraq and Shi’ite Muslims in the south. He survived several attempts on his life and tightened his grip on Iraq, frustrating U.S. efforts to uncover and destroy his suspected chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons facilities. During the next dozen years, many Americans would conclude that if Bush had completed the ouster of Saddam in 1991, he would have spared the United States and the world a great deal of trouble.

The Changing Faces of America
 How did the American population shift and grow between 1990 and 2010? From the Mayflower to the covered wagon, movement has always characterized the American people. The final years of the twentieth century and the early years of the twenty-first witnessed two significant shifts in the American population: continued movement internally to the Sunbelt region of the South and West, and a remarkable influx of immigrants from developing nations. These changes led to increased urbanization, greater ethnic diversity, and growing social unrest.

 The increasing urbanization of America had positive and negative aspects. People living in the large metropolitan areas were both more affluent and better educated than their rural counterparts. Family income among people living in the bigger cities and their suburbs ran $9,000 a year more, and three-fourths of the urban population had graduated from high school, compared to two-thirds of other Americans. A metropolitan American was twice as likely to be a college graduate as a rural resident. Yet these advantages were offset by higher urban crime rates, longer commuting time in heavy traffic, and higher living costs. Nevertheless, the big cities and their suburbs continued to thrive, accounting for 80 percent of all Americans by 2000. Another striking population trend was the nationwide rise in the number of the elderly. At the beginning of the twentieth century, only 4.1 percent of the population was aged 65 or older; by 2000, those over 65 made up more than 12 percent of the population, with the nearly four million over 85 the fastest growing group of all. Census Bureau projections suggest that by the year 2030, one out of every five Americans will be over age 65. Six of every ten older Americans were women, and they tended to have a higher rate of chronic disease and to be worse off economically than men the same age. Many of the oldest old, those over 85, lived in nursing homes and accounted for one-third of all Medicaid payments. Yet only 10 percent of the elderly lived below the poverty line and three-fourths owned their own homes. The annual cost-of-living increases in Social Security payments spared them the worst ravages of inflation. Most impressive of all was their political power: Two-thirds of those over 65 voted regularly, compared to just under half of the entire population. With more than 30 million members, the AARP (formerly known as the American Association of Retired People) proved very effective in Washington in representing the interests of the elderly, particularly in regard to Medicare.

A
People on the Move  By the 1990s, a majority of Americans lived in the Sunbelt of the South and West. Best defined as a broad band running across the country below the 37th parallel from the Carolinas to Southern California, the Sunbelt had begun to flourish with the buildup of military bases and defense plants during World War II. Rapid population growth continued with the stimulus of heavy Cold War defense spending and accelerated in the 1970s when both new hightechnology firms and more established industries were attracted by lower labor costs and the favorable climate of the Sunbelt states. Florida, Texas, and California led the way, each gaining more than two million new residents in the 1970s. The flow continued at a slightly lower rate over the next two decades. The Northeast and the Middle West continued losing people to the South and West, and in 1994 Texas surpassed New York as the nation’s second most populous state. The 2000 census revealed that while all regions had gained population in the 1990s, the South and West had expanded by nearly 20 percent, compared to around 6 percent for the Northeast and Middle West. Phoenix was typical of the phenomenal growth of Sunbelt cities, adding a million residents in the 1990s to grow at a 45 percent rate. “Phoenix is flat and it’s easy,” explained a geographer who saw no end in sight. “You stick a shovel in the ground and pour a slab and you have a house.”

The Revival of Immigration
 The flow of immigrants into the United States reached record proportions in the 1990s as a result of the new policies adopted in 1965. (See the Feature Essay in Chapter 30, “Unintended Consequences: The Second Great Migration,” pp. 722–723.) The number of arrivals continued to grow during the first decade of the new century, with nearly 8 million immigrants reaching America between the beginning of 2000 and early 2005. By 2005, a record high of 35 million foreign-born persons lived in the United States, constituting 12 percent of the total population. The new wave of immigrants came mainly from Latin America and Asia. By 2005, over half the foreign-born population of the United States came from Latin America, about one-quarter from Asia, and about one out of seven from Europe. The new immigrants tended to settle in urban areas in six states—California, Texas, New York, Florida, Illinois, and New Jersey. In California, the influx of immigrants from Asia and Mexico created growing pressure on public services, especially during the recessions of the early 1990s and the early 2000s. The arrival of so many immigrants was bound to lead to controversy over whether immigrants were a benefit or a liability to American society. A study by the National Academy of Sciences in

The Changing Faces of America


 1997 reported that while government services used by immigrants— schools, welfare, health clinics—cost more initially than was collected from them in taxes, in the long run, immigrants and their families more than paid their way. In regard to employment, immigrants tended to help consumers and employers by working for relatively low wages in restaurants, the textile industry, and farming, but they hurt low-skilled U.S. workers, notably high school dropouts and many African Americans, by keeping wages low. Economist George J. Borjas, a refugee from Cuba, claimed that immigrants from developing countries lacked the education and job skills needed to achieve the level of prosperity attained by newcomers in the past; instead of entering the mainstream of American life, they were likely to remain a permanent underclass.

Emerging Hispanics
 People of Hispanic origin became the nation’s largest ethnic group in 2002, surpassing African Americans for the first time. The rapidly growing Hispanic population climbed to over 41 million by 2005, accounting for 14 percent of the nation’s population. “It doesn’t surprise me,” commented the leader of the League of Latin American Citizens. “Anybody that travels around . . . can see Latinos everywhere, working everywhere, trying to reach the American dream.” The Census Bureau identified four major Hispanic groups: Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans, Cuban Americans, and other Hispanics, including many from Central America. Even though

Read the Document




 most of the Hispanic population was concentrated in cities such as New York, Los Angeles, San Antonio, and Miami, the 2000 census showed a surprising geographical spread. Hispanics made up 20 percent of the population in individual counties in states such as Georgia, Iowa, and Minnesota. “The Latinization of the country is not just happening in New York, Miami, or L.A.,” observed a Puerto Rican leader. “Its greatest impact is in the heartland in places like Reading, Pennsylvania; Lorain, Ohio; and Lowell, Massachusetts.” The Hispanic groups had several features in common. All were relatively youthful, with a median age of 22 and a high fertility rate. They tended to be relatively poor, with one-fourth falling below the poverty line, and to be employed in low-paying positions as manual laborers, domestic servants, and migrant workers. Although the position of Hispanics had improved considerably in the boom years of the 1980s and 1990s, they still lagged behind mainstream America. The poverty rate among Hispanics was twice the national average, and family median income in 2005 was $34,000, or roughly two-thirds the level for whites. Lack of education was a key factor in preventing economic progress for Hispanics. Fewer Hispanics graduated from high school than other minorities, and their school dropout rate was the nation’s highest at more than 50 percent. Hispanic leaders warned that these figures boded ill not just for their own group but for society as a whole. “You either educate us,” claimed a San Antonio activist, “or you pay for building more jails or for more welfare.”

Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility


Act of 1996


 Newly sworn-in citizens of the United States wave U.S. flags during a naturalization ceremony in Miami on April 28, 2006. Days later, more than one million immigrants participated in a nationwide boycott called “A Day Without Immigrants” to protest the proposed tightening of U.S. immigration laws.



 CHAPTER 32

INTO THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, 1989–2012

 The entry of several million illegal immigrants from Mexico, once derisively called “wetbacks” and now known as undocumented aliens, created a substantial social problem for the nation and especially for the Southwest. Critics charged that the flagrant violation of the nation’s border with Mexico had led to a subculture beyond the boundaries of law and ordinary custom. They argued that the aliens took jobs from U.S. citizens, kept wages artificially low, and received extensive welfare and medical benefits that strained budgets in states such as Texas and California. Defenders of the undocumented aliens contended that the nation gained from the abundant supply of workers who were willing to work in fields and factories at backbreaking jobs shunned by most Americans. Moreover, defenders stated, illegal entrants usually paid sales and withholding taxes but rarely used government services for fear of being deported. Whichever view was correct, an exploited class of illegal aliens was living on the edge of poverty. The Wall Street Journal summed it up best by observing, “The people who benefit the most from this situation are certainly the employers, who have access to an underground market of cheap, productive labor, unencumbered by minimum wage laws, union restrictions, or pension requirements.” Concern over economic competition from Mexican “illegals” led Congress to pass legislation in 1986 that penalized employers who hired undocumented workers. Congress permitted those aliens who could show that they were living in the United States before 1982 to become legal residents; nearly three million accepted this offer of amnesty to become legal residents. The reform effort, however, failed to stem the continued flow of undocumented workers northward from Mexico in the 1990s and early 2000s—more than five hundred thousand in some years. While experts debated the exact number, the most widely accepted estimates indicated that more than ten million foreigners, mainly from Mexico and Central America, were living illegally in the United States in 2005. Despite stepped-up border enforcement efforts after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, illegal immigrants continued to move northward from Mexico and Central America. The trip could be dangerous, even lethal. Human-rights advocates estimated that more than three thousand migrants lost their lives attempting to enter the United States illegally between 1997 and 2006. Nineteen Mexican and Central American workers died from suffocation in south Texas in May 2003—nearly one hundred illegal aliens had been jammed into a truck trailer without access to water or fresh air. Yet the movement continued. As one rural Mexican official commented, “There are great problems in the countryside. And that famous American dream keeps calling.”

Advance and Retreat for
African Americans
 African Americans formed the second largest of the nation’s ethnic minorities. In 2004, there were just over 39 million blacks in the United States, 13.4 percent of the population. Although the heaviest concentration of African Americans was in northern cities, notably New York and Chicago, there was a significant movement back to the South. This shift, which began in the 1970s and accelerated during the 1990s, meant that by 2000 nearly 54 percent of those identifying themselves as black for the census lived in the sixteen states of the Sunbelt. Family ties and a search for ancestral roots

 explained much of this movement, but it also reflected the same economic incentives that drew so many Americans to the Sunbelt in the last three decades of the twentieth century. African Americans made substantial gains in certain areas of life. In 2004, some 81 percent of blacks aged 25 and older had earned a high school diploma, an increase of 8 percent during the previous decade. Eighteen percent of African Americans possessed a college degree, 5 percent more than a decade earlier. The number of black-owned businesses topped 1.2 million, up more than 45 percent since 1997. Yet in other respects African Americans did less well. The black poverty rate was nearly 25 percent, and the median income for black families was less than two-thirds of that for whites. Blacks remained clustered in entry-level jobs, where they faced increasing competition from immigrants. The African American incarceration rate was much higher than the national average; in 2002, more than 10 percent of black males aged 25 to 29 were in prison, and more than one out of four black men could expect to spend time in a state or federal prison during their lives. Blacks were also more likely to be victims of crime, especially violent crime. Homicide was the leading cause of death among black males between the ages of 15 and 34. Two events, one from 1991 and the other from 2005, summarized much of the frustration African Americans felt. In March 1991, a bystander videotaped four Los Angeles policemen brutally beating Rodney King, an African American who had been stopped for a traffic violation. The pictures of the rain of blows on King shocked the nation. Nearly a year later, when an all-white jury acquitted the four officers of charges of police brutality, rioting erupted in South Central Los Angeles that for a time threatened the entire city when the police failed to respond promptly. In the aftermath of the riot, which took fifty-three lives (compared to thirty-four deaths in the 1965 riot in the nearby Watts area) and did more than $1 billion in damage, government and state agencies promised new efforts to help the inner-city dwellers. But the efforts produced little effect, and life for many urban blacks remained difficult and dangerous. A tragedy of a different sort occurred fourteen years later. In August 2005, Hurricane Katrina ravaged the Gulf Coast and broke levees in New Orleans. The high winds and water killed more than a thousand persons, destroyed hundreds of thousands of homes, and forced the evacuation of millions of men, women, and children. Television cameras captured the plight of the several thousand who took refuge in the New Orleans Superdome, only to be stranded when state and federal relief efforts failed. Most conspicuous in the footage was the fact that the vast majority of those suffering the worst in New Orleans were black. Their neighborhoods were the lowestlying in the city, and hence, the worst flooded. Many lacked the cars necessary to flee the city in advance of the hurricane; others lacked the means to pay for hotels or apartments had they been able to get out. Though the relief efforts were largely color-blind (despite early allegations to the contrary), the entire experience demonstrated that poverty in America most certainly was not.

 Americans from Asia and the Middle East Asian Americans were the fasting-growing minority group at the beginning of the twenty-first century. According to the 2000 census, there were more than 12 million Americans of Asian

The Changing Faces of America


 or Pacific Island descent. Although they represented only 4 percent of the total population, they were increasing at seven times the national rate, and future projections indicated that by 2050 one in ten Americans would be of Asian ancestry. The Chinese formed the largest single group of Asian Americans, followed by Filipinos, Japanese, Indians, Koreans, and Vietnamese. Immigration was the primary reason for the rapid growth of all these groups except the Japanese; during the 1980s, Asia had provided nearly half of all immigrants to the United States. Though the influx subsequently slowed, the children of the immigrants added to the Asian numbers. Compared to other minorities, Asian Americans were welleducated and affluent. Three out of four Asian youths graduated from high school, compared to less than one out of two for blacks and Hispanics. Asian Americans also had the highest percentage of college graduates and recipients of doctoral degrees of any minority group; in fact, they were better represented in colleges and universities than the white majority. Many Asians entered professional fields, and in part as a result, the median income for Asian American families in 2004 was nearly 20 percent higher than the national average. Not all Asian Americans fared so well, however. Refugees from Southeast Asia experienced both economic hardship and persecution. The median family income for Vietnamese Americans fell substantially below the national average. Nearly half the Laotian refugees living in Minnesota were unemployed because they had great difficulty learning to read and write English. Vietnamese fishermen who settled on the Gulf Coast of Texas and Louisiana experienced repeated attacks on their livelihood and their homes. In the Los Angeles riots in 1992, Korean stores and shops became a main target for looting and firebombing. But the overall experience of Asian Americans was a positive one. They came to America seeking economic opportunity, or as many put it, “to climb the mountain of gold.” “People are looking for a better life,” a Chinese spokeswoman explained. “It’s as simple as that, and we will continue to come here, especially if the situations over there [in Asia] stay tight, or get worse.” The number of Americans from the Middle East grew almost as fast as the number of those from Asia in the 1990s. The 2000 census counted 1.5 million Americans of Middle Eastern ancestry, up from 200,000 thirty years earlier. Most came from Arab countries, as well as Israel and Iran. Concentrated in California, New York, and Michigan, Middle Eastern Americans were well-educated, with nearly half having college degrees. Many Arab Americans felt nervous after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, committed by Arab extremists; some experienced actual violence at the hands of persons who wanted to blame anyone of Arab descent for the shocking mass murders. Yet most Arab Americans carried on as before, pursuing their interpretation of the American dream.

Assimilation or Diversity?
 The influx of people from all around the world, not just from Europe, had profound implications for American culture. Traditionally, the favorite American self-image was the melting pot, the title of Israel Zangwill’s play written in 1908, at the height of European immigration into the nation. “America is God’s crucible, the great Melting-Pot where all the races of Europe are melting



 and reforming,” one of his characters proclaimed. “Germans and Frenchmen, Irishmen and Englishmen, Jews and Russians—into the Crucible with you all! God is making the American!” The melting pot image carried with it the concept of stripping newcomers of their culture and national traits and casting them into an Anglo-Saxon mold. Dubious for European immigration in view of the way each ethnic group retained its separate identity, this analogy seemed increasingly irrelevant to the Latin American, Asian, and Middle Eastern migration to America in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. Instead of recasting immigrants into an American type, immigration could better be seen as broadening the diversity that had always characterized the United States. Sociologist Amitai Etzioni suggested replacing the melting pot image with a “mosaic” portraying a nation in which ethnic groups retained their own identities “while recognizing that they are integral parts of a more encompassing whole.” The new awareness of ethnic diversity manifested itself in many ways. In public education, blacks led a crusade against Eurocentric curriculums and demanded a new emphasis on the influence of African culture; on college campuses, the call for multicultural courses and separate departments for African American, Asian American, and Hispanic studies created controversy. Citing the forecasts of a declining Anglo dominance and the rise of minority groups in the twenty-first century, ethnic leaders advocated cultural pluralism. Raul Yzaguirre, president of the National Council of La Raza, an Hispanic advocacy group, argued that America had never had a real melting pot in which all races contributed to the mix. “What we’ve had is a pressure cooker, where everybody has had to come in and become Anglophiles.” Yzaguirre claimed that the “new demographics ask America to live up to its own conception of itself as a pluralistic society.” Many Americans found themselves perplexed and uncertain of their cultural identity. A Census Bureau survey, asking people to state their ancestry, revealed that fully one-fourth of Americans listed Germany first, with Ireland and England a distant second and third. Some Hispanics found the census racial classifications—black, Asian–Pacific Islander, white, or American Indian—meaningless. “I don’t really consider myself Caucasian,” objected Jose Arroyo of San Jose, California. “My roots go down into the Indians of Mexico.” People of Arab descent felt equally confused. Maha El-Sheikh, a Californian of mixed Egyptian and Jordanian parentage, resented the fact that “on tests and things like that, I either have to put that I’m ‘Caucasian’ or I’m ‘Asian’—which I’m not. . . . I say I am Arabic—or I leave it blank.” In the 1990s, people of mixed racial parentage demanded that the census for 2000 include a box labeled “multiracial” rather than just the meaningless “other.” A group called Project RACE (Reclassify All Children Equally) argued that the four million children of more than a million interracial marriages deserved their own census category. The professional golf champion Tiger Woods—whose ancestry is part black, part Thai, part Chinese, part Native American, and part Caucasian—agreed, saying that as a child he called himself “Cablinasian.” Civil rights groups, however, objected, fearing cuts in government benefits to minorities based on the census figures. The Census Bureau compromised in 2000 by adding four new dual-race categories—American Indian– white, American Indian–black, Asian-white, and black-white.



 CHAPTER 32

INTO THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, 1989–2012

 In addition, individuals of mixed ancestry could mark several racial categories, not just one as in the past. The results were startling. Nearly seven million Americans claimed to be multiracial, with most choosing either black-white or Asian-white. Levonne Gaddy, president of the Association of Multiethnic Americans, was ecstatic. “This is the beginning of our having to redefine this social myth that we call race,” she declared. A more neutral Census Bureau official observed, “The nation is much more diverse in the year 2000 than it was in 1990.” “That diversity,” he added, “is much more complex than we’ve ever measured before.” Horace Kallen, one of the early critics of Zangwill’s melting pot analogy, offered the most appealing image of the nation’s diverse heritage. He likened the United States to a symphony orchestra, in which each nationality and ethnic group contributed its “own specific timbre and tonality” to create “a multiplicity in a unity, an orchestration of mankind.” As Americans wrestled with the continuing dilemma embodied in the national motto, E pluribus

Watch the Video


 unum, the image of a great symphony in which all groups blended harmoniously offered a way to balance the pride individuals find in ethnic identity with the need for national unity.

The New Democrats
 What were the accomplishments and failures of the Clinton administration? The Democrats, victims of the runaway inflation of the 1970s, became the beneficiaries of the lingering recession of the early 1990s. Moving away from its traditional liberal reliance on big government, the party regained strength by choosing moderate candidates and tailoring its programs to appeal to the hard-pressed middle class. These tactics enabled the Democrats to regain the White House in 1992 and retain it in 1996, despite a Republican sweep of Congress in 1994. The key figure in this political shift was Bill Clinton, who overcame some early setbacks to reap the rewards of a sustained economic boom.

Bill Clinton Sells Himself to America


 Twelve years of Republican administrations and economic turmoil left voters ready to make a change. Enter Bill Clinton, Democratic governor of Arkansas, who would best George Bush in the election of 1992 and go on to serve two full terms.

The New Democrats


The Election of 1992
 The persistence of the recession that had begun two years earlier became a major political issue in 1992. Although mild by postwar standards, the economic downturn that began in July 1990 proved unusually stubborn, especially in states such as California that relied heavily on the defense industry, which was hurt by the end of the Cold War. The recovery, which started just after the end of the Persian Gulf War in the spring of 1991, proved slow and uneven. Unemployment remained high for eighteen months and the gross domestic product rose only an anemic 2.9 percent in the same period. The political impact was devastating for the Bush administration. Three million Americans joined the ranks of the unemployed, and many were white-collar employees rather than factory workers typically hit by hard times. Although the economy began to advance more briskly in 1992, unemployment persisted as businesses still hesitated to hire new workers. As a result, the average American worker was ready to look beyond the Republican party for relief. As Bush’s popularity plummeted, two men sought to capitalize on the dismal state of the U.S. economy. First, Arkansas governor Bill Clinton defeated a field of five other challengers for the Democratic nomination by becoming the champion of economic renewal. Forgoing traditional liberal appeals to interest groups, Clinton stressed the need for investment in the nation’s future—rebuilding roads and bridges, training workers for high-tech jobs, and solving the growing national health care crisis. Despite his victories in the Democratic primaries, however, Clinton faced a new rival in H. Ross Perot. An eccentric Texas billionaire, Perot singled out the deficit as the nation’s gravest

Election of 1992
Electoral Vote by State


Popular Vote


DEMOCRATIC
Bill Clinton 


44,908,254


REPUBLICAN
George Bush 


39,102,343


INDEPENDENT H.
Ross Perot 
19,741,065


MINOR PARTIES

773,161


104,524,823
















































 ALASKA



 HAWAII



WASH., D.C.































 problem and agreed to run as an independent candidate in response to a grassroots movement (which he financed) to place his name on the November ballot. When Clinton and his running mate, Senator Albert Gore, Jr., of Tennessee, succeeded in unifying the Democratic party and gaining agreement on a moderate platform promising economic change, Perot stunned his supporters by suddenly dropping out of the race in July. Clinton immediately became the front-runner, rising from 30 percent to more than 50 percent in the polls, leaving Bush far behind. A relentless Democratic attack on the administration’s lackluster economic performance overcame all the president’s efforts to remind the nation of Reagan prosperity and Bush triumphs abroad. Even GOP assaults on Clinton’s character, notably his evasion of the draft during the Vietnam War, failed to halt the Democratic momentum. The message that Clinton’s political advisers tacked up at the Democratic candidate’s headquarters in Little Rock—“The economy, stupid”—provided the key to victory in November. Clinton wound up with 43 percent of the popular vote but with a commanding lead in the electoral college, 370 to 168 for Bush. Perot, who had reentered the race, won 19 percent of the popular vote but failed to carry a single state.

Clinton and Congress
 In the White House, Bill Clinton proved to be the most adept politician since Franklin Roosevelt. Born in Hope, Arkansas, in 1946, Clinton weathered a difficult childhood with an alcoholic stepfather by developing skills at dealing with people and using personal charm to achieve his goals. Intelligent and ambitious, he completed his undergraduate work at Georgetown University, studied law at Yale, and spent two years as a Rhodes scholar at Oxford University in England. Entering politics after teaching law briefly at the University of Arkansas, he won election first as Arkansas attorney general and then as governor. Defeated after his first term in 1980, Clinton won the nickname “Comeback Kid” by regaining the governor’s office in 1982. He was elected three more times, earning a reputation as one of the nation’s most successful young political leaders. In keeping with the theme of his campaign, Clinton concentrated at first on the economy. The federal budget he proposed to Congress in February 1993 called for tax increases and spending cuts to achieve a balanced budget. Congress was skeptical of such unpopular measures, but Clinton cajoled, shamed, and threatened sufficient members to win approval of $241 billion in new taxes and $255 billion in spending cuts, for a total deficit reduction of $496 billion over four years. This major achievement earned Clinton the confidence of financial markets and helped fuel the economic boom of the 1990s. Clinton scored another victory when Congress approved the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in the fall of 1993. NAFTA, initiated and nearly completed by Bush, was a free-trade plan that united the United States, Mexico, and Canada into a common market without tariff barriers. Clinton endorsed the treaty as a way of securing American prosperity and spreading American values. Critics complained that free trade would cost American workers their jobs as American companies moved production overseas; Ross Perot, the defeated 1992 third-party candidate, predicted a “giant sucking sound” as American jobs went south to Mexico. But Clinton carried the day, winning a bruising fight in the House and an easier contest in the Senate.



 CHAPTER 32

INTO THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, 1989–2012

 Although Clinton’s NAFTA coalition included many congressional Republicans, on other issues the GOP staunchly opposed the president. Republicans decried his budget as entailing “the biggest tax increase in the history of the world,” and they scuttled an ambitious attempt to revamp the nation’s health care system. Leading the opposition was a young congressman from Georgia, Newton Leroy “Newt” Gingrich, who asked all GOP candidates in the 1994 congressional races to sign a ten-point Contract with America. The contract consisted of familiar conservative goals, including a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution, term limits for members of Congress, a line-item veto for the president, and a middle-class tax cut. For the first time in recent political history, a party sought to win Congress on ideological issues rather than relying on individual personalities. A series of embarrassing disclosures involving Bill Clinton’s character made this tactic particularly effective in 1994. During the 1992 campaign, the New York Times had raised questions about a bankrupt Arkansas land development called Whitewater in which the Clintons had lost a modest investment. Additional scandals cropped up over activities that had taken place after Clinton was elected president. Travelgate was the name given to the firing, apparently at the urging of First Lady Hillary Clinton, of several White House employees who arranged travel for the press covering the president. Then in early 1994, Paula Jones, a former Arkansas state employee, filed a sexual harassment suit against Clinton, charging that in 1991 then-Governor Clinton had made sexual advances to her. The outcome of the November 1994 vote stunned political observers. The Republicans gained 9 seats in the Senate and an

Election of 1996
Electoral Vote by State


Popular Vote


DEMOCRATIC
Bill Clinton 


45,590,703


REPUBLICAN
Robert Dole 


37,816,307


INDEPENDENT H.
Ross Perot 
7,866,284


91,273,294












































 ALASKA



 HAWAII



WASH., D.C.





























 astonishing 53 in the House to take control of both houses. Newt Gingrich, who had worked so hard to ensure the change in leadership in the Congress, became speaker of the House. The GOP also captured 32 governorships, including those of New York, California, and Texas, where George W. Bush, the son of the man Clinton beat in 1992, won handily. The Republicans claimed a mandate to resume the Reagan Revolution: to cut taxes, diminish the scope of government, and empower the private sector. Clinton and the Democrats managed to keep the Republicans in check on matters of substance, but the Republicans, in turn, contrived to hobble Clinton. The administration and the Republicans collaborated on welfare reform and a modest increase in the minimum wage, but otherwise deadlock descended on Washington. Clinton turned the deadlock to his benefit in 1996 after the Republicans, having failed to force him to accept cuts in Medicare, college loans, and other social services, refused to pass a budget bill, and thereby shut down the federal government. Clinton proved more deft at finger-pointing than Gingrich and the Republicans did, and he succeeded in persuading voters that they were to blame. He carried this theme into his 1996 reelection campaign. The Republican nominee, Robert Dole of Kansas, lacked Clinton’s charisma and failed to shake the impression that the Republicans were flint-hearts who wanted to cut the pet programs of the American people. Clinton won decisively, holding the presidency for the Democrats even while the Republicans continued to control Congress.

Scandal in the White House
 Despite Clinton’s reelection, rumors of wrongdoing still clung to his presidency. The special prosecutor appointed to probe the Whitewater transactions, Kenneth Starr, turned over stone after stone in search of evidence of malfeasance, until he came across rumors that Clinton had conducted a clandestine affair with a White House intern, Monica Lewinsky. Clinton initially denied the affair. “I did not have sexual relations with that woman, Miss Lewinsky,” he said in January 1998. But Starr subpoenaed Lewinsky, who eventually gave a detailed account of her sexual encounters with the president and provided crucial physical evidence implicating Clinton. Realizing that he could no longer deny the affair, the president sought to limit the damage. On August 17, 1998, he appeared before Starr’s grand jury and admitted to having “inappropriate intimate contact” with Lewinsky. That evening Clinton spoke briefly to the nation. Claiming that he had given the grand jury “legally accurate” answers, the president for the first time admitted to a relationship with Lewinsky that was “not appropriate” and “wrong.” He said he regretted misleading the people and especially his wife, but he refused to apologize for his behavior or his false denials. Clinton’s fate hung in the balance. For the first time, some Democrats began to speak out, most notably Senator Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut, who called the president’s behavior “disgraceful” and “immoral.” But just when Clinton seemed most vulnerable, the special prosecutor inadvertently rescued him. In early September, Starr sent a 452-page report to Congress outlining

Clinton and the World


Read the Document




Bill Clinton, Answers to the Articles of Impeachment


 Members of the House Judiciary Committee listen to Clinton’s testimony during the hearings on the president’s impeachment in December 1998. The Committee sent four articles of impeachment to the full House, and the House adopted two—one count of perjury and one of obstruction of justice. The Senate could not muster the two-thirds majority required for conviction, and so Clinton was acquitted of both articles.

 eleven possible impeachment charges against Clinton. The key charge was perjury, and Starr provided painstakingly graphic detail on all of the sexual encounters between Clinton and Lewinsky to prove that the president had lied when he denied engaging in sexual relations with the intern. Many Americans responded by condemning Starr rather than the president. Shocked by the sordid details, they blamed the prosecutor for exposing families to distasteful sexual practices on the evening news. When Hillary Clinton stood staunchly by her husband, a majority of the public seemed to conclude that however bad the president’s conduct, it was a private matter, one to be settled between a husband and a wife, not in the public arena. Republican leaders ignored the public sentiment and pressed ahead with impeachment proceedings. In December, the House (where the 1998 midterm elections had narrowed the GOP advantage to six) voted on four articles of impeachment, rejecting two, but approving two others—perjury and obstruction of justice—by small margins in nearly straight party-line votes. The final showdown in the Senate was anticlimactic. With a two-thirds vote required to find the president guilty and remove him from office, there was no chance of conviction in the highly charged partisan mood that prevailed. On February 12, 1999,

 the GOP was unable to muster even a majority on the perjury charge, with 45 in favor and 55 opposed. After a second, closer vote, 50 to 50, on obstruction of justice, the presiding officer, Chief Justice William Rehnquist, declared, “Acquitted of the charges.” Clinton had survived the Monica Lewinsky affair, but he emerged from the ordeal with his presidency badly damaged. His final two years in office would be devoted to a concerted effort to restore his damaged reputation. Desperate for a legacy to mark his White House years, Clinton failed to realize that he had already created an enduring one—he would always be remembered as the president who dishonored his office by his affair with a young intern.

Clinton and the World
 How did Clinton respond to the Balkan Wars? Neither Clinton’s scandals nor his struggle with Congress allowed Americans to forget about the rest of the world, although many would have liked to do so. The Cold War had ended, and with it America’s forty-year struggle with communism. But the post–Cold



 CHAPTER 32

INTO THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, 1989–2012

 War world was plenty threatening, and while the United States was the only superpower still standing, America’s power could not preserve Americans from having to make difficult decisions about how to use that power.

Old Rivals in New Light
 Inheriting the chaos left by the breakup of the Soviet Union, Clinton concentrated on two issues in dealing with Russia and its neighbors. First, as Bush had done, he strongly supported Russian President Boris Yeltsin. In 1993, Clinton persuaded Congress to provide a $2.5 billion aid package to help Yeltsin carry out his free market reforms of the devastated Russian economy. The Clinton administration backed Yeltsin and his successor, Vladimir V. Putin, despite Russia’s continuing brutal war with Chechnya. Although the expansion of NATO to include Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic, and plans for a missile defense system created some tension, the Clinton administration succeeded in maintaining good relations with Russia. Clinton was even more successful on the second big issue left over from the Cold War against the Soviets: preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons among the former republics of the Soviet Union. With patient diplomacy, Secretary of State Warren Christopher won agreements from Belarus and Kazakhstan to scrap their deadly ICBMs. Ukraine proved more difficult, but in 1994, Clinton persuaded the president of Ukraine to surrender his country’s entire nuclear stockpile. Clinton’s effort on behalf of nuclear nonproliferation in the former Soviet Union was perhaps his most important, if least heralded, achievement. The president’s policy toward China was more questionable. Clinton ignored China’s dismal human rights record and continued Bush’s policy of annually extending most-favored-nation status to Beijing. The growing importance of trade with China, whose economic output in 1993 exceeded Britain’s, led Clinton to overlook the memory of the Tiananmen Square massacre and the continued persecution of dissidents in China. As trade with China began to rival that with Japan, the president announced a policy of “constructive engagement.” It was better, he contended, to keep talking, and trading, with China than to harden Chinese resentment against the West by harping on moral issues. In 2000, Clinton won a notable victory for free trade when the House voted to give China permanent most-favored-nation status. The Chinese, however, proved to be less than fully cooperative. China ignored U.S. protests of its export of missiles to Iran and nuclear technology to Pakistan, and it continued to stifle dissent at home. China conducted provocative missile tests near Taiwan, which Beijing still claimed for China. When the Clinton administration sent aircraft carriers to patrol the waters off Taiwan, a Chinese official talked casually about raining nuclear bombs upon Los Angeles. Constructive engagement clearly had its limits.

To Intervene or Not
 The most difficult foreign policy decisions for the Clinton administration came over the use of American troops abroad. The absence of the Cold War threat, with its implicit need to counter communist rivals, made it much more difficult for the president

 and his advisers to decide when the national interest required sending American servicemen and servicewomen into harm’s way. Between 1993 and 1999, Clinton opted for foreign intervention in four areas—Somalia, Haiti, Bosnia, and Kosovo—with decidedly mixed results. Clinton inherited the Somalian venture from Bush, who in December 1992 had sent twenty-five thousand American troops to that starving country on a humanitarian mission. Under Clinton, however, the original aim of using troops to protect the flow of food supplies and relief workers gradually shifted to supporting a UN effort at nation building. Tragedy struck in October 1993 when eighteen American soldiers died in a botched attempt to capture a local warlord in Mogadishu. After television cameras recorded the naked corpse of a U.S. helicopter pilot being dragged through the streets of Somalia’s capital, an angry Congress demanded a quick end to the intervention. American forces left Somalia by the end of March 1994 in what was unquestionably the low point of Clinton foreign policy. The lack of clear criteria governing intervention that had brought on the disaster in Somalia almost led to another fiasco in Haiti. Seeking to halt the flow into Florida of thousands of Haitians fleeing both poverty and tyranny, Clinton worked to compel the military rulers of Haiti to abdicate in favor of the man they had overthrown in 1991, Jean-Bertrand Aristide. After nearly a year of trade sanctions and increasing diplomatic pressure, the president prepared to use force to remove the military regime. At the last minute, a three-member peace mission led by former President Jimmy Carter worked out a compromise that allowed U.S. troops to land unopposed in late September 1994. Aristide returned to Haiti, but he could do little either to restore democracy or achieve economic progress in view of his country’s bankrupt treasury, ruined economy, and deep political divisions. By the time Aristide turned over the presidency to his elected successor in 1996, Haiti remained mired in hopeless poverty. The reality of Haiti’s plight had frustrated Clinton’s effort to use American power righteously.

The Balkan Wars
 Two other U.S. interventions, in Bosnia and Kosovo in the Balkan Peninsula, were more difficult but more successful. The breakup of Yugoslavia in 1991 led the Muslim president of Bosnia to ask the European community to recognize the independence of BosniaHerzegovina. But Bosnia’s ethnic and religious makeup—44 percent Muslim, 31 percent Serb, and 17 percent Croat—contributed to a civil war in which the Bosnian Serbs used the weapons of the former Yugoslavian army to seize more than 70 percent of Bosnian territory. The Muslim and Croatian forces were unable to prevent the Serb bombardment of the capital, Sarajevo, or the Serb policy of “ethnic cleansing”—driving Muslims and Croats from their ancestral homes. Clinton initially backed a plan to divide Bosnia into ten ethnic provinces. When the Serbs rejected the proposal in the spring of 1993, the president fell back on using American air power to patrol no-fly zones over Bosnia designed to protect UN peacekeeping efforts. Meanwhile, Serb artillery continued to pour a withering fire on the civilian population of Sarajevo, and journalists reported a series of brutal atrocities in which Serb troops slaughtered thousands of Muslim men and raped thousands of Muslim women.

Republicans Triumphant


 These reports forced Clinton’s hand. In the summer of 1995, American planes under NATO auspices began a series of air strikes on the Serb forces that were shelling Sarajevo from the surrounding mountains. The air campaign, which lasted two weeks, along with a major counteroffensive by better equipped Croatian and Muslim forces, led to a cease-fire in October 1995. The three warring factions sent delegations to Dayton, Ohio, to discuss a settlement. After three weeks of talks, U.S. mediator Richard Holbrooke secured agreement to create a weak central government for all Bosnia at Sarajevo and to divide the rest of the country into two parts—a Muslim–Croatian federation with 51 percent of the territory and a Serbian enclave with 49 percent. The Dayton plan called for free elections, the return of refugees to their former homes, and a NATO force to oversee the peace process. The U.S. intervention in Kosovo was similarly rooted in the breakup of Yugoslavia. Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic had ended Kosovo’s autonomy within Yugoslavia and imposed Serbian

Read the Document


The Balkan Proximity Peace
Talks Agreement (1995)


AUSTRIA HUNGARY

Ljubljana


 SLOVENIA (1991) ROMANIA

Zagreb


N
IO EG AR JIN KRA

 CROATIA (1991)

EASTERN SLAVONIA

 VOJVODINA

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
(1992) 
Belgrade


SERBIA
Sarajevo 


 rule, even though 90 percent of the province’s population was ethnic Albanian. When these Kosovars launched a guerrilla war against the Serbian police, Milosevic responded with a campaign of repression that outraged world opinion. Diplomatic efforts failed to achieve a ceasefire, prompting Clinton and the heads of government of other NATO countries in March 1999 to order an aerial assault on Serbia, in an effort to end the persecution of the Kosovars. At first it appeared that Clinton had miscalculated. The initial air attacks, directed at empty barracks and remote military bases, failed to persuade Milosevic to seek peace. Instead, he stepped up the ethnic cleansing in Kosovo, forcing hundreds of thousands of Kosovars to leave their homes and flee to neighboring Albania and Macedonia. Clinton and the NATO governments shifted the focus of the air assault to Serbia’s infrastructure, targeting bridges, oil refineries, and, most important of all, power stations. By the end of May 1999, Serbia had lost 60 percent of its electrical capacity, and domestic pressure on Milosevic began to mount. With Russian diplomats acting as go-betweens, Milosevic finally agreed to halt his attempts to purge Kosovo of its Albanian inhabitants. An agreement signed on June 10, 1999, called for the withdrawal of all Serb forces and placed Kosovo under UN supervision, with NATO troops acting as peacekeepers. The conflict over Kosovo revealed both the strengths and weaknesses of the United States in the turbulent post–Cold War world. American military power, while great, was limited by a strong desire to avoid risking American lives. Clinton could boast of an amazing result—NATO had waged a 12-week air campaign without the loss of a single pilot. Yet the United States had been unable to prevent Milosevic from uprooting and terrorizing nearly one million Kosovars. When the fighting ended, the Kosovars returned to their devastated homeland, and soon NATO troops had the thankless task of preventing the Albanians from seeking revenge against the Serbian minority in Kosovo.

 YUGOSLAVIA (1991)

Civil War in Bosnia
(1992–1995)
 MONTENEGRO tic r ia Ad

 ITALY





Se
 a

 KOSOVO

BULGARIA
Skopje 
War in Kosovo
(1999)


 MACEDONIA (1992)

Republicans Triumphant
 How did George W. Bush become president, and what did he do in the White House?

 ALBANIA

 100 miles

 GREECE

 100 kilometers Slovenes

Hungarians


Croatians


Romanians


Serbians


Albanians


Macedonians


Turks


Germans


Greeks


Bosnian Muslims
 (Slavs converted to Islam after the Ottoman conquest) Boundary of Dayton Accord (1995)

Italians


THE BREAKUP OF YUGOSLAVIA/CIVIL WAR IN BOSNIA
With the end of the communist regime in Yugoslavia in the early 1990s, the country broke apart into ethnically distinct regions. In Bosnia, Muslims, Croatians, and Serbians fought a bloody civil war rife with atrocities on all sides over the issue of ethnic cleansing. 
 Clinton’s eight years in the White House gave Democrats hope that the conservative gains of the 1980s had been only temporary. They pointed to the booming economy of the 1990s and the absence of any serious threat to American security as reasons for voters to leave the presidency in Democratic hands. The election of 2000 proved a bitter disappointment—all the more bitter by reason of the way in which it made Republican George W. Bush president.

The Disputed Election of 2000
 If history had been the guide, the prosperity of the 1990s should have guaranteed victory to Clinton’s protégé, Vice President Al Gore. The state of the economy generally determines the outcome of presidential elections, and entering 2000, the American economy had never appeared stronger. The stock market soared, spreading wealth among tens of millions of Americans; the federal deficit of the Reagan years had given way to large and growing surpluses.



 CHAPTER 32

INTO THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, 1989–2012

 But Clinton’s personal problems muddled the issue. Clinton had survived his impeachment trial, yet the experience tainted his record and left many voters unwilling to reward the Democrats by promoting his vice president. Certain other domestic problems unnerved voters, as well. The 1995 bombing of a federal building in Oklahoma City by two domestic terrorists killed 168 people and suggested that irrational violence threatened the daily lives of ordinary Americans. This feeling was reinforced by a 1999 shooting rampage at Columbine High School near Denver, which left twelve students and a teacher dead, besides the two shooters, who killed themselves. The apparent conflict between material abundance and eroding personal values resulted in the closest election in more than a century. The two candidates, Vice President Gore of Tennessee and Governor Bush of Texas, had little in common beyond being the sons of successful political fathers. Gore had spent eighteen years in Washington as a congressman, senator, and vice president. Somewhat stiff and aloof in manner, he had mastered the intricacies of all the major policy issues and had the experience and knowledge to lead the nation. Bush, by contrast, had pursued a business career before winning the governorship of Texas in 1994. Personable and outgoing, Bush had the temperament for leadership but lacked not only experience but a full grasp of national issues. Journalists were quick to seize on the weaknesses of both men, accusing Gore of frequent and misleading exaggeration and Bush of mangling words and speaking only in generalities. The candidacy of consumer advocate Ralph Nader, who ran on the Green Party ticket, complicated the political reckoning. Nader never seemed likely to win more than a small percentage of the votes, but in a close election a few points could make all the difference. Nader’s mere presence pushed Gore to the left, leaving room for Bush among independent-minded swing voters. The race appeared close until election day, and even closer on election night. Gore seemed the likely winner when the major television networks predicted a Democratic victory in Florida. They reconsidered as Bush swept the South, including the Clinton-Gore home states of Arkansas and Tennessee. After midnight, the networks again called Florida, but this time for Bush, and the vice president telephoned the governor to concede, only to recant an hour later when it became clear that the Bush margin in Florida was paper thin. There things stuck, and for the next month all eyes were on Florida. Gore had two hundred thousand more popular votes nationwide than Bush, and 267 electoral votes to Bush’s 246. Yet with Florida’s 25 electoral votes, Bush could win the presidency. Both sides sent teams of lawyers to Florida. Bush’s team, working with Florida’s Republican secretary of state, sought to certify the results that showed the GOP candidate with a lead of 930 votes out of nearly six million cast. Citing many voting problems disclosed by the media, Gore asked for a recount in three heavily Democratic counties in south Florida. All three used antiquated punch card machines that resulted in some ballots not being clearly marked for any presidential candidate when the chads, the bits of paper removed when a card is punched, were not completely detached from the cards. For weeks the results in Florida, and hence of the entire election, appeared to depend on how one divined the intent of a voter based on hanging, dimpled, or bulging chads.

Election of 2000
Electoral Vote by State
REPUBLICAN
George W. Bush DEMOCRATIC Al Gore 
Popular Vote




50,456,167


266*


50,996,064


GREEN
Ralph Nader 
2,864,810


 OTHER

834,774


105,151,815


 *One District of Columbia Gore elector abstained.

















































 HAWAII



WASH., D.C.









 ALASKA























 The decision finally came in the courts. Democrats appealed the initial attempt to certify Bush as the victor to the Florida Supreme Court. The Florida court twice ordered recounts, the second time for all counties in the state, but Bush’s lawyers appealed to the United States Supreme Court. On December 12, five weeks after the election, the Court overruled the state court’s call for a recount, in a five to four decision that reflected a long-standing ideological divide among the nine justices. The next day, Gore gracefully conceded, and Bush finally became president-elect. Bush’s narrow victory revealed deep divisions in American life at the beginning of the twenty-first century. The rural West and South went for Bush, along with a few key Midwest and border states, while Gore won the urban states along both coasts. There was an equally strong divide along economic lines, with the poor voting for Gore, the rich for Bush, and the middle class dividing evenly between the two candidates. Gore benefited from the gender gap, winning 54 percent of the women’s vote, and he won an even larger share of the black vote, 90 percent, than Clinton in 1996. Bush did manage to narrow the Democratic margin among Hispanic voters, taking 35 percent, compared to only 28 percent for Dole four years earlier. The two candidates split the suburban vote evenly, while Bush reclaimed the Catholic vote for Republicans.

George W. Bush at Home
 Bush’s first order of business was a large tax cut, which required intense lobbying from the White House. The president had to win over enough conservative southern Democrats to compensate for

Republicans Triumphant


 losing Republican moderates who insisted on reducing the federal debt before cutting taxes. Bush managed the feat, and in June 2005 Congress passed legislation that slashed taxes by a staggering $1.35 trillion over a ten-year period. Many of the cuts would take effect only in future years, but Congress offered an immediate stimulus to the economy by authorizing rebate payments to taxpayers: $600 for couples and $300 for individuals earning more than $6,000 a year. While critics saw this measure as a betrayal of the long effort to balance the budget, Bush contended that future budget surpluses would more than offset the loss of tax revenue. A slowdown in the American economy, triggered by the bursting of the 1990s high-tech bubble, soon turned the projected budget surplus into annual deficits. But it failed to halt the Bush administration’s tax cut momentum. In 2003, arguing that a further reduction in taxes would stimulate the stalled economy, Bush prevailed upon Congress to adopt another $350 billion in cuts. Like the 2001 cuts, the new reductions were temporary in order to preserve the possibility of a balanced budget by 2010. Opponents charged that if a future Congress made these tax cuts permanent, as seemed likely, the total cost would rise to nearly $1 trillion. While Clinton had favored a policy of eliminating the deficit, Bush made tax reduction the centerpiece of his economic policy. Although it took a bit longer, the president also succeeded in persuading Congress to enact a program of education reform. Borrowing the label, “No Child Left Behind,” from liberal Democrats, the administration pushed hard for a new policy requiring states to give annual performance tests to all elementary school students. Democrats countered with demands for increased federal funding of public education to assist states and local school boards in raising their standards. Bush shrewdly cultivated the support of Senator Edward Kennedy, a leading liberal Democrat, to forge a bipartisan consensus. The final measure increased federal aid to education by $4 billion, to a total of $22 billion annually, and mandated state tests in reading and math for all students in grades three through eight, and at least once during grades ten to twelve. By this time the economic slowdown had become a full-blown recession, the first in ten years. A glut of unsold goods forced manufacturers to curtail production and lay off workers. Unemployment rose, eventually to 6 percent, despite the efforts of the Federal Reserve to stem the economic decline by cutting interest rates. The tax rebates authorized by Congress had boosted the economy slightly during the summer of 2001, but then the September 11 terrorist attacks on New York and the Pentagon led to a further decline. In 2002, the economy once again began to recover, only to relapse late in the year amid concern over the threat of war with Iraq. One of the most troubling aspects of the economic downturn was the implosion of several major corporations and the subsequent revelation of shocking financial practices. WorldCom, Inc., a major telecommunications company, became the largest corporation in American history to declare bankruptcy, while a New York grand jury charged executives of Tyco International, a large electronics company, with stealing more than $600 million from shareholders through stock fraud, false expense reports, and unauthorized bonuses. These scandals, however, paled before the misdeeds of Enron, a Houston energy company that failed in late 2001 as the result



 of astonishingly corrupt business practices, including fraudulent accounting and private partnerships designed to inflate profits and hide losses. When investors began to sell their overvalued Enron stock, shares that were once worth nearly $100 fell to less than $1. Enron declared bankruptcy and the remaining shareholders lost over $50 billion, while rank-and-file employees lost not only their jobs but much of their retirement savings, invested largely in now worthless Enron stock.

The War on Terror
 On the morning of September 11, 2001, nineteen Islamic militant terrorists hijacked four U.S. airliners and turned them to attack targets in New York City and Washington, D.C. The hijackers took over two planes flying out of Boston’s Logan Airport en route to California, and flew them into the World Trade Center (WTC) in New York. One plane slammed into the north tower just before 9 a.m., and the second hit the south tower only twenty minutes later. Within two hours, both towers had collapsed, taking the lives of nearly three thousand victims trapped in the buildings or crushed by the debris and more than three hundred firefighters and other rescue workers who had attempted to save them. In Washington, an American Airlines flight that left Dulles Airport bound for Los Angeles met a similar fate. Taken over by five terrorists, the Boeing 757 plowed into the Pentagon, destroying one wing of the building and killing 189 military personnel and civilian workers. The terrorists had seized a fourth plane, United Airlines flight 93, scheduled to fly from Newark, New Jersey, to San Francisco. Over Pennsylvania, as the hijackers attempted to turn the plane toward the nation’s capital, the passengers fought to regain control of the plane. They failed to do so, but prevented the plane from hitting another target in Washington—perhaps the White House or the Capitol building. Flight 93 crashed in southern Pennsylvania, killing all forty-four passengers and crew as well as the hijackers. “None of us will forget this day,” President Bush told the American people in a televised speech that evening. Bush vowed to find and punish those responsible for the attacks, as well as any who assisted them. “We will make no distinction between those who planned these acts and those who harbor them.” Bush didn’t have to look long to discover the master mind behind the September 11 attacks. Osama bin Laden, a wealthy Saudi, released videotapes claiming responsibility on behalf of his terrorist organization, al Qaeda (“the Base” in Arabic). Bin Laden had originally been part of the international Muslim resistance to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan that had received support and weapons from the CIA in the 1980s. He turned against the United States at the time of the Persian Gulf War, outraged by the presence of large numbers of American troops in his native Saudi Arabia. Evidence linked bin Laden and al Qaeda to the bombing of two American embassies in East Africa in 1998 and an attack on the American destroyer USS Cole in Yemen in 2000. The United States had been trying to neutralize al Qaeda for a decade without success. Ordered out of Saudi Arabia in 1991, bin Laden had sought refuge in the Sudan and later in Afghanistan after the Taliban, another extremist Muslim group, took over that country. In Afghanistan, bin Laden set up camps to train hundreds of would-be terrorists, mainly from Arab countries but including

 Complete the Assignment An Inconvenient Truth? The Controversy Surrounding Global Warming on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


An Inconvenient Truth? The
Controversy Surrounding
Global Warming


 Al Gore in a still from An Inconvenient Truth, his Oscar-winning documentary about climate change.

W


 hen Al Gore lost the disputed 2000 presidential election, he gave such a gracious concession speech that pundits wondered just how badly he wanted to be president. Did he know something they didn’t know? Was there life after politics? For Gore it turned out there was. But if he had expected that the next phase of his career might be less bruising than the slugfest he had just experienced with George W. Bush, he was quickly proven wrong. Gore’s new cause was environmentalism, and he discovered that nothing posed greater danger to one’s reputation or peace of mind than trying to save the earth.

 Gore had become interested in environmental affairs while he was in Congress during the 1970s and 1980s. In 1992 he published Earth in the Balance, an environmentalist call to arms. “We must make the rescue of the environment the central organizing principle for civilization,” he wrote. As vice president under Bill Clinton, he pushed hard for American approval of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which would have committed the United States to substantially reduce greenhouse gases: carbon dioxide and other gases that trap heat in the atmosphere and are responsible, in the opinion of most scientists, for rising global temperatures. Gore lost the Kyoto fight—badly. The Senate, which has the responsibility to ratify treaties, rejected the Kyoto

 pact by a vote of 95 to 0. The negative Republican votes were no surprise, but that Democrat Gore—a former senator and the Senate’s presiding officer, by virtue of his office as vice president— couldn’t muster even one Democratic vote was an embarrassment that would have daunted most politicians. But Gore wasn’t an ordinary politician, and he didn’t embarrass easily. Following his defeat by Bush in 2000, he threw himself into the environmental cause, becoming what some of his many critics derided as a one-man-traveling-band in favor of all things green. He wrote a new book, An Inconvenient Truth, that described the threat to civilization from global warming as dire and imminent. The book became the basis for a documentary, also called An Inconvenient

 Truth, that in 2007 won an Academy Award, further irking Gore’s critics. President Bush gave the movie the back of his hand; asked whether he would watch it, Bush replied, “Doubt it.” The Republican chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee, Jim Inhofe, who was disparaged in the film, compared it to Hitler’s Mein Kampf: “If you say the same lie over and over again, and particularly if you have the media’s support, people will believe it.” Spoofs of An Inconvenient Truth on YouTube mocked the film as boring and selfrighteous. Gore’s critics grew even more incensed when he was awarded the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize for his environmental efforts. At the heart of the controversy were the substantive questions of global warming: Was the earth’s climate really getting hotter, and were human actions responsible? Mountains of data gathered over decades by thousands of scientists suggested that the planet was indeed warming and that human production of greenhouse gases was responsible. But the data and the models the scientists employed weren’t definitive or irrefutable. Persons determined not to be persuaded could find plausible grounds for skepticism. Had the debate involved scientists only, it would have been bitter enough. But the consequences of global warming predicted by most of the scientists—floods, droughts, famine, pestilence—appeared to require a political response. Humans must stop producing so much carbon dioxide, and their governments must make them stop. This would be inconvenient (hence the title of Gore’s book and film), and almost certainly expensive. But it had to be done. So said the convinced. Skeptics disagreed. Many were political conservatives, who didn’t like government telling them what to do. Most complained at the expense and trouble. And nearly all bridled at what they deemed the holier-than-thou attitude of Gore and the global-warming believers. The emotions surrounding the issue made reasoned debate difficult,

 at times impossible. Liberals often treated the skeptics as ignorant and venal; many conservatives made denial of global warming a litmus test of true conservatism. Many liberals made changes in their own lives, switching to gas-electric hybrid cars, which squeezed more mileage out of each gallon of gas, and recycling household items, to save the energy cost of producing new ones. Cities adopted ordinances to encourage recycling and diminish the “carbon footprint”—the amount of carbon dioxide emitted— of urban activities. But conservatives often derided such measures as liberal hypocrisy—they noted that Gore’s globe-spanning travels on behalf of carbon reduction generated huge amounts of carbon—and an affront to the American way of life. Meanwhile, the evidence mounted. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) reported in 2012 that the surface temperature of the earth had been rising since 1880, and that the warming was accelerating, with the ten warmest years of the last century occurring within the last twelve years. The oceans were also warming, which caused sea levels to rise and threaten low-lying areas along the shores. Glaciers and the ice sheets that covered most of Greenland and Antarctica were shrinking. The ice cap over the North Pole retreated farther and faster during the summer. Instances of extreme weather— droughts, torrential rains, record high temperatures—appeared to be increasing, although climate scientists were careful not to claim that any one of these events was a direct consequence of global warming. Despite the evidence, the controversy persisted. Among conservatives, especially social and religious conservatives, rejection of humancaused global warming seemed to be part of the broader rejection of science that included disbelief in evolution. During the Republican campaign for the 2012 nomination for president, most of the candidates either dodged the issue or denied it. Rick Santorum, former Pennsylvania senator, called the

 assertion that humans were warming the planet “patently absurd…It’s just an excuse for more government control of your life.” When Mitt Romney, the front-runner, expressed tepid support for the idea, Rush Limbaugh, the conservative radio host, jibed, “Bye-bye nomination.” Romney’s stance on global warming did not kill his hopes of getting the nomination, but the controversy guaranteed that the government would take no serious action to curtail emissions of greenhouse gases. Even environmentalists acknowledged that there was comparatively little the United States could do, given that the greatest growth in carbon dioxide emissions would almost certainly come from China, India, and other developing countries. Those countries weren’t likely to agree to emissions caps until their inhabitants’ standards of living more closely approximated those of the developed nations. The economic recession in the United States also raised the political cost of new environmental regulations on business that might cause firms to hire fewer workers. In consequence, the issue of global warming joined such others as health care and Social Security in generating enormous debate but no resolution. One of the strengths of the American political system had always been its checks and balances, with each branch and interest group countering the others until a consensus was achieved. As the earth heated up, many Americans wondered if the old system could meet this new challenge.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
Why has the issue of global warming become so controversial in the United States? 2. What does the controversy say about the intersection of politics and science in American democracy? 3. Is democracy the best way to resolve debates that turn on technical issues? 


 CHAPTER 32

INTO THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, 1989–2012

 political coalition resisting the Taliban. Using a variety of methods, ranging from bribes of local warlords to air strikes, American forces quickly routed the Taliban and by December had installed a U.S.-friendly regime in Kabul. Most of Afghanistan, however, remained in chaos, and despite extensive efforts and several near misses, bin Laden avoided capture. While waging the war on terror abroad, the Bush administration also focused on the problem of securing the United States from any further terrorist assaults. At the president’s urging, Congress approved a new Department of Homeland Security, combining the Customs Bureau, the Coast Guard, the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), and other government bureaus. A primary focus of homeland security was ensuring the safety of airline travel in the wake of the September 11 hijackings. In November 2001, Bush signed legislation replacing private companies with government employees at all airport screening stations. The airlines were required to replace cockpit doors with secure barriers and to permit armed air marshals to ride among the passengers. The understandable public fear of flying after September 11 nevertheless had a devastating effect on the airline industry, forcing the cancellation of many flights and the laying off of thousands of pilots and other workers. Despite a $15 billion government bailout approved in late September 2001, the airlines continued to experience heavy losses. Several, including United Airlines, filed for bankruptcy. Although air travel began to revive slowly in 2002, the industry, along with other forms of tourism, continued to be a drag on an already sluggish economy. The war on terror raised an even more fundamental question than economic stagnation. Attorney General John Ashcroft, using This photo depicts the unprecedented deaths and destruction caused by the al Qaeda terrorist new powers granted by Congress under the attacks on the World Trade Center in New York on September 11, 2011. Nearly 3,000 victims were Patriot Act, conducted a broad crackdown on trapped in the buildings or crushed by the debris and more than three hundred first responders died possible terrorists, detaining many Muslim in their heroic efforts to save the victims. Americans on flimsy evidence and insisting recruits from the Philippines, Indonesia, and Central Asia. After the that concern for national security outweighed traditional civil 1998 embassy bombings, President Clinton ordered cruise missile liberties. Opponents quickly challenged Ashcroft, arguing that the attacks on several of these camps in the hope of killing bin Laden. terrorists would win their greatest victory if the United States vioThe al Qaeda leader survived, though, leaving one of the targets only lated its own historic principles of individual freedom in the name a few hours before the strike. of fighting terrorism. It was a debate that troubled many Americans Bush’s determination to go after those harboring terrorists who had difficulty reconciling the need for security with respect made Afghanistan the prime target for the American counfor civil liberties. terattack. The president ordered the Pentagon and the CIA, which already had agents on the scene, to launch an invasion Widening the Battlefield of Afghanistan to destroy the Taliban, wipe out al Qaeda, and The terrorist attacks on the United States were the catalyst for a capture or kill Osama bin Laden. major change in direction for American foreign policy. Not only In early October 2001, the CIA and Army Special Forces did the Bush administration wage an intensive effort to avenge began the operation, relying on the Northern Alliance, an Afghan View the Closer Look

World Trade Center, Sept. 11, 2001


Republicans Triumphant




 accept fully the role the nation had been playing since the end of the Cold War: Read the Document George W. Bush, Address to Congress global policeman. The United States would (September 20, 2001) not shrink from defending freedom anywhere in the world—with allies if possible, by itself if necessary. To implement this policy, NSS asserted that the Bush administration would maintain “military strength beyond challenge.” “Our forces,” the NSS declared, “will be strong enough to dissuade potential adversaries from pursuing a military buildup in hopes of surpassing, or equaling, the power of the United States.” In playing the role of world cop, Bush and his advisers asserted the right to the preventive use of force. Reacting to September 11, the NSS continued, “We cannot let our enemies strike first.” Although promising to seek the support of the international community before using force, the NSS stated, “we will not hesitate to act alone, if necessary, to exercise our right of self-defense.” In other words, the Bush administration, aware that the United States was far stronger militarily and economically than any other nation, accepted its new role as final arbiter of all international disputes. Iraq quickly became the test case for this new shift in American foreign policy. After As rescue efforts continued in the rubble of the World Trade Center, President Bush toured the site his “axis of evil” speech in January, President on September 14, 2001. In CNN’s televised coverage of the visit, Bush is shown here addressing Bush focused on what he and his Pentagon rescue workers through a bullhorn. Firefighter Bob Beckwith stands beside him. advisers called weapons of mass destruction (WMD) that they claimed Saddam Hussein had been secretly the September 11 attacks and prevent further assaults, it initiated amassing in large quantities. The United States demanded that a new global policy of American preeminence. For the first time Iraq permit UN inspectors (forced out of the country in 1998) since the end of the Cold War, the United States had a clear, if to search for such weapons. Meanwhile, the Bush administration controversial, blueprint for international affairs. formulated plans for a unilateral American military solution to The new administration rejected traditional forms of the Iraq question. international cooperation. President Bush withdrew U.S. parSlowly, but inevitably, the United States moved toward war ticipation in the Kyoto Protocol to control global warming and with Iraq in late 2002 and early 2003. Congress approved a resoannounced plans to terminate the 1972 Antiballistic Missile lution in October authorizing the president to use force against (ABM) treaty with Russia. And he was outspoken in refusing to Saddam Hussein’s regime. A month later, the UN Security Council expose American military personnel to the jurisdiction of the voted unanimously to send its team of inspectors back into Iraq, International Criminal Court for possible crimes committed in warning Saddam of “severe consequences” if he failed to comply. worldwide peacekeeping efforts. Despite the failure of the international inspectors to find any eviThe new direction of American foreign policy became clear dence of chemical, biological, or nuclear weapons in Iraq, the Bush on January 29, 2002, when Bush delivered his second State of the administration kept pressing for a Security Council resolution Union address to Congress and the nation. He repeated his vow authorizing the use of force to compel Saddam to disarm. When to punish all nations sponsoring terrorism, and he specified three France and Russia vowed to veto any such measure, Bush and his countries in particular. Iraq, Iran, and North Korea, he declared advisers decided to ignore the world body and proceed on their in a memorable phrase, constituted an “axis of evil.” Nine months own. Preemption would have its first real test. later, in September 2002, the Bush administration released a fully The ensuing war with Iraq surprised both the backers and developed statement of its new world policy, “National Security the critics of unilateralism. In March 2003, three columns of Strategy (NSS) of the United States.” The goal of American policy, American troops, a total of sixty-five thousand, began to execute Bush’s NSS declared, was to “extend the peace by encouraging free a two-pronged invasion of Iraq from bases in Kuwait. Britain, and open societies on every continent.” the only major power to join the United States in the fi ghtThere were two main components of the new strategy, ing, helped by besieging the city of Basra and taking control of which critics quickly called unilateralism . The first was to



 CHAPTER 32

INTO THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, 1989–2012

 In a memorable image from the war in Iraq, Iraqi civilians and U.S. soldiers pull down a statue of Saddam Hussein in Baghdad on April 9, 2003. Eight months later, U.S. soldiers captured the former Iraqi president near Tikrit.

 southern Iraq. Within two weeks, the U.S. army had captured the Baghdad international airport, and on April 8, just three weeks after the fighting had begun, marines marched virtually unopposed into the heart of the city. The American people watched the televised scene of joyous Iraqis toppling a statue of Saddam in Fardos Square. An Iraqi major summed up the magnitude of his country’s defeat: “Losing a war is one thing, but losing Baghdad is another,” he explained. “It was like losing the dearest thing in life.” The rapid success of the anti-Saddam offensive seemed to confirm the wisdom of Bush’s decision for war. But the subsequent failure to find any weapons of mass destruction led critics to question the validity of the war. In response, the president’s defenders emphasized the importance of deposing Saddam by pointing to his brutal prisons and to the killing fields south of Baghdad where thousands of Shi’ite rebels had been slaughtered in 1991. The problems of restoring order and rebuilding the shattered Iraqi economy quickly overshadowed the debate over the war’s legitimacy. Daily attacks on American troops in the Sunni triangle north of Baghdad began in the summer of 2003 and increased in intensity during the fall, killing an average of three American soldiers each week. By October, more troops had died from these attacks than had been killed during the combat phase in March and April. Widespread looting, sabotage of oil pipelines, and difficulties in repairing and operating outdated power plants

 and oil facilities made economic recovery very slow and halting. U.S. efforts to involve occupation forces from other UN members yielded only a few troops. The December 2003 arrest of Saddam, who had eluded capture until then despite determined efforts to find him, revived American optimism. Yet the overall situation remained troubling. Despite slow but steady progress in restoring public services such as electric power and the gradual recovery of the Iraq oil industry, the armed insurrection continued. Mortar attacks on Baghdad hotels, roadside bombs aimed at American armored convoys, and handheld missile attacks on American helicopters made Iraq a very dangerous place. Equally disturbing, conflicts of interest between Shi’ite and Sunni Muslims, as well as the Kurdish demand for autonomy, threatened the American goal of creating a stable Iraqi government.

Bush Reelected
 Not surprisingly, the war in Iraq became the central issue in the 2004 presidential race. Bush cast himself as the resolute commander in the war on terror; he and his supporters contended that it would be reckless to change commanders midconflict. Democrats initially favored former Vermont governor Howard Dean, who had opposed the invasion of Iraq and still strongly criticized Bush’s conduct of the war. But the nomination ultimately

 Barack Obama’s Triumph and Trials

 a divide-and-conquer policy toward the insurgents, diminished the violence and made credible Bush’s claim that Iraq had turned a corner toward democratic self-government.

Election of 2004
Electoral Vote by State


Popular Vote


REPUBLICAN
George W. Bush 


60,934,251


DEMOCRATIC
John F. Kerry 


57,765,291


 Barack Obama’s Triumph and Trials

405,933


INDEPENDENT
Ralph Nader 










































 HAWAII



WASH., D.C.









 ALASKA



















 What challenges faced Barack Obama and the American people during the first decade of the twentyfirst century?

119,105,475












 went to Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, a decorated Vietnam War veteran who voted for the war but later criticized Bush for misleading the country regarding the causes of the conflict, and who contended that the war in Iraq, rather than contributing to the war on terror, actually distracted from it. The campaign was the most vitriolic in years. Democrats accused Bush of having stolen the election of 2000 (with the help of the Supreme Court) and of lying about Saddam’s weapons. Republicans called Kerry’s belated opposition to the war in Vietnam an insult to those Americans who had died there, and they cited certain of his votes in the Senate as evidence of a fatal inconsistency. Both sides (following the example of Howard Dean in the primaries) employed the Internet to rally the faithful, raise money, and spread rumors. The strong emotions produced a record turnout: 12 million more than in 2000. Bush won the popular vote by 2.5 percent, becoming the first victor since his father in 1988 to gain an absolute popular majority. The electoral race was comparably close, with 286 for Bush and 252 for Kerry. Taken together with the congressional elections, which increased the Republican majorities in both the Senate and the House of Representatives, the 2004 race confirmed a “red state/blue state” split in America, with the Republicans dominating the South, the Plains, and the Rockies, while the Democrats carried the Northeast, the Great Lakes, and the West Coast. Despite his modest margin of victory, Bush claimed a mandate. He proposed to privatize part of the Social Security system and promised to stay the course in Iraq. His Social Security plan went nowhere, but the situation in Iraq eventually improved. Following a new round of insurgent attacks, Bush in 2007 ordered an increase in American troop strength; this “surge,” combined with

 By then, however, Americans faced a new problem—one that looked much like an old problem. A booming real estate market in the early 2000s tempted banks and other investors to borrow and lend more than was prudent; when the real estate bubble burst in 2007, the financial markets reeled. Wall Street’s panic evoked grim memories of the Great Depression of the 1930s and produced a comparable result at the ballot box: the replacement of a Republican president by a Democratic one. That this new president was the first African American to occupy the White House made his accession even more historic. But it didn’t make the problems he inherited less daunting.

The Great Recession
 Wall Street’s troubles reached the crisis stage in the summer and autumn of 2008. Major lenders, including the governmentbacked twins the Federal National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home Mortgage Corporation (nicknamed Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac), teetered on the brink of bankruptcy. The Bush administration, fearful of the consequences that might follow their collapse, threw the two a life-preserver of federal loans. The panic nonetheless spread, bringing down Wall Street giants Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers and frightening the administration and Congress into crafting a broader rescue package for the financial sector, totaling hundreds of billions of dollars. The bailout package averted chaos but left voters shaken. Until this point, the Republican nominee for president, Senator John McCain of Arizona, appeared the favorite in the 2008 contest. His war-hero background from the Vietnam era reassured Americans worried about the ongoing wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. But the floundering economy neutralized McCain’s advantage and made voters take a second look at the Democratic candidate, Senator Barack Obama of Illinois. Obama ran a brilliant campaign, summarized in the catchword “Hope” and the promise “Yes, We Can.” More important was the fact that he was from the opposite party to that which had held the White House during the boom and bust. Obama garnered 53 percent of the popular vote and defeated McCain handily (See Map: The Election of 2008). Obama’s supporters hoped for great things from the new president. And indeed his inauguration was historic and moving. “God calls on us to shape an uncertain destiny,” Obama said. “This is the meaning of our liberty and our creed; why men and women and children of every race and every faith can join in celebration across this magnificent Mall, and why a man whose father less than 60 years ago might not have been served at a local restaurant can now stand before you to take a most sacred oath.”



 CHAPTER 32

INTO THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, 1989–2012

Election of 2008
Electoral Vote by State


Popular Vote


DEMOCRATIC
Barack Obama 


69,456,897


REPUBLICAN
John McCain 


59,934,814




129,391,711














































 HAWAII



WASH., D.C.









 ALASKA























 But the warm feeling soon wore off in the cold wind of the bleak economy. The rescue package helped stabilize the financial sector, but unemployment rose inexorably, peaking at 10 percent in 2009 and remaining near there for the next year. Obama and the Democratic majority in Congress pushed through an economic stimulus package, which may have kept unemployment from going even higher but did little to bring it down. Obama and the Democrats also achieved something Democratic presidents since Harry Truman had been attempting: passage of a comprehensive program of medical insurance for nearly all Americans. But the measure, passed in the face of bitter resistance from Republicans in Congress, prompted a backlash among voters. Together with the lengthening recession, it contributed to the rebuke the Democrats received in the 2010 midterm elections, in which the Republicans reclaimed control of the House of Representatives, gained six seats in the Senate, and carried most of the governor’s races. Obama scored an important success when American special forces killed Osama bin Laden, the al Qaeda mastermind, in 2011. And he withdrew American troops from Iraq and scheduled the removal of troops from Afghanistan, foreshadowing a reduction of the American military role in the Middle East. But instability in Pakistan and the nuclear ambitions of Iran suggested that America’s worries about the region were far from over.

New Challenges and Old
 Meanwhile, the Great Recession knocked the federal budget wildly out of balance. Government revenues fell as unemployed workers no longer paid income taxes; government spending rose to cover unemployment compensation and other recession-related expenses. By 2011, the annual deficit seemed stuck at more than $1 trillion. Reducing the deficit was the first priority to many voters and elected officials, but if reducing the deficit required laying off government

 workers, as it seemed certain to do, it might aggravate the recession. The problem, for the moment, defied solution. Other problems had deeper roots but no easier solutions. The race question remained alive and contentious, despite the presence of an African American in the White House. Affirmative action policies—policies designed to ensure greater participation by minorities—had been under scrutiny for years. The Bakke v. Regents of the University of California decision of 1978 had allowed the use of race as one factor in determining admission to colleges and universities, so long as rigid racial quotas weren’t employed. This dissatisfied many conservatives, who during the 1980s and 1990s attacked affirmative action politically and in the courts. In 1992, Cheryl Hopwood, an unsuccessful white applicant to the University of Texas Law School, challenged her rejection, contending that the school had admitted less-qualified African Americans. In 1996, the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals decided in her favor, and the Hopwood decision raised the hopes of anti–affirmative action groups that the Supreme Court would overturn Bakke. But in a 2003 case involving the University of Michigan, the Supreme Court ruled that “student body diversity is a compelling state interest that can justify the use of race in university admissions.” In other words, affirmative action in higher education could continue. But the narrowness of the 5–4 vote suggested that affirmative action would continue to spark controversy, as indeed it did. Even more controversial was abortion. The issue had roiled American politics for decades, but it did so particularly after the 2005 death of Chief Justice William Rehnquist and the nearly concurrent retirement of Associate Justice Sandra Day O’Connor. The two vacancies on the Supreme Court allowed George W. Bush to nominate their replacements. Rehnquist had been a reliable conservative, but O’Connor was a swing vote, and liberals feared that a more conservative successor would tip the balance against abortion rights, among other contentious issues. Yet John Roberts, Bush’s nominee for chief justice, and Samuel Alito, the nominee for associate justice, dodged Democrats’ questions in hearings, and both nominations succeeded. Almost immediately, the South Dakota legislature essentially banned abortion, hoping to persuade the newly reconfigured court to revisit the 1973 Roe decision, which guaranteed abortion rights. South Dakota voters subsequently overturned the state law, but the issue remained highly charged. Gay rights provoked fresh controversy as gay advocates pushed for equal marital rights. After the Massachusetts Supreme Court in 2004 struck down a state law barring same-sex marriages, gay advocates celebrated, but conservatives in dozens of states pressed for laws and constitutional amendments reaffirming traditional views on the subject and defining marriage as the union of one man and one woman. Nearly all these efforts were successful, suggesting that, on this front at least, the advances gay men and women had achieved since the 1960s had hit a wall. The issue of military service proved similarly controversial. Bill Clinton had achieved a minor breakthrough with the “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy, which allowed gay service as long as the men and women in question kept their sexual orientation to themselves. Barack Obama campaigned to let gays come out of the military closet, but the Republican party resisted. Finally, however, in the lame duck session of Congress in December 2010, the legislature approved and Obama signed a measure repealing the “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy and permitting gays to serve openly in the armed forces.

 Barack Obama’s Triumph and Trials

Watch the Video




The Historical Significance of the 2008 Election


 Barack Obama takes the presidential oath of office from Supreme Court Justice John Roberts on January 20, 2011 to become the 44th president of the United States. President Obama’s wife, Michelle, is holding the Bible as an estimated 1.8 million people attended the inaugural on the National Mall.

 Science and religion continued to battle in America’s classrooms. Opponents of evolution revised their challenge to Darwin, replacing creationism with “intelligent design” and demanding that biology classes air this version of their beliefs. School board elections hinged on the issue; Ohio embraced intelligent design only to reject it following an adverse 2005 court decision in a case from the Dover school district. For the moment, the evolutionists held their own, but given that public-opinion polls consistently showed most Americans rejecting evolution in favor of divine creation, the fight was sure to continue.

Doubting the Future
 During most of American history, every generation had been better off materially than the generation before. Events of the early twenty-first century called this implicit guarantee into question.

 The stubbornness of the Great Recession made Americans wonder whether the economy would ever recover its resiliency. The towering federal deficit imperiled such cherished programs as Social Security and Medicare and put the myriad other contributions the federal government had long made to American life even more at risk. Demographics didn’t help. As the baby boom generation neared retirement, the load on the Social Security system increased. Everyone realized that something would have to be done to keep the pension program afloat, but no one could figure out how to make the necessary changes politically palatable. Middle-aged Americans faced the prospect of delayed retirement, smaller pensions, or both. Not surprisingly, they objected. Younger Americans resisted the tax increases that could have spared their elders such sacrifice. The trend in health care costs was even more alarming. For years, medical costs had grown rapidly, and as the population



 CHAPTER 32

INTO THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, 1989–2012

 aged, the costs appeared certain to claim an ever-larger share of the nation’s income. The health care law enacted by Congress at Obama’s behest promised to rein in medical costs, but many observers doubted the promises, and the Republicans vowed to repeal it. Immigration remained controversial. Efforts to reduce the number of illegal entries—by tighter enforcement at the border, by sanctions on employers hiring undocumented aliens, by temporary visas for guest workers—stalled on the opposition of immigrant advocates, businesses, and other groups. The cloud of the Great Recession had at least one silver lining: As jobs grew scarce in America, the flow of illegal immigrants diminished. But no one doubted that the immigration issue would resurface or that it would provoke heated debate. Environmental problems demanded attention, which they got, and solutions, which they didn’t. A broad consensus emerged among the scientific community that global warming had to be addressed, but the proposed solutions—higher mileage standards for automobiles, a “carbon tax” on emissions of greenhouse gases, greater reliance on nuclear energy, among others—were costly, intrusive, unproven, or environmentally problematic in their own ways. And though the scientists mostly agreed that humans were causing global warning, the politicians did not. As on other problems facing the country, the consequence was deadlock.

THE ELECTION OF 2008
Candidate Obama McCain 
Party
Democratic
Republican


Popular
Vote
69,456,897
59,934,814


Electoral
Vote


Conclusion: The End of the
 American Future—or Not? From before its eighteenth-century birth as an independent nation, America had been the land of the future. Immigrants to America left their pasts behind as they traveled to the new country; native-born Americans treated the future as though they owned it. And to nearly everyone in the country, the future almost invariably looked bright. By 2012, however, the American future didn’t look bright at all. The terrorist attacks of 2001 had made Americans feel vulnerable; eleven years later they had suffered no comparable assaults, but they still felt vulnerable. They waited in long lines at airport security checkpoints and submitted to personal searches on entering public buildings and gathering places all over the country. The Great Recession darkened America’s economic horizons like nothing since the Great Depression, and American officials could not agree on how to restore prosperity. A poll released in 2011 revealed that only 44 percent of Americans believed that the young people of this generation would live better than their parents, the smallest percentage on record. Not everyone despaired, though. Immigrants still came to America, seeking its promise of a better life for themselves and their children. High-school graduates went to college in search of fulfilling jobs. Young men and women got married and had children, hoping the little ones would fare well in the decades ahead. Those who knew history tended to be the most optimistic. The country had been through difficult times in the past. The American Revolution, the Civil War, the Great Depression, and two world wars had tested Americans’ mettle and faith in the future. Each time the country had survived, typically stronger for the trial. No one could guarantee that America would emerge from its current trials stronger than before, but Americans had never required guarantees.

STUDY RESOURCES



Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 32 Into the Twenty-first Century, 1989–2012 on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1989
Berlin Wall opens (November) 1990 Saddam Hussein invades Kuwait (August); Bush breaks “no new taxes” campaign pledge, supports $500 billion budget deal (November) Operation Desert Storm frees Kuwait and crushes Iraq (January–February); Soviet Union dissolves, replaced by Commonwealth of Independent States (December) Riots devastate South Central Los Angeles after verdict in Rodney King case (May); Bill Clinton elected president (November) General Motors announces loss of $23.4 billion, the largest one-year loss in U.S. corporate history 




 1994 Republicans gain control of both houses of Congress (November) U.S. troops arrive in Bosnia as part of international peacekeeping force (December) Clinton signs major welfare reform measure (August) Terrorists bomb American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania Senate acquits Clinton of impeachment charges (February), Dow Jones Industrial Average goes over 10,000 for first time (March) Y2K worries prove unfounded; George W. Bush wins contested presidential election American economy goes into recession, ending the longest period of expansion in U.S. history (March); Terrorist attacks on World Trade Center and the Pentagon (September 11); Anthrax spores



 found in mail (October); United States military action against the Taliban regime in Afghanistan (October–December)

2002 Department of Homeland Security
 created (November)

 2003 U.S. troops invade Iraq and overthrow Saddam Hussein’s regime (March–April); Saddam Hussein captured (December)

 2004 Insurgency in Iraq escalates; Global warming gains international attention; George W. Bush reelected (November)

 2005 Bush’s plan for Social Security reform fails; Hurricane Katrina (August) devastates Gulf Coast and forces evacuation of New Orleans

 2006 Proposed constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage fails to achieve required two-thirds majority in the Senate

 2007 Troop “surge” in Iraq helps calm insurgency (February, to 2008); Real-estate bubble bursts

 2008 Oil prices skyrocket before falling back; Federal government takes control of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (September); Barack Obama elected president (November)

 2009 Recession drives unemployment rate to 10 percent (October)

 2010 Health care reform passed (January); Republicans regain control of House (November)

 2011 Osama bin Laden killed (May); US troops leave Iraq (December)

CHAPTER REVIEW
The First President Bush Northern Ireland 
The Changing Faces of America


 What were the important issues in George H. W. Bush’s presidency, and how were they handled?

 How did the American population shift and grow between 1990 and 2010?

 In domestic affairs, the first President Bush focused on fixing the savings and loan industry and balancing the budget. In foreign affairs, he managed the end the Cold War peacefully and successfully. The Gulf War of 1991 liberated Kuwait and weakened the Iraqi regime of Saddam Hussein, but didn’t remove Saddam from power in Baghdad. (p. 770)

 Americans continued to migrate to the Sunbelt in the 1990s and early 2000s, and immigration continued to grow. Hispanics formed the largest segment of the immigrant population and included millions of illegal immigrants. African Americans gained ground economically but still suffered from poverty, as Hurricane Katrina demonstrated. (p. 774)

UNITED KINGDOM
North Sea 
 IRELAND

 DENMARK

 Germany. Berlin Wall breached, Nov. 1989; East and West Germany reunited, Oct. 1990.

 NETH.

GERMANY BELG.

 LUX.

 FRANCE

 SWITZ.

 Hungary. Free election sweeps nonCommunists into power, Apr. 1990.

AU S

S


 ITALY



 CHAPTER 32

CHAPTER REVIEW

The New Democrats


Republicans Triumphant


 What were the accomplishments and failures of the Clinton administration?

 How did George W. Bush become president, and what did he do in the White House?

 Clinton balanced the federal budget and helped revive the economy, which boomed during the 1990s. The North American Free Trade Agreement eliminated tariff barriers among the United States, Canada, and Mexico. But personal scandals led to Clinton’s impeachment, which he survived, although not without damage to his own reputation and that of the Democrats. (p. 778)

 George W. Bush became president in an election that turned on a ballot dispute in Florida, which was resolved only by the Supreme Court. As president, Bush persuaded Congress to cut taxes and, after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, to authorize invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq. The war in Iraq bogged down amid an insurgency against the American-supported government in Baghdad. (p. 783)

Clinton and the World


 Barack Obama’s Triumph and Trials What challenges faced Barack Obama and the American people during the first decade of the twenty-first century?

 How did Clinton respond to the Balkan Wars?

 OVENIA 991) Zagreb CROATIA (1991)

EASTERN SLAVONIA

N
IO EG AR JIN KRA

 The breakup of communist Yugoslavia in 1991 led to bloody ethnic fighting. When Serb forces began to commit atrocities first against Muslim Bosnians and then Albanians in Kosovo, Clinton organized military intervention by U.S. and NATO forces that forced the Serbs to stop and led to independence for both Bosnia and Kosovo. (p. 781) VOJ

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
(1992) Sarajevo 
 r in Bosnia

 The culture wars between conservatives and liberals continued into the twenty-first century, with abortion, affirmative action, gay rights, and evolution provoking controversy. The Great Recession shook the economy, and Americans wondered how to deal with problems of health care, retirement, illegal immigration, and the environment. (p. 791)

KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Passed by Congress in 1991, this act banned discrimination against the disabled in employment and mandated easy access to all public and commercial buildings. p. 770 Operation Desert Storm Desert Storm was the code name used the United States and its coalition partners used in the war against Iraq in 1991 to liberate Kuwait. p. 773 Sunbelt A broad band of states running across the South from Florida to Texas, extending west and north to include California and the Pacific Northwest. Beginning in the 1970s, it experienced rapid economic and population growth. p. 774 Undocumented aliens Illegal immigrants, mainly from Mexico and Central America. p. 776 
 Contract with America In the 1994 congressional elections, Congressman Newt Gingrich had Republican candidates sign a document in which they pledged support for such things as a balanced budget amendment, term limits for members of Congress, and a middle-class tax cut. p. 780 War on terror Initiated by President George W. Bush after the attacks of September 11, 2001, the broadly defined war on terror aimed to weed out terrorist operatives and their supporters throughout the world. p. 788 Unilateralism A national policy of acting alone without consulting others. p. 789 Affirmative action The use of laws or regulations to achieve racial, ethnic, gender, or other diversity, as in hiring or school admissions. Such efforts are often aimed at improving employment or educational opportunities for women and minorities. p. 792

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
Was the first President Bush lucky or skillful in ending the Cold War so successfully? 
 2. What do the internal migration to the Sunbelt and the immigration to America from other countries have in common?

 3. Do you think President Clinton should have been convicted on his impeachment charges?

 4. Many people thought the outcome of the 2000 election was a violation of democracy. Do you?

 5. Are you optimistic about America’s future, or pessimistic? Why?

STUDY RESOURCES

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 32 on MyHistoryLab The First President Bush

Republicans Triumphant


◾


◾


View the Closer Look Opening the Wall, Berlin p. 771
Read the Document


George Bush, Address to the
Nation on the Persian Gulf (1991) p. 773


◾


Read the Document


Illegal Immigration Reform and
Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 p. 775


George W. Bush, Address to
Congress (September 20, 2001) p. 789


Watch the Video


Bill Clinton Sells Himself to


America p. 778
Read the Document


Bill Clinton, Answers to the Articles


 of Impeachment p. 781

Clinton and the World
Read the Document


 Barack Obama’s Triumph and Trials ◾

The New Democrats


The Balkan Proximity Peace Talks
Agreement (1995) p. 783


Complete the Assignment An Inconvenient Truth?
The Controversy Surrounding Global Warming p. 786
Read the Document


The Changing Faces of America
◾


View the Closer Look World Trade Center, Sept. 11,
2001 p. 788


Watch the Video


The Historical Significance of the
2008 Election p. 793


◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment

